
                               1 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           December 23, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 521 words

HEADLINE: Life science firms win $23.9m in tax breaks;
30 Mass. companies promise to create 1,000 jobs in 2011

BYLINE: By D.C. Denison, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Thirty Massachusetts life sciences companies were awarded a total of $23.9
million in tax incentives by the state yesterday in an effort to create more
jobs.

   In return for tax breaks, ranging from $55,000 to $5.85 million, the
companies have promised to hire 1,000 people over the coming year.

   The annual awards, administered by the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center and
the state Department of Revenue, are part of a state program established in 2008
that authorizes up to $25 million in tax incentives each year for companies
engaged in life sciences research and development, commercialization, and
manufacturing.

   Last year, the program's first, $24.5 million in tax breaks were handed out
to 26 companies that pledged to create 800 jobs.

   As of June 30, those companies had created around 400 jobs, according to the
Life Sciences Center, a quasi-public agency set up to promote the life sciences
industry in Massachusetts.

   This year's recipients were chosen from 56 companies that applied for
credits. Eight of them also received credits last year.

   ``I can guarantee that all of those repeat companies hit their employment
targets,'' said Susan Windham-Bannister, chief executive of the Massachusetts
Life Sciences Center. ``Because if they didn't reach last year's hiring target,
they didn't get an award this year.''

   Shire HGT Inc., a division of Shire PLC - a biopharmaceutical company
headquartered in Dublin - was awarded $5.85 million yesterday to expand its
Human Genetic Therapies division in Lexington.

   The company pledged to hire 150 workers next year.

   ``Most of the jobs will be in manufacturing, creating biopharmaceuticals
products for global distribution,'' said Bill Ciambrone, senior vice president
of technical operations at Shire HGT.

   Last year, Shire received more than $6 million in tax incentives in return
for a pledge of creating 150 jobs.

   ``We've created that many jobs, and then some, this year,'' Ciambrone said.

   Organogenesis Inc., which develops regenerative medicine therapies to speed
up healing, was awarded nearly $458,000 to expand its operation in Canton.

   The company said it will add at least 17 workers in 2011.

   Last year, the state gave Organogenesis a $245,240 tax break in return for a
commitment to create 15 jobs.

   The company, which was considering a move to Rhode Island a few years ago,
said in September that it has hired 50 workers this year.

   Positions that are created using the incentives must be maintained for at
least five years. If a company receiving a tax incentive does not do that - or
fails to hire the number of employees it promised - the state Department of
Revenue can require it to pay back all or a portion of the incentive.

   Windham-Bannister said the companies that won awards this year have committed
to create 28 percent more positions than those that got the incentives last
year.

   ``And these are real jobs in sales, marketing, administration, and
manufacturing,'' she said. ``These are not just people in white coats.''

   D.C. Denison can be reached at denison@globe.com

   SEE THE LIST

   See the 30 life science

   companies that have received tax incentives at www.boston.com/business.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2010


                               2 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            December 19, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: EDITORIAL

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: A best-ever Christmas

BYLINE: Meredith Oakley

BODY:

   The big day is less than a week away. If you have a Christmas memory to
share, send it soon, won't you?

   You can address your e-mail to moakley@arkansasonline.com or post a letter to
my attention at P.O. Box 2221, Little Rock AR, 72203. Today's Christmas story
comes from reader Karen Lee of Little Rock. Sometimes when you look back, a
Christmas that seems to be your worst-ever Christmas, beckons you back,
invitingly, and you realize that, in comparison to the present, it was really
one of the unappreciated times that we can't see the good in at that moment, but
oh, how we long to be back in that moment. Last year, my son and I were living
in the Philippines for the last half of the year.

   Keaton was just 13 when he was diagnosed with a kids bone cancer,
osteosarcoma. We had been fighting this monster for three years and had been
through rounds of hellish chemos, a half-dozen difficult surgeries, and lived
away from our home here in Little Rock as he was undergoing treatment at M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, where more options for treatment were
available for his rare cancer. We had traveled to the Philippines for him to be
in a trial for a new experimental gene therapy after his cancer had continued to
progress, despite all we had tried, and though we had initially hoped the new
treatment was being effective, during the last couple weeks of December, he
started showing signs of the disease progressing. He was in a lot of pain, with
a large tumor on his arm and his lower side, and the both of us had only one
thing we wanted for Christmas: to come home to our family and friends. The
18-hour trip back to the states was agonizing for him despite large doses of
pain meds, and watching my "little boy" in such pain was more than agony for me
also. Trying to push his wheelchair and a crowded luggage rack through busy
holiday lines in several different airports was backbreaking and emotionally
stressful, with a lot of the crowd in their own "got to get home for Christmas"
moods and several mean-spirited people refusing to let us through the lines and
even accusing us of "faking" illness! I was definitely not in the merriest of
moods for Christmas, but I was totally focused on getting my son home, and I
would have pushed through however many legions I had to in order to do that for
him. I will have to admit that right then I was labeling that as "the worst-ever
Christmas." When we got off the plane, finally back home, the first thing we saw
was a row of signs welcoming us back, with all our family holding them, and as I
look back at that memory the picture is alight with a soft glow, smiling faces
and comforting embraces. Between jet lag and fear of the future, most of my
memories of the Christmas of 2009 are a big blur, with flashes of joy at being
back with our loved ones and seeing Keaton's smiles at being able to be home
alternating with periods of panic as I was terrified to think about what might
be looming ahead. I wish I had concentrated more on just enjoying the simple
fact of having him there with me. With the clearer vision that comes from
hindsight, I can see the house so beautifully decorated by my family where
Keaton and I could enjoy it, I can feel the warmth of the fireplace as well as
the warmth of the love that surrounded us, and the thing that made it the best
Christmas ever, looking back, was the warm feeling of seeing my son sitting in
the middle of all the Christmas festivities, a quiet smile on his face. In spite
of the physical pain he was in, he did so enjoy his Christmas-his one last
Christmas-and what will forever be for me our last " best-ever Christmas."
Keaton passed on this year, four months after our Christmas. I miss him so much.
My very heart and soul is gone. Such a huge hole in our lives he left. Hold your
children tight and enjoy every moment of joy you can find this Christmas and in
this life. You never know how long those moments will last. ------::------
Associate Editor Meredith Oakley is editor of the Voices page. This article was
published 12/19/2010

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2010


                               3 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                          December 15, 2010 Wednesday

SECTION: FRONT SECTION; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: A blood transplant appears to cure HIV

BYLINE: By, MARILYNN MARCHIONE

BODY:

   ASSOCIATED PRESS

   A very unusual blood transplant appears to have cured an American man living
in Berlin of infection with the AIDS virus, but doctors say the approach is not
practical for wide use.

   The man, who is in his 40s, had a blood stem cell transplant in 2007 to treat
leukemia. His donor not only was a good blood match but also had a gene mutation
that confers natural resistance to HIV.

   Now, three years later, the recipient shows no signs of leukemia or HIV
infection, according to a report in the journal Blood.

   "It's an interesting proof-of-concept that with pretty extraordinary
measures, a patient could be cured of HIV," but it is far too risky to become
standard therapy even if matched donors could be found, said Dr. Michael Saag of
the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   He is past chairman of the HIV Medicine Association, an organization of
doctors who specialize in treating AIDS.

   Transplants of bone marrow -- or, more commonly these days, blood stem cells
-- are done to treat cancer, and their risks in healthy people are unknown. The
process involves destroying the person's native immune system with powerful
drugs and radiation, then replacing it with donor cells to grow a new immune
system. Mortality from the procedure or its complications can be 5% or more,
Saag said.

   "We can't really apply this particular approach to healthy individuals
because the risk is just too high," especially when drugs can keep HIV in check
in most cases, Saag said. Unless someone with HIV also had cancer, a transplant
would not likely be considered, he said.

   When the Berlin man's case surfaced two years ago, Dr. Anthony Fauci,
director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the
procedure was too expensive and risky to be practical as a cure but that it
might give more clues to using gene therapy or other methods to achieve the same
result.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2010


                               4 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2010 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                          December 15, 2010 Wednesday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: Report: Transplant may have cured man of AIDS Doctors say treatment
can't be used widely

BYLINE: By MARILYNN MARCHIONE, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   A very unusual blood transplant appears to have cured an American man living
in Berlin of infection with the AIDS virus, but doctors say the approach is not
practical for wide use.

   The man, who is in his 40s, had a blood stem cell transplant in 2007 to treat
leukemia. His donor not only was a good blood match but also had a gene mutation
that confers natural resistance to HIV.

   Now, three years later, the recipient shows no signs of leukemia or HIV
infection, according to a report in the journal Blood.

   "It's an interesting proof-of-concept that with pretty extraordinary measures
a patient could be cured of HIV," but it is far too risky to become standard
therapy even if matched donors could be found, said Dr. Michael Saag of the
University of Alabama at Birmingham.

   A new immune system

   He is past chairman of the HIV Medicine Association, an organization of
doctors who specialize in treating AIDS.

   Transplants of bone marrow - or, more commonly these days, of blood stem
cells - are done to treat cancer, and their risks in healthy people is unknown.
It involves destroying the person's native immune system with powerful drugs and
radiation, then replacing it with donor cells to grow a new immune system.
Mortality from the procedure or its complications can be 5 percent or more, Saag
said.

   "We can't really apply this particular approach to healthy individuals
because the risk is just too high," especially when drugs can keep HIV in check
in most cases, Saag said. Unless someone with HIV also had cancer, a transplant
would not likely be considered, he said.

   When the Berlin man's case first surfaced two years ago, Dr. Anthony Fauci,
director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said the
procedure was too expensive and risky to be practical as a cure but that it
might give more clues to using gene therapy or other methods to achieve the same
result.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2010


                               5 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            December 12, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; South; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Calling all hands to back Mayflower for online prize

BYLINE: By Taryn Plumb, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   For 66 days, it was batted by the angry sea, its 102 pilgrim passengers
adventurous, determined, and hoping for a new beginning.

   While en route across the Atlantic, a child was born, and some emigrants were
jostled overboard; after reaching its wild new world, half of its travelers died
from sickness.

   The year 2020 will mark the quadricentennial of that fateful, pivotal voyage
of the Mayflower.

   To commemorate the historic occasion, though, Plimoth Plantation, steward of
a replica of the original ship, isn't completely entrenching itself in the 17th
century: It's vying for funding in a very 21st-century way. The living-history
museum is a contender for a $250,000 grant through an online vote that would
help get the Mayflower II shipshape - pun intended - for its namesake's 400th
anniversary.

   Kept docked at the State Pier in Plymouth Harbor, the Mayflower II is a
55-year-old copy of the original vessel, which is mentioned in just about every
American history textbook and which sailed out of history shortly after its
momentous voyage in 1620. But beyond what it represents in its predecessor, the
recreated version boasts a history all its own, having been built from many of
the same materials, and also having made the same crossing from England to
America in the mid-1950s.

   ``It's a ship full of amazing historical memories,'' said Jennifer Monac,
spokeswoman for the not-for-profit Plimoth Plantation. ``It's a physical way for
people to connect with history.''

   And, at least as far as the Pepsi ``Refresh Project'' contest goes, a virtual
one, too.

   In the online vote (cast your ballot at
www.refresheverything.com/saveourship), the Mayflower II started the month
ranked at No. 196 out of more than 300 contenders in its category, but by Friday
had smoothly cruised up to No. 82.

   Taking over the No. 1 spot, meanwhile, was a campaign based in upstate New
York to fund a gene-therapy clinical trial for a rare disorder, giant axonal
neuropathy.

   As for the other competition? Ideas include ``an insanely cool community
playground'' for children with disabilities through Columbus State University in
Georgia; brain cancer research; various renewable energy projects; even a
drop-in center for sex-trafficking victims.

   All told, it's a motley medley of 1,096 proposals in various categories, with
an available funding pot of $1.3 million, according to the ``Refresh Project''
website.

   Online voting for this cycle ends Dec. 31, with finalists announced Jan. 1,
and the top two finishers in the $250,000 category will both receive the cash.

   It's a popularity-based funding mechanism in the vein of ``American Idol''
that's becoming an outlet for more historical entities these days.

   Last year, for instance, Hull's Paragon Carousel won the popular vote - and
$100,000 - in the American Express Partners in Preservation Greater Boston
Initiative. Its fierce local competition included the Old Ship Meeting House in
Hingham; the National Monument to the Forefathers in Plymouth; the United First
Parish Church in Quincy; and Norfolk County Agricultural High's dairy barn in
Walpole.

   Advocates lament that grants for historical entities and projects are scarce,
and private funding even more so.

   ``We're in a tough economy right now,'' said Monac. ``Historical and cultural
attractions are all vying for the same funding. It's limited.''

   In the Paragon's case, the $100,000 infusion helped restore the 1928
merry-go-round's historical luster. The money was used to recreate 12 doors and
restore 48 windows on the structure housing it, according to Friends of the
Paragon Carousel member Judeth Van Hamm.

   ``The building just looks totally different,'' she said, noting its rich wood
and colors, and the additional visibility and light let in by the refurbished
windows.

   Still, being the popular favorite didn't solve all of its financial troubles;
the carousel, which operates from April to the end of October, is still $400,000
in debt, according to Van Hamm. In a new fund-raising effort, the Friends group
is restoring its 66 horses, with plans to raffle off the naming rights to each
one as the work is completed. At a recent count, there were 100 of the $100
raffle tickets available for a recently restored equine. The group is about
halfway through the project, Van Hamm said.

   The Mayflower II, going into dry dock this winter for maintenance work, also
suffers from old-age maladies. As Plimoth Plantation officials explained, the
vessel requires upkeep of its hull and structural repairs, as well as a new set
of handmade sails, and a stem-to-stern stripping and repainting job, which by
itself costs $40,000.

   ``She's an expensive artifact to maintain,'' said Monac, adding that
``$250,000 would make a huge difference for us.''

   The ship's builders in Brixham, Devonshire, England, strove for historical
accuracy in its construction, using English oak timbers, hand-sewn canvas sails,
and hand-forged nails.

   The Mayflower II set out from Plymouth, England, on April 20, 1957, and for
accuracy's sake made the trans-Atlantic crossing entirely by sail, without an
engine and unescorted. The 54-day voyage drew wide attention, featured in both
National Geographic and Life magazines, and finally ended with the Mayflower
II's docking in Plymouth on June 13.

   Since then, it's been sailed roughly a dozen times, Monac said, and each year
draws 350,000 to 400,000 visitors to its perch on the Plymouth waterfront,
highlighting the presence of Plimoth Plantation barely 3 miles south on Route
3A.

   Of the boat's chances in the online contest, Monac said she's hopeful it
would finish like the first Mayflower's voyage. ``Slow and steady wins the
race,'' she said. ``This is a marathon, not a sprint. We need people to continue
voting.''

   In that regard, Van Hamm offered encouragement.

   ``We didn't start at the top,'' she said, and noted that votes for the
Paragon Carousel eventually came in from all over the country. ``We inched our
way up, and eventually were able to hold the lead.''

   Taryn Plumb can be reached at tarynplumb1@gmail.com

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2010


                               6 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Courier-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            December 10, 2010 Friday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Scientists see efforts as 'extremely' encouraging

BYLINE: By, Laura Ungar lungar@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   Scientists are making strides in the fight against Alzheimer's, improving
their understanding of the devastating brain disease and searching for new drug
treatments.

   "I'm extremely encouraged right now," said David Morgan, director of the
Alzheimer's Disease Research Laboratory at the University of South Florida.

   Morgan pointed to 10 different approaches to dealing with Alzheimer's that
are close to or in clinical testing, including anti-inflammatory drugs,
estrogen-related therapies and immunotherapy. Other approaches, such as gene
therapy, are also in the works, but are not as far along in the development
process, Morgan said.

   In a promising development last year, researchers said an experimental
vaccine to treat Alzheimer's seemed to slow memory decline. A study suggested
that the treated group did better on memory tests than a control group. on
memory tests Even though research was stopped in early 2002 because some
participants developed brain inflammation, the results were an encouraging sign
for using the immune system to attack Alzheimer's.

   Two distinguishing traits of Alzheimer's are amyloid plaques, clumps of
protein fragments outside of the brain's nerve cells, and "tangles," strands of
another protein inside brain cells.

   Current medications  --  such as Aricept or Exelon  --  do not halt the
disease process. "The drugs we have now are really just treating the symptoms,"
Morgan said.

   New treatments are being designed to affect the disease at its source  --  by
blocking amyloid production, for example.

   Compared withIn the past 10 or 15 years ago, scientists have made "lots of
headway" in understanding and treating Alzheimer's, said Dr. Charles Smith,
director of the clinical core at the University of Kentucky's Alzheimer's
Disease Research Center. "But we've got a long way to go."

   At UK's Alzheimer's research center, in the Sanders-Brown Center on Aging,
Smith and others are studying the progression of the disease by following people
with Alzheimer's and normal volunteers. Study participants donate their brains
when they die.

   University of Louisville researcher Dr. Michal Hetman, meanwhile, recently
received a three-year, $240,000 grant from the Alzheimer's Association for his
research at the University of Louisville,work, which may help suggest new
targets for developing drugs to modify the disease.

   While these scientists work, the number of people with Alzheimer's threatens
to rise significantly as the population ages.

   As research continues locally and nationally, tThe Alzheimer's Association is
working to pass legislation, named after late President Ronald Reagan, that
would increase funding spending for Alzheimer's research, provide more help for
caregivers and increase public education about reducing the risk of developing
the disease.

   The association is also urging people to make healthy changes in their lives
that could reduce their risk of getting Alzheimer's, such as exercising and
controlling their weight and cholesterol levels.

   Morgan said there's probably no nutritional magic bullet that will prevent
Alzheimer's. But "maintaining a good, healthy diet is obviously going to help us
in a variety of diseases."

   Foster Burba, 80, of Louisville said he is glad researchers are looking for
answers in for the disease that afflicts his 78-year-old wife, Winifred  --
even though she probably won't benefit.

   "But perhaps I will," Burba said. "And perhaps my children and grandchildren
will."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2011


                               7 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           December 9, 2010 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 436 words

HEADLINE: Treatments, devices can curtail hearing loss for older people

BYLINE: AGING SUCCESSFULLY o Dr. John Morley, St. Louis University

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   Many older adults might not enjoy holiday parties as much as they could
simply because they can't hear conversations with others. Inability to hear in a
noisy environment is one of the first signs of presbycusis, or late-life hearing
loss.

   The German philosopher, Immanuel Kant, recognized the significance of this
impairment when he noted, "Not being able to hear isolates you from people."

   It doesn't have to be this way. A combination of modern technology and the
ability of a person to be open and assertive about a hearing deficit can greatly
improve one's quality of life.

   About a third of those who are 70 suffer hearing loss. Besides inability to
hear in a noisy environment, those who are hard of hearing may perceive people
talking to them as mumbling. They may have trouble hearing higher pitched sounds
such as "s" and "th" or women's voices, which are not as deep as men's. Some
sounds may seem excessively loud.

   At the first sign of hearing loss, see an audiologist or otolaryngologist.
Sometimes the solution is easy; removing ear wax may dramatically improve
hearing.

   Assistive devices, such as Pocket Talkers, which are personal portable
amplifiers, can improve one-on-one conversations and save others in the house
from listening to TV or radio at excessively loud volumes.

   While hearing aids improve hearing by amplifying sound, altering pitch or
reducing background noise, many older people don't wear them. Thus aural
rehabilitation - or therapy on how to use devices and techniques to improve
hearing - should accompany the purchase of a hearing aid.

   Those who are communicating with someone who has difficulty hearing, and
likely compensates by reading lips, should look directly at the person, not chew
or cover the mouth and make sure the face is well lighted. Speak with a deep
voice but do not shout.

   Surgical treatments, such as middle ear implants or cochlear implants that
directly stimulate the auditory nerve, may markedly improve speech recognition
for those with severe hearing impairments.

   While therapy and technology improve the lives of older people with hearing
impairment, the future is even more promising. Gene therapy and adult stem cells
that regenerate hair cells in the cochlear may be on the horizon. In the
meantime, if you have difficulty hearing, tell your doctor so you can be
referred to the appropriate specialist.

   ---

   SLUCare physician John Morley is director of geriatrics at St. Louis
University and a geriatrician at St. Louis VA Medical Center. E-mail him at
morley@slu.edu The Aging Successfully column for seniors rotates each week with
XX Files, a women's health column.

NOTES:  AGING SUCCESSFULLY o Dr. John Morley, St. Louis University

GRAPHIC:  Photo - Dr. John Morley

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2010


                               8 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved

                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           December 9, 2010 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; TAMPA BAY'S HEALTH; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 1027 words

HEADLINE: GETTING UNDER OUR SKIN

BYLINE: IRENE MAHER, Health Writer

DATELINE: TAMPA

HIGHLIGHT:

   A Tampa filmmaker's documentary bluntly illustrates the deadly dangers of
skin cancer.

BODY:

   If you live in Florida, chances are that you or someone you know has had skin
cancer. It's the most common cancer in the United States, particularly here in
the Sunbelt.

   For most cases - the less serious nonmelanoma cancers - treatment is a quick
matter, achieved in the dermatologist's office. Which is why a lot of people
might think it's no big deal.

   Stan Kozma knows all about that attitude.

   "People go, 'It's just skin cancer. Just cut it off. It's not real cancer,'
'' the Tampa filmmaker said.

   "It's not real until you have a 14-inch scar on your back," he said. "It's
taking one life every hour."

   Kozma's award-winning documentary on the real toll of skin cancer, More Than
Skin Deep, airs on cable TV this weekend. It's an engaging film with an
important message.

   Kozma profiles several young women who battled the most serious form of skin
cancer, melanoma, in their 20s and 30s and survived. An African-American woman
who went to a string of doctors before finally convincing one that a lump on her
bikini line was nothing to ignore shows that melanoma isn't a disease of just
the fair-skinned. Keep the tissue box handy for a young mother's story of
surviving a virulent melanoma diagnosed during her pregnancy.

   The film is brutally frank, showing unforgettable pictures of what skin
cancer can look like after its often painless arrival, sometimes in places that
get no direct sun exposure.

   'Topic found me'

   Kozma has worked on movie sets, produced TV commercials and made
documentaries for 30 years. His Tampa company, Z Film, has done work for Busch
Gardens, Tampa's Hyde Park Village and the U.S. armed forces. His subjects have
included art, music and Florida wildlife.

   Skin cancer awareness wasn't on his agenda. "The topic found me," Kozma said.
"It all started one evening in 1997."

   Kristi Michael, Kozma's close friend, was coloring her hair. The solution
stung when it touched a mole on the top of her ear, one that had been there
since birth.

   Over the next couple of weeks the mole seemed to change, so Michael, a
freelance hair and makeup artist, went to a doctor, who told her not to worry.

   She sought a second opinion, and was diagnosed with melanoma, the most
serious type of skin cancer. After the mole was removed, a check of her lymph
nodes was negative and Michael was given a clean bill of health.

   But nine months later, the cancer was back and had spread to her lymphatic
system; by 1999 it had invaded her brain. Numerous attempts at aggressive,
experimental treatment failed and in 2001 Michael died. She was 35.

   Memorial project

   A dark-haired beauty, Michael relied on tanning beds for sun-kissed-looking
skin. Like many young women, she thought the beds were a safe way to look good.

   Upon her return to health, Kozma recalls, she talked with him about a skin
cancer awareness campaign aimed at children, teenagers and their parents.

   Instead, he completed the project in her memory in 2008. It has been screened
at independent film festivals across the country, including this year's
Gasparilla International Film Festival in Tampa.

   Kozma stays informed about the latest developments in skin cancer research
and treatment and updates the documentary as necessary. He produced a shorter
version, 20 minutes, for use in high school classrooms. He gets many requests
for the DVD from grandparents who want their grandkids to see it.

   Spreading awareness

   In the documentary, famed National Cancer Institute researcher and gene
therapy pioneer Dr. Steven Rosenberg calls melanoma ". . . the most rapidly
increasing cancer in the United States."

   More than 68,000 new cases were diagnosed nationwide last year, according to
the American Cancer Society; there were about 8,700 deaths.

   For years scientists have known that overexposure to the sun, particularly
blistering sunburns in childhood or the teen years, increases the risk of skin
cancer later in life. But tanning beds may be even more dangerous. According to
the World Health Organization, when the devices are used regularly before age
35, melanoma risk increases by 75 percent. In 2009, WHO classified tanning beds
as "carcinogenic to humans."

   The documentary features experts from USF Health and Moffitt Cancer Center,
as well as other nationally recognized physicians and researchers.

   It also offers a tour of how pop culture has contributed to this epidemic,
starting with Coco Chanel kicking off the "tan is glam" attitude in the 1920s.
Footage that manages to be both amusing and chilling captures the roots of the
craze for indoor tanning. As a narrator extols the health virtues, a mother
waves a handheld sunlamp over her infant, who is wearing nothing but eye
goggles.

   It also shows that many modern sun worshipers aren't much more knowledgeable.

   One bikini-clad young woman interviewed at the beach explains that all
through school students are taught about the dangers of smoking, alcohol and
drugs, but no one ever tells young people about protecting their skin from the
sun.

   Irene Maher can be reached at imaher@sptimes.com

   * * *

   FAST FACTS

   Be aware of potential skin cancers

   - Basal and squamous cell are the most common, usually found on areas that
get UV exposure from sun or tanning beds. Very treatable when found early.

   - Melanoma is less common but deadlier and harder to treat.

   - Symptoms to investigate: new growths, spots, bumps, rough patches and sores
that don't heal in several weeks; spots that look different from all others;
moles that change.

   - The ABCD rules point to signs that may mean a spot is melanoma:
asymmetrical shape,borders are irregular or blurred,color varies, and diameter
is greater than a pencil eraser. Also look for swelling or redness beyond the
borders of a spot or mole.

   - Check your skin once a month. Use a mirror for hard-to-see areas; don't
skip bottoms of feet, between toes and behind ears. Ask your hairstylist to
check your scalp for growths or dark patches.

   -Report any suspicious changes to your doctor right away, and get a physician
skin exam once a year.

   Source: Skin Cancer Foundation

   On television

   More Than Skin Deep will air on the Education Channel (Bright House Ch. 614
and Verizon Ch. 32) at 9 p.m. Sunday. View clips at www.morethanskindeep.org.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - EDMUND D. FOUNTAIN - Times: Tampa filmmaker Stan Kozma made the
documentary More Than Skin Deep in memory of his friend Kristi Michael, pictured
behind him, who died of melanoma at age 35. The award-winning film takes a
brutally frank look at skin cancer and its toll.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2010


                               9 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            December 5, 2010 Sunday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS SUNDAY; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1549 words

HEADLINE: Startups get ready to woo investors

BYLINE: By, John Yantis, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   If you want money from Paul Winandy, you better come with more than a just a
good idea.

   The managing director of the Arizona Technology Investor Forum reviewed
applications from roughly 130 business startups this year. Eleven of them will
present to his group, made up of about 50 angel investors who focus on
early-stage technology funding in Arizona. Out of those 11, only three or four
will actually receive capital.

   "There are probably some other good companies in that mix that merit
investment," Winandy said. "There's just not enough dollars to go around."

   Winandy and other investors will be looking for the next great idea during
the Invest Southwest Capital Conference this week in Scottsdale. Eleven
companies will present at the three-day event that kicks off Wednesday in hopes
of finding angel or venture-capital funding.

   Arizona venture-capital investment was dismal during the most recent quarter,
according to two reports, but experts caution against reading too much into the
numbers because of similar declining numbers across the U.S. and region as well
as funding that went unreported.

   Just two companies in the state received financing during the third quarter
for a total investment of $7 million, Dow Jones VentureSource said.

   Another report, the MoneyTree Report from PricewaterhouseCoopers and the
National Venture Capital Association, said $13.9 million was invested in three
Arizona companies during the quarter.

   Venture capital is used to gauge the entrepreneurial strength of a region.
Investors typically provide the funding in exchange for a stake in the
companies. They hope recipients will be acquired by another company or go public
at a later date, providing a big payoff for backers.

   Frank Grimmelmann will be studying the companies at Invest Southwest closely
to see how senior management teams come across given the short amount of time
they have to pitch their firms.

   "That's something you obviously don't see in the write-ups or summaries or
even a business plan, but in today's market clearly management is a key
indicator," said Grimmelmann, who became an active angel investor after moving
to Arizona nine years ago.

   About three years ago, after being involved in four high-tech startups,
Winandy decided to he would focus more on investing in the state because of the
scarce capital in the region for startups. He became involved in the Arizona
Technology Investor Forum, where members are required to invest a minimum of
$25,000 over two years.

   "Over the last three years, we've invested more than $3.5 million in about 14
different startups," he said. "It's a drop in the bucket compared to what's
needed in Arizona. But at least the group is active."

   Winandy will be at Invest Southwest as an investor and as a presenter of a
company called WebPT LLC, a Phoenix-based company that develops Web-based
electronic medical records for physical therapists.

   "At ATIF, we see a lot of deals come across our plate, pretty much everybody
who is looking for money in the state," he said. "I must have seen 200 or 300
different companies over the last three years. Not one of them has ever
attracted me to go back to an operating role until I saw WebPT."

   As an angel investor looking at other companies, Winandy concentrates on what
he knows: software. He looks for companies where a strong management team is
already in place.

   Then he wants to know if they've already built their product. Next, he
determines if the company is generating revenue and whether its market will
continue to grow.

   "You can't just come with a concept and be a nice guy," he said. "That might
work in Silicon Valley. But it doesn't work in Arizona. You have to find a way
if you're an entrepreneur to take that idea and actually bring it into life. If
you gotten that kind of traction, then it starts to become an interesting
investment, or at least something to consider."

   Invest Southwest is good for spotting trends in emerging companies, investor
Ed Vanderslice said. He considers companies doing work in industries with
potential for growth in the next five to 10 years.

   "A lot of time when the economy is not doing very well, going all the way
back to the Great Depression, that's quite often the time some of the great
business concepts that get incubated and developed," said Vanderslice, a former
Intel employee, said. "Generally, when things are going well, you don't
generally have a lot of your best people out there trying to create something
new."

   He predicts green technology will be big, comparing its potential to the tech
bubble of the 1990s.

   "A lot will crash and burn early, but the survivors are potentially huge,"
Vanderslice said. "You've got Amazon.com and Google and a few other companies
who have made it through all that to become industry giants 10 years later. What
it really comes down to in green tech is having core technology, having some
defensible technology as well as having the ability to address a very large
market."

   Vanderslice invests for himself, but he may also work with a company through
mentoring or helping to define its strategic vision.

   "I leave myself open to what the opportunity presents itself to be," he said.
"I kind of backed away from the industry for a couple of years after leaving
Intel. Now I've been looking at ways of re-engaging in the industry without
going back into a corporate role again."

   Grimmelmann, who has been in senior management positions and/or running his
own company since he was 26, attends several capital conferences a year. His
expertise is in health-care technology and finance.

   "Sometimes it's a good experience and sometimes you wish you could rethink
it," he said of investments.

   He was invited to Invest Southwest and says those involved in Arizona venture
and angel capital are a fairly tight circle of people who know who is actively
investing.

   He compares Invest Southwest to speed dating, where investors take a look at
companies and get a feel for them initially. The meeting dictates what he's
interested in and what he'll follow up on.

   "The other thing the Invest Southwest conference does is allow you to network
with other investors," Grimmelmann said. "There's a lot of power and strength in
being able to know what other investors are doing and getting their
perspectives."

   Grimmelmann says he's a bit unusual in that often he'll take a proactive role
in the companies he invests in. That allows him to bring his capital, experience
and network of relationships to the deal.

   Investments can come from angel groups locally or syndication across multiple
groups in multiple states, Grimmelmann said.

   "I think what we're increasingly seeing is the angel groups now take on
investments that in past were funded by the venture-capital firms," Grimmelmann
said. "The venture-capital firms are quite often looking for a later-stage or a
larger investment in order to not have so many investments in their portfolio
that don't make sense."

   |

   Invest Southwest

   The Invest Southwest Capital Conference is Wednesday to Friday at  Four
Seasons Resort Scottsdale at Troon North, 10600 E. Crescent Moon  Drive. The
conference's keynote speaker is Peter Diamondis, chairman and  CEO of the X
PRIZE Foundation. Diamondis is known for the $10 million  Ansari X PRIZE for
private spaceflight and the $10 million Progressive  Automotive X PRIZE for 100
mile-per-gallon equivalent cars.

   PRESENTERS

   * Brain State Technologies of Scottsdale, which has a system for  brainwave
optimization with real-time balancing, a technology the  company says is
designed for relaxation, self-regulation and meditation.  Ultimately, the
process produces personalized exercises to balance and  optimize your brain.

   * Calimmune Inc. of Tucson,  which is developing a one-time  outpatient gene
therapy to treat HIV-positive individuals and  delay/eliminate the need for
costly anti-viral medications.

   * ClearData Networks of Phoenix, which is selling  data hosting to  the
health-care industry to move to electronic medical records and  ensures HIPAA
compliance.

   * Cognivue Corp. of Gatineau, Quebec, which is solving the
processor-performance bottleneck while delivering best performance per  area per
milliwatt for image-cognition processing.

   * Elliptical Mobile Solutions of Chandler,  which is offering a
cost-effective, energy-efficient, microcontainerized data center by  making
refrigerator units for IT equipment.

   * Real Time Optical of Phoenix, which is is a 3-D display and
embedded-avionics company that sells to Fortune 500 companies and has a  3-D
stereographic head display.

   * SEAL Innotech of Chandler, which provides mobile business  applications
synced with enterprise resource planning for Fortune 1000  sales
representatives, executives, operations and other staff.

   * Serious Integrated Inc. of Phoenix, which  provides touch-screen  interface
technology for industrial/medical/consumer device original  equipment managers.

   * Sokikom of Chandler, which  is developing a multiplayer online learning
game to help students learn math.

   * Thumbspeak LLC of Scottsdale, which  allows companies to gain rapid
insights by sending targeted questions to smartphones.

   * WebPT LLC of Phoenix, which  is a Web-based electronic medical-record
solution for independent physical-therapy clinics.

   |

   Reach the reporter john.yantis@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8280.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2010


                              10 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                          November 24, 2010 Wednesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 88

LENGTH: 203 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY: SIMMONS CONFRONTS PAST

BYLINE: MICHAEL STARR

BODY:

   GET ready for a very special episode of "Gene Simmons Family Jewels."

   The Dec. 5 return of the A&E reality show features series star and KISS
rocker Gene Simmons, whose mother is a Holocaust survivor, on a teary visit to
the Anne Frank House in Amsterdam.

   Simmons, 61, was born Chaim Witz in Israel and moved here when he was 8 years
old.

   In the episode, Simmons is touring with KISS in Amsterdam when he agrees to
be interviewed by a young Dutch student who wants to know more about Simmons'
family history -  and takes Simmons to visit the Anne Frank House.

   Simmons weeps openly at the first sight of photos of Anne Frank, a
German-born Jew who was hidden in an Amsterdam attic with her family before they
were discovered by the Nazis in 1945. Frank, 15, was shipped off to
Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, where she died.

   Simmons' European-born mom, Florence Klein, was exactly the same age as Anne
Frank when she was sent to a concentration camp, and Simmons' visit to the Anne
Frank House forces him to confront a part of his past he rarely discusses.

   The episode also features Simmons sitting for an interview with William
Shatner on Shatner's BIO show, "Shatner's Raw Nerve" (BIO is a sister network of
A&E).

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2010


                              11 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           November 20, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: G; Living Arts; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Somerville spins tales of the future and end;
Stories are smart, witty, surreal

BYLINE: By Joseph Peschel,

BODY:

   You may recognize Patrick Somerville as the author of ``The Cradle,'' a
realistic and often comical exploration of contemporary fatherhood. Little in
that novel would prepare for you the amazing stories in Somerville's second
story collection, ``The Universe in Miniature in Miniature.'' These tales are
mostly speculative fiction-science fiction, surrealism, absurdism, and fantasy
blended into a metafictional continuum.

   In his linked sketches, vignettes, and full-blown stories, Somerville's
characters like to quote or allude to Bilbo and Frodo Baggins, characters
straight out of Tolkien's fantasies, but they also read Coleridge and Salinger.
Characters, institutions, and techno gadgets from one story sometimes recur in
another. Nevertheless, the stories are chiefly connected by theme: how we cope
with pain, fear, death, and how the world works and how it might end. Somerville
offers these topics in smart, often humorous techno-geekish ways.

   The best stories are the full-blown tales. In the title piece, Dylan and
Rosie, students at SSTD (School of Surreal Thought and Design), help Lucy with
her project about pain: surveilling an invalid to ``observe the wholesale
collapse of a family following major trauma.'' Dylan is writing a novel about
scientists who, while trying to develop the perfect carbonated beverage, destroy
the world. Rosie's project is making a miniature of a boy making a miniature of
the solar system.

   Dark on one side, afire on the other, the Earth has stopped spinning in ``The
Sun,'' and people doubt that normalcy will ever return. Fear and pain drive the
magic in ``Vaara in the Woods.'' A soon-to-be-father dreams about a magical ox
that returns from the dead as a monstrous ox-man and attacks the narrator's
ancestors and metaphorically his own baby.

   ``Hair University'' shows us how far people will go to fend off aging. Danny,
a successful sci-fi writer and former SSTD student, lends $85,000 to his hard-up
friend Phil for a dangerous hair treatment involving gene therapy that will not
only stop baldness but will re-grow hair. The risk: full-body disintegration.

   Danny mentions he's the author of a short story about aliens too stupid to
fly their own ship. It's the very next story, ``Confused Aliens,'' a humorous
look at what aliens and their leaders might really be like - very like ourselves
and our leaders.

   The brightest thing in Somerville's universe of stellar stories is ``The
Machine of Understanding Other People,'' a witty and ironic four-part novella. A
down-and-out drunk and former lawyer from Chicago, Tom Sanderson, and a social
worker from London, Eliza Dagonet, are heirs to the fortune of their lost
aristocratic uncle Herman. The eccentric Herman had lived in a well-furnished
cave with a door, ``not unlike hobbits.'' The cave, lit by track lights and
cooled with central air-conditioning, has furniture fashioned from stones, an
organic sort of architecture that's a fantastical mix of Taliesin West and a
hobbit home. Herman's money, castles, and cave go to Eliza. The machine,
actually a helmet, goes to Tom. Eliza's Grandma Beatrice, a scientist, designed
the helmet as a weapon during World War II. When a person wears the helmet, he
can simply point a stick to merge into the consciousness of others.

   One story, reminiscent of 1970s experimentalism with the typeface placement,
failed to resonate, but the rest twinkle. Somerville has vast talent for
invention and a flair for writing in a variety of voices, whether his character
is a young female, a middle-aged male, or an alien. All in all in all, this is a
remarkable and fun-to-read collection.

   Joseph Peschel, a freelance writer and critic in South Dakota, can be reached
at joe@josephpeschel.com or through his website at josephpeschel.com.

   Book Review

   THE UNIVERSE IN MINIATURE

   IN MINIATURE

   By Patrick Somerville

   Featherproof, 304 pp., $14.95

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2010


                              12 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           November 20, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: G; Living Arts; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: Somerville spins tales of the future and end;
Stories are smart, witty, surreal

BYLINE: By Joseph Peschel,

BODY:

   You may recognize Patrick Somerville as the author of ``The Cradle,'' a
realistic and often comical exploration of contemporary fatherhood. Little in
that novel would prepare for you the amazing stories in Somerville's second
story collection, ``The Universe in Miniature in Miniature.'' These tales are
mostly speculative fiction-science fiction, surrealism, absurdism, and fantasy
blended into a metafictional continuum.

   In his linked sketches, vignettes, and full-blown stories, Somerville's
characters like to quote or allude to Bilbo and Frodo Baggins, characters
straight out of Tolkien's fantasies, but they also read Coleridge and Salinger.
Characters, institutions, and techno gadgets from one story sometimes recur in
another. Nevertheless, the stories are chiefly connected by theme: how we cope
with pain, fear, death, and how the world works and how it might end. Somerville
offers these topics in smart, often humorous techno-geekish ways.

   The best stories are the full-blown tales. In the title piece, Dylan and
Rosie, students at SSTD (School of Surreal Thought and Design), help Lucy with
her project about pain: surveilling an invalid to ``observe the wholesale
collapse of a family following major trauma.'' Dylan is writing a novel about
scientists who, while trying to develop the perfect carbonated beverage, destroy
the world. Rosie's project is making a miniature of a boy making a miniature of
the solar system.

   Dark on one side, afire on the other, the Earth has stopped spinning in ``The
Sun,'' and people doubt that normalcy will ever return. Fear and pain drive the
magic in ``Vaara in the Woods.'' A soon-to-be-father dreams about a magical ox
that returns from the dead as a monstrous ox-man and attacks the narrator's
ancestors and metaphorically his own baby.

   ``Hair University'' shows us how far people will go to fend off aging. Danny,
a successful sci-fi writer and former SSTD student, lends $85,000 to his hard-up
friend Phil for a dangerous hair treatment involving gene therapy that will not
only stop baldness but will re-grow hair. The risk: full-body disintegration.

   Danny mentions he's the author of a short story about aliens too stupid to
fly their own ship. It's the very next story, ``Confused Aliens,'' a humorous
look at what aliens and their leaders might really be like - very like ourselves
and our leaders.

   The brightest thing in Somerville's universe of stellar stories is ``The
Machine of Understanding Other People,'' a witty and ironic four-part novella. A
down-and-out drunk and former lawyer from Chicago, Tom Sanderson, and a social
worker from London, Eliza Dagonet, are heirs to the fortune of their lost
aristocratic uncle Herman. The eccentric Herman had lived in a well-furnished
cave with a door, ``not unlike hobbits.'' The cave, lit by track lights and
cooled with central air-conditioning, has furniture fashioned from stones, an
organic sort of architecture that's a fantastical mix of Taliesin West and a
hobbit home. Herman's money, castles, and cave go to Eliza. The machine,
actually a helmet, goes to Tom. Eliza's Grandma Beatrice, a scientist, designed
the helmet as a weapon during World War II. When a person wears the helmet, he
can simply point a stick to merge into the consciousness of others.

   One story, reminiscent of 1970s experimentalism with the typeface placement,
failed to resonate, but the rest twinkle. Somerville has vast talent for
invention and a flair for writing in a variety of voices, whether his character
is a young female, a middle-aged male, or an alien. All in all in all, this is a
remarkable and fun-to-read collection.

   Joseph Peschel, a freelance writer and critic in South Dakota, can be reached
at joe@josephpeschel.com or through his website at josephpeschel.com.

   Book Review

   THE UNIVERSE IN MINIATURE

   IN MINIATURE

   By Patrick Somerville

   Featherproof, 304 pp., $14.95

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2010


                              13 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 19, 2010 Friday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; P-com Obituaries; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Alan M. Gewirtz, Penn medical professor

BYLINE: By Walter F. Naedele; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Alan M. Gewirtz, 61, the C. Willard Robinson Professor of Hematology-Oncology
at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, died of lung cancer
Wednesday, Nov. 17, at his home in the Washington Square neighborhood of
Philadelphia.

   A researcher of cancers of the blood, Dr. Gewirtz "dedicated his career to
the development of novel therapeutics for the treatment of leukemia," Charles
Abrams wrote in an e-mail appreciation for their medical school colleagues.

   Abrams, associate chief of hematology-oncology at the medical school, wrote
that "Alan's scientific contributions were published in the best journals," and
that Dr. Gewirtz had been honored by organizations such as the American Society
of Hematology "for the excellence of his work."

   Noting that Dr. Gewirtz had led the Hematologic Malignancies Program at
Penn's Abramson Cancer Center, Abrams wrote that he "was a tireless advocate for
basic science research and for promoting the careers of young scientists."

   Combining his work with his leisure interest, Dr. Gewirtz "was a passionate
pilot who was even funded by NASA to study hematopoiesis," the production of
blood cells, in outer space.

   But he had a whimsical side, Abrams wrote, "the sort of fellow who would
bring Sparky his dog to a conference."

   Born in New York City, Dr. Gewirtz received a bachelor's degree in marine
biology at Colgate University in 1971 and earned his medical degree at the State
University of New York at Buffalo in 1976.

   After spending the 1982-83 academic year as an instructor at the Yale
University School of Medicine, Dr. Gewirtz began his Philadelphia career at the
Temple University School of Medicine.

   He was an assistant professor there from 1983 to 1989 and an associate
professor in 1989-90.

   When he moved to Penn, he was an associate professor from 1990 to 1996 and
professor from 1998 to 2004, when he became the Robinson Professor of
Hematology-Oncology.

   Since 1993, he had been a member of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy
and, since 1997, a leader in the stem-cell biology and therapeutics program at
Penn's cancer center.

   Since 2005, his son Jamie said, Dr. Gewirtz's many foreign
lectures-by-invitation included ones for the Ramanbhai Foundation International
Symposium in Ahmedabad, India; the European Stem Cell Therapeutic Excellence
Center in Kracow, Poland; and the European School of Hematology in Mandelieu,
France.

   A holder of nine patents, Dr. Gewirtz had been on the editorial board of such
publications as Cancer Gene Therapy since 1993, Leukemia since 1994,
Experimental Hematology since 1998, and the Journal of Clinical Investigation
since 2007.

   Among his several honors, in 1999 he received the Doris Duke Charitable
Foundation's Distinguished Clinical Scientist Award and an honorary doctorate
from the Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Poland.

   Besides his son, Jamie, Dr. Gewirtz is survived by his wife, Joanna
Opalinska; a daughter, Emily Stiebel; three brothers; a granddaughter; and
former wife Elizabeth Bien.

   A graveside service was set for 11 a.m. Friday, Nov. 19, at West Laurel Hill
Cemetery, 215 Belmont Ave., Bala Cynwyd.

   Contact staff writer Walter F. Naedele at 215-854-5607 or
wnaedele@phillynews.com.

GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2010


                              14 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2010 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           November 18, 2010 Thursday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Concert to benefit Alzheimer's;
Violinist recalls music-loving Atlanta developer.;
Proceeds will help research at Emory.

BYLINE: Bo Emerson; Staff

BODY:

   Real estate developer Charles M. "Mack" Taylor built significant parts of
Atlanta, including Buckhead Plaza and Perimeter Center. He remade the city's
skyline, until he himself was unmade by Alzheimer's disease.

   "He was hands down the most interesting, engaging person I've met in my
entire life," said his son-in-law Robert McDuffie, a Macon-based concert
violinist and educator.

   McDuffie used to play music with Taylor at Christmas and Thanksgiving and on
other occasions. "We'd play hymns together," McDuffie said. "He was a very
competitive guy. I'd try to one-up him and he'd one-up me by playing 'Rhapsody
in Blue.' "

   Eventually Taylor lost his speech, his memory and his life to Alzheimer's.
"The music was one of the last things to fade away," said his son-in-law. "It
was painful to see when he couldn't play anymore."

   McDuffie played an adagio from "The Four Seasons" by Vivaldi at Taylor's
funeral. On Friday he will reprise the Vivaldi and perform the Atlanta premiere
of "The American Four Seasons" by Philip Glass, a composition he commissioned.

   Proceeds from the concert, at the Schwartz Center for Performing Arts, will
help support research and treatment at the Emory Alzheimer's Disease Research
Center, one of 29 such research centers operating under the aegis of the
National Institutes of Health, and the only one in the Southeast.

   Allan Levey, director of the center, diagnosed Taylor in 1996 and treated him
until he died in 2008. Levey said Alzheimer's disease is "threatening society
globally because of a tsunami of patients up ahead as people age."

   Some 5.3 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's, Levey said.

   Between 3 percent and 12 percent of Americans older than 65 have some
dementia, and the rate doubles every five years of age after that, he said. Some
50 percent of those 85 and older have some dementia, much of it caused by
Alzheimer's.

   Despite its prevalence, Alzheimer's research receives only about one-20th of
the money devoted to solving other ills, such as cancer and diabetes.

   Partly that's a matter of public relations. Alzheimer's silences its victims,
and is 100 percent fatal. "There's not a Lance Armstrong, there's not a survivor
who becomes a spokesman," Levey said.

   But researchers are making strides in detecting the disease and developing
techniques to slow its progress. There are gene therapies aimed at healing
certain acetycholine-producing cells in the brain that are vulnerable, and
others aimed at resuscitating brain cells responsible for producing
neurotransmitters. Findings by Emory scientists and others demonstrate that
low-tech treatments such as exercise and memory training can have a positive
impact on Alzheimer's patients.

   Studies also show that music, which activates the same area of the brain as
memory and emotions, can improve mood, help with memory tasks and evoke
autobiographical memories.

   Though he was all business at the office, Mack Taylor remained a musician at
home, sitting at the piano each night before dinner and playing some of the
swing tunes that helped him earn his way through college.

   He was proud to have a concert violinist as a son-in-law, and helped McDuffie
put together a consortium to purchase an extraordinarily valuable violin once
played by Paganini. "When Mack was sick, Bobby would come over and play violin
for him," said Taylor's widow, Mary Rose Taylor. "The first time I allowed
myself to cry was when I realized [Mack's] brain no longer moved his fingers
over the keyboard."

   Concert preview

   Robert McDuffie (above) with the Venice Baroque Orchestra, performing
Vivaldi's "The Four Seasons" and Philip Glass' "The American Four Seasons"

   8 p.m. Friday. $46-$56. Schwartz Center for Performing Arts, 1700 N. Decatur
Road, Atlanta. 404-727-5050, www.arts.emory.edu.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2010


                              15 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                           November 16, 2010 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1.0

LENGTH: 1580 words

HEADLINE: Cancer treatment shows promise

BYLINE: By, Peggy O'Farrell

BODY:

   An experimental cancer treatment developed locally has the potential to
revolutionize the way doctors treat the disease.

   The compound, called SapC-DOPS, tricks cancer cells into committing suicide
without harming healthy tissues  - and with no apparent side effects  -
developers say.

   Bexion Pharmaceuticals in Covington, which manufactures the compound, plans
to begin the first phase of testing it on humans by mid-2011, said president and
CEO Ray Takigiku."There's nothing like this kind of drug in anyone's pipeline,"
he said

   While the compound has only been tested in tumor samples and lab animals, it
has the potential to provide a non-toxic treatment that cancer cells can't
outsmart, experts say.

   A genetics researcher at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
discovered it in 2002.

   In the lab, the compound works against several cancers, but it holds special
promise for treating glioblastoma brain tumors and pancreatic cancer, two deadly
cancers with few effective treatments.

   "It's one of the most exciting potential therapies I've seen," said
neurosurgeon Ronald Warnick, director of the UC Brain Tumor Center. Warnick, who
is not affiliated with Bexion, has reviewed the pre-clinical data on the
compound.

   Cancer occurs when genetic mutations trigger the formation of abnormal cells
that invade normal, healthy tissue. Surgery is one treatment option, but not
every cancer can be cut out.

   Radiation and chemotherapy work by killing cancer cells, but they also kill
healthy tissue, and can have debilitating side effects.

   New targeted molecular therapies work by blocking the unique genetic signals
that create cancer cells.

   But scientists haven't identified every signaling mechanism, and cancer is
wickedly smart, said Xiaoyang Qi, the human geneticist at Cincinnati Children's
who discovered the compound.

   Cancer cells mutate rapidly, and they can become resistant to chemotherapy
and radiation. In addition, tumors are remarkably diverse.

   "Even the same tumor in the same patient, the genetic profiles are different
in different tumor cells," Qi said.

   So targeted therapies might work on parts of the tumor, he said, but not the
whole mass.

   Other defense mechanisms also protect cancer.

   Normal cells know when they've reached the end of their life cycle  - usually
a few days or weeks  - and die off on schedule, to be replaced by new healthy
cells.

   Cancer cells don't die natural deaths.

   But the new compound can trick them into committing suicide, Qi said.

   It takes advantage of the way cancer cells are built. In a nutshell, cancer
cells are very acidic because of the way they're constructed.

   That unique construction helps them hide from the immune system, which would
normally recognize cancer as an invader and "zap" it.

   But the new compound likes acid, and grabs on to cancer cells, which then
ingest it. Inside the cell, the compound triggers the release of a chemical
that, in essence, makes it kill itself.

   If cancer cells evolve and change their structure so that they don't attract
the new compound, they'll make themselves targets for the immune system,
Takigiku said. "I just don't see how they could mutate themselves into becoming
unresponsive to this drug," he said.

   Nanotechnology for cancer treatment, like the compound developed at
Cincinnati Children's, is the wave of the future, said Jeff Bulte, director of
the cellular imaging section in Johns Hopkins University's Institute for
Cellular Imaging.

   The National Institutes of Health has established a new division focusing on
developing new nanotech approaches because experts recognize that chemotherapy
and radiation have advanced as far as they can.

   "At this point, the only way cancer is pretty much cured is surgery," Bulte
said. "Chemotherapy and radiation are pretty much stalled. The hope with
nanotechnology is that you can do much more aggressive, high-dose treatment.
With standard therapies, the problem is, if you really want to kill the tumor,
you end up killing the patient."

   The compound is made up of two substances found naturally in the body  - a
protein and a lipid. Qi combined the two substances into what's called a
nanovesicle  - a tiny, molecule-sized bubble. It's a new way to deliver a
treatment, and it's been patented.

   The new compound has several advantages over traditional cancer treatments:

   It ignores healthy cells; they aren't acidic enough to attract it.

   It's not toxic, so super-strong cancer cells can't resist it.

   It has exhibited no harmful side effects.

   It can travel anywhere in the body to get to cancer cells  - including into
the brain. Many cancer-killing agents can't get to the brain because they're
blocked by a natural defense mechanism designed to protect the brain from
poisons, bacteria and viruses and other threats.

   Surgery is the standard treatment for most brain tumors, but there are
limitations.

   Brain tumors aren't easily removed, Warnick said. They usually have tiny
tentacles that are impossible to remove surgically.

   And, depending on where the tumor is located, cutting out sections of the
brain could leave a patient paralyzed or unable to speak or see.

   The compound can get to the tentacles the scalpel can't reach, at least in
lab animals.

   Chemotherapy and radiation are also poisonous to delicate brain tissue, and
often ineffective against brain tumors in the long run.

   In children, especially, standard brain tumor treatments pose a serious risk
for long-term developmental damage, said Charles Stevenson, a pediatric
neurosurgeon at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center.

   Stevenson and Qi are exploring another potential application. Its ability to
attach only to cancer cells also makes it useful for delivering fluorescent dyes
to those cells, making it easier for doctors to pinpoint cancers for diagnosis
and treatment.

   Since the compound is only attracted to cancer cells and can travel anywhere
in the body, scientists can attach to it fluorescent dyes that show up on
imaging scans.

   The addition will light up cancer cells so they're visible anywhere in the
body, Stevenson said. That's a great tool to help surgeons cut out as much as
possible.

   It's also a way to let doctors see if the cancer has spread, as well as how
well it's responding to treatment.

   The compound shows great potential, Takigiku and Qi said, but so far has only
lived up to it in lab animals and cultured human cancer cells.

   In lab mice engineered to develop brain tumors, only the mice treated with
the compound survived, Takigiku said.

   "It was a lethal model," he said. "There wasn't a drug on God's green earth
that would save those mice.

   "Except ours."

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration will review the compound's
effectiveness in mice and cultured tissue, and make the determination as to
whether Bexion can test it in humans.

   The phase 1 clinical trials, if they get that far, will be used only to
determine whether the compound is safe in humans. Its effectiveness against
cancer will be determined in later stages  - again, if it gets that far.

   Getting it to this point has been a long  - and expensive  - journey.

   Takigiku estimates the cost so far is $5 million. He won't speculate on what
sales the compound might generate, but globally, cancer drugs generate about $50
billion in sales.

   Qi discovered the compound in 2002. He's worked full time on the compound
since then.

   Cincinnati Children's licensed the technology to Bexion in 2006. Qi continues
to study the compound, and indications are it might be useful against other
diseases.

   Bexion is a small company, Takigiku said, and so far, they've made the
compound "a batch at a time," he said.

   They've received several start-up grants from the National Cancer Institute
and the National Institutes of Health that have allowed them access to the
technology they need to build the compound.

   If the compound is as safe and effective as developers hope, Takigiku said,
there's no telling what the next step could be.

   "There's no roadmap," Takigiku said.

   "It's not like someone has done this before. It's not like there's been a
drug like this before."

   How the compound works

   A researcher at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Bexion
Pharmaceuticals in Covington have teamed to develop a new way to fight cancer.
They've built an experimental compound, SapC-DOPS, that flips the "suicide
switch" in cancer cells by taking advantage of the malignant cells' unique
construction.

   In normal cells, there are structures called lysosomes that contain cellular
waste products, bacteria and other structures the cell engulfs.

   The lysosome is made up in part of phosphatidylserines. In a normal cell,
those chemicals are tucked neatly inside the cell.

   In cancer cells, phosphatidylserines migrate to the outside of the cell
membrane. The migration prevents cancer cells from triggering inflammation and
hides them from the immune system. But it also makes for leaky lysosomes, and
that leakage creates an acidic environment in cancer cells. That acidic
environment immediately attracts the new compound, which attaches to the cancer
cell - and only to the cancer cell.

   Once inside the cell, the compound activates an enzyme that produces
ceramide.Ceramide is the enzyme that tells cells it's time to die. Once the
ceramide is released, the cancer cell kills itself.

   The protein is made up of two substances that occur naturally in the body: a
protein call saposin C that works in cells' lysosomes, and DOPS, a fat-soluble
molecule that helps make up cell membranes. It's often found on the surface of
tumor tissues.

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2010


                              16 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 16, 2010 Tuesday

SECTION: Business; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: POSITIVE STUDY RESULTS FOR 2 LOCAL BIOTECHS;
Cytori, Celladon both plan to move ahead with treatments for heart-failure
patients

BODY:

   A pair of San Diego biotechnology companies reported positive results Monday
from studies of experimental heart therapies at the American Heart Association's
scientific sessions conference this week in Chicago.

   In the first report, Cytori Therapeutics said patients with chronic heart
failure who received its stem cell treatment improved their performance in two
physical measures of heart function after six months and maintained those gains
for another year, while those receiving a placebo experienced declines.

   A total of 27 patients participated in the European study, the company said.

   Cytori makes the Celution System, a dishwasher-sized device that extracts
stem cells from fatty tissue. The cells are then injected back into the patient
as a therapy.

   The system, which cost $100,000 to $200,000, has been approved in Europe for
use in breast reconstruction surgery and wound repair in Crohn's disease
patients. About 135 machines are in operation worldwide.

   The company plans to seek European approval of the system for treating
chronic heart failure patients based on the latest study, said Chief Executive
Christopher Calhoun. Such patients have few, if any, other treatment options, he
said.

   The study deserves attention, but it probably won't be enough to win
regulatory approval, said Dr. J. Thomas Heywood, director of the heart-failure
program at Scripps Clinic in La Jolla.

   "It's very interesting, but it needs to be confirmed in a much larger group,"
he said. "Cardiology is just littered with studies that look fantastic early on,
then go nowhere."

   In the other report, Celladon of La Jolla said heart-failure patients
receiving Mydicar, its experimental gene therapy, had significantly fewer major
cardiovascular events -- including need for a heart transplant, heart
failure-related hospitalization or death -- than those given a placebo.

   The 12-month, phase 2 clinical study involved 39 patients.

   Celladon officials said they will move forward with a larger phase 3 study of
the therapy.

   Keith DarcÉ o U-T

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2010


                              17 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                            November 14, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 2491 words

HEADLINE: A DISEASE AS OLD AS MAN - NEW HISTORY OF CANCER SHOWS IT HAS ALWAYS
HAUNTED US - AND MAY NEVER BE CURED

BYLINE: SUSANNAH CAHALAN

BODY:

   The powerful Persian queen Atossa, immortalized by Greek historian Herodotus
in 440 BC, experienced every woman's worst nightmare: a bleeding lump in her
breast.

   Today, Atossa would undergo a combination of possible cures - surgery,
radiation, chemotherapy, targeted gene therapy, among others. But several
millennia ago, her options were limited.

   She wrapped herself in sheets and succumbed to a self-imposed quarantine
until - and we can only guess - the pain became so severe that she allowed her
slave to cut off her breast.

   Although the former seems more humane, and certainly more modern, it's
unclear how much progress she would have made a few thousand years and a few
billions of dollars in the future. Since the records don't say when Atossa died,
we don't know how well the extreme surgery worked. And since there's no way to
test the current cancer fighting drugs on her now, we can't conclude that they
would be effective. The sad truth is that her life expectancy could have been
exactly the same.

   All we know for certain is that cancer, considered a "monster more insatiable
than the guillotine," has been man's oldest foe, haunting us from ancient Egypt
to present day, according to the intensely readable "Emperor of All Maladies"
(Simon & Schuster) by Columbia University oncologist Siddhartha Mukherjee.

   Mukherjee's history grew out of a question asked of him by a terminally ill,
cancer-stricken patient: "What am I battling?"

   "We can only find solace when we demystify things. The process of understand
is the first step," Mukherjee told The Post. "It begins the long journey of
finding solace."

   And as any good biography does - even one about a thing, not about a person -
he starts with its creation.

   The "Karkinos"

   Although cancers are heterogeneous, meaning that types of cancers are
different and unique to the individual, each form of the disease has one thing
in common: the violent, uncontrollable growth of cells. Doctors still aren't
sure why this process begins, but the rogue cells then attack neighboring tissue
and - in some cases - spread through the body via the lymph nodes or the blood,
sometimes forming tumors. Cancer is the human body battling itself.

   The complex nature of the disease and its proliferation in recent decades has
linked cancer to modernity and civilization - yet evidence of its deathly grip
dates almost to man's beginnings.

   The first known case of cancer was discovered by Louis Leakey, an
archeologist best known for finding Lucy, one of the earliest human skeletons.
Nearby, Leakey unearthed a human skeleton whose jawbone carried signs of
lymphoma, or cancer of the immune system, dating to 4000 BC.

   Other archeologists have found early examples of cancers, including a
2,000-year-old mummy in an Alexandrian catacomb with a tumor in its pelvic bone,
an Egyptian mummy in 400 AD with signs of abdominal cancer, and a 1,000-yearold
Persian woman with a malignant bone tumor, called osteosarcomas, so fierce that
it broke through the skin while she was still alive.

   The first reference to tumors dates back to 2500 BC, when Imhotep, an
Egyptian physician, described a "bulging mass in the breast."

   "Bulging tumors of the breast mean the existence of swellings on the breast,
large, spreading and hard; touching them is like touching a ball of wrappings,
or they may be compared to the unripe hemat fruit," he wrote.

   Although he had described several remedies for other illnesses, including
milk poured through the ears for neurological problems and balms for burns, he
was at a loss about how to treat breast cancer. "There is none," he concluded.

   Two thousand years later, the cancerous growth finally got a name. Greek
physician Hippocrates, author of the medical ethics oath under his name, called
cancer "karkinos," from the Greek word for crab.

   "The tumor, with its clutch of swollen blood vessels around it, reminded
Hippocrates of a crab dug in the sand with its legs spread in a circle,"
describes Mukherjee.

   Two hundred years later , another Greek physician described the source of
cancer as an over-abundance of "black bile" in the system.

   Skeptics still point to the dearth of information on ancient cancer as proof
that it is still a thoroughly modern illness. They would be right, but only
partly.

   Mukherjee says that the theory that modern life is to blame has to be fleshed
out a bit. Part of the increase in cancers in the last century is due to
carcinogens, such as tobacco smoke and hormone replacement therapy. But that's
only part of the story.

   "The most obvious way to answer this is that cancer is an age-related
disease," Mukherjee said. "Also, centuries ago, people would die first of other
diseases before cancer, it only emerges as a great killer once the other ones
are extinguished."

   Also, he points out, we are better able to diagnose cancer now in ways that
were unthinkable thousands of years ago. Cancer was always lurking.

   Extreme measures

   Patients were almost sure to die if they went under the knife before this
19th century, when cancer got its proper designation as a cellular disease and
life-saving surgical techniques were employed.

   Sixteenth century surgeons were known to use soldering irons and sulfuric
acid to treat tumors. And treatments offered without a scalpel were just as bad.
Apothecaries treated cancers with arsenic, laxatives and lead.

   It was in this same century that surgical procedures, including anesthesia
and antiseptics, were introduced, ushering in a new era of cancer surgery.

   Viennese surgeon Theodor Billroth discovered "safe pathways" to enter the
body and began removing tumors from infected areas in the stomach, colon,
ovaries and esophagus that would have previously killed. Now the patient, and
his organs, remained intact.

   Not all cures were progress, however.

   William Halsted, an overachieving American surgeon with a penchant for
cocaine and morphine, invented one of the most controversial and long-lasting
cancer surgeries: radical mastectomies. Instead of removing the tumor, Halsted
argued that to be truly effi cient you must remove as much as possible,
including parts of the collarbone, glands above and beneath the breast, and
parts of the shoulder and arms.

   It wouldn't be until 1981, when a study was released showing that the women
who had radical mastectomies showed no benefit in survival rates. By that time,
500,000 women had undergone the invasive and life-altering surgery.

   Age of chemotherapy

   The first wave of chemical treatments came in the form of radiation - a
toxic, although often successful, treatment.

   After the Curies discovered radium in 1902, the medical fi eld was awash in
surgeons using the new treatment on breast, brain and lung tumors. One woman
even woke up from a year-long coma to watch a basketball game.

   But the success was short-lived. And relapses became common.

   Radiation, which worked by killing cells, actually caused cancer by mutating
in the cell's genes. A team of female works, dubbed the "Radium Girls," sued US
Radium in 1927 after they got sick handling radioactive paint. They won, but
didn't live long enough to spend their payout.

   So doctors and researchers were yet again at the drawing board.

   Dr. Sidney Farber, who worked at Children's Hospital in Boston, was searching
for a cure-all for cancer. He focused on childhood leukemia, or the
proliferation of damaging white blood cells, which could easily be monitored
through blood tests.

   In the late 1940s, he discovered one in a series of chemicals that would
block the growth of white blood cells, called anti-folates. It was the birth of
modern day chemotherapy.

   Other types of chemotherapy drugs emerged around the same time. After two
tons of mustard gas was mistakenly released during Allied bombings in World War
II, doctors noticed that mustard gas killed white blood cells. Using this
knowledge, they added a variation of mustard gas to their arsenal of cancer-fi
ghting drugs.

   Now there are over 20 drugs used to treat cancers - and because no cancer is
the same, it takes an individual combination to treat each cancer. Farber's
vision of a magic bullet was far off - or impossible.

   But there were signs of hope. In 1955, a team of doctors announced that they
had found a combination of four chemotherapy drugs that treated leukemia. Ten
years later, another group discovered that a specifi c cocktail of drugs treated
many cases of advanced stage Hodgkin's disease.

   Hope and disappointment

   Scientists in the 1950s discovered hormonal therapy that treats certain types
of breast and prostate cancer with limited side effects - another big plus for
the medical fi eld. It would represent the start of "target therapy," considered
one of the futures of cancer treatment, by which doctors are able to target
certain cancer-causing genes and, in effect, turn them off.

   Around this time, socialite Mary Woodard Lasker, with the help of Dr. Farber,
began the "War on Cancer" campaign. By 1971, Lasker and her compatriots had
lobbied so effectively that they had raised $1.5 billion in funding for three
years of research.

   The notion of preventative care also began to take hold.

   Research linking cigarette smoking to lung cancer hit the general public in
the early 1950s, which later resulted in the Surgeon General's Report on Smoking
and Lung Cancer and eventually the curtailing of cigarette companies' ability to
lobby government and advertise.

   Screening trials in the early '50s revealed that pap smears reduce cervical
cancer deaths and mammograms increase early detection of breast cancers.

   Despite advances - and huge coffers - cancer rates continued to climb.
Between 1962 and 1985, cancer-related deaths increased by 8.7%.

   "There is no evidence that some 35 years of intense and growing efforts to
improve the treatment of cancer have had much overall effect on the most
fundamental measure of clinical - death," wrote cancer researchers John Bailar
and Elaine Smith.

   But there are some glimmers of hope, writes Mukherjee. For one, researchers
are in the midst of the biggest cancer program yet: the Cancer Genome Atlas.
Through this, researchers are able to identify the pathways of cancer mutations
- of which there are up to 15 different routes. In essence, the Atlas attempts
to make sense out of the chaos of rapidly reproducing cancer cells.

   Breast cancer mortality rates have dropped dramatically - by almost 20% - and
many of the treatments are far less toxic. And yet still, in America, cancer
accounts for a quarter of all deaths.

   Mukherjee is doubtful there will ever be a complete cure.

   "Cancer is dauntingly complex. There's no one single archetype to cancer, and
that's what makes it so fascinating," he said. "It will be a continuous war, one
that we will only win by redefi ning what victory means by converting cancer
into a chronic disease and delaying its inevitable onslaught."

   'MORE INSATIABLE THAN THE GUILLOTINE" - TIMELINE

   Although cancer is considered a modern disease, research shows that it may be
mankind's oldest.

   4000 BC - Louis Leakey, the archeologist best known for discovering Lucy, one
of the earliest known human skeletons, finds a jawbone nearby that carried signs
of lymphoma, or cancer of the immune system.

   2500 BC - Cancer is described for the first time by Egyptian physicist
Imhotep. He describes "bulging mass" in the breast: "They may be compared to the
unripe hemat fruit, which is hard and cool to the touch." His treatment? "There
is none."

   440 BC - Greek historian Herodotus records the story of Atossa, the queen of
Persia, who finds a lump in her breast. She wraps herself in sheets and
quarantines herself -until she allows a Greek slave named Democedes to cut her
breast off.

   400 BC - Hippocrates coins a term for cancer - "karkinos," from the Greek
word meaning "crab." The name was inspired by swollen blood vessels around a
tumor, like a crab in its shell.

   10 AD - A team of archeologists discovers a 2,000-year old Egyptian mummy in
the Alexandrian catacombs with a tumor in its pelvic bone.

   400 - Abdominal cancer is found in a mummy from Daklah, Egypt.

   1000 - A University of Minnesota professor unearths a mummified body of a
Persian woman who has "bulbous mass" in her left upper arm. Her malignant bone
tumor had broken through the skin.

   1846-1867 - Anesthesia in the form of ether and antisepsis in the form of
carbolic acid paste makes longer and safer surgeries possible, ushering in an
era of cancer surgeries.

   1890 - New York surgeon William Stewart Halsted introduces "radical
mastectomy," where cancer-ridden breasts were completely removed, along with
nearby lymph nodes and tissue.

   1890-1895- A Scottish surgeon named George Beatson removes ovaries from women
with breast cancer and observes striking remissions in cancer.

   1902 - Pierre and Marie Curie discover radium, allowing surgeons to beam more
powerful bursts onto cancerous tumors.

   1927 - A group of women called "the Radium Girls," hired by US Radium to
paint signs, sue the company for workrelated illness. The case was settled out
of court for $10,000 to each girl, and $600 per year in living expenses.

   Many of the radium girls eventually died of leukemia and other cancers.

   1929-1930 Edward Doisy discovers the female hormone, estrogen. Later,
antagonists to estrogen will make for powerful cancer-fighting drugs.

   1937 - Spurned on by the growing rates of cancer (from 70,000 cancer deaths
in 1911 to 115,000 in 1927), President Roosevelt signs the National Cancer
Institution Act, creating a new unit called the National Cancer Institute.

   1949 - Socialite Mary Woodard Lasker (right), called the "fairy godmother of
medical research," begins campaigning for the American Society for the Control
of Cancer in New York. Her work ushered in the "War on Cancer" era.

   1956 - First published study linking cigarette smoking and lung cancer is
released.

   1955-1960 - Scientists combine four drugs to treat leukemia.

   1960 - Chinese emigrant Dr. Min Chiu Li successfully treats a woman with lung
cancer with chemotherapy, even after the tumors disappeared, the first example
of cancer cured by the technique. It cost him his job, because the NIC said he
"experimented" on his patient. Years later, the NIC would adopt this "adjuvant"
therapy.

   1971 - The National Cancer Act passed in Washington, raising $1.5 billion in
funding over the next three years.

   1986 - New cancer drug added to the already long list. Retinoic acid, which
causes cancer cells to mature and die out, is added to the standard chemo
cocktail. There are currently 24 drugs that have been shown to be effective
against breast, lung, colon and prostate cancers.

   2003 - Cancer Genome Atlas launched, which sequences the genomes of human
cancer cells.

   2010 - 600,000 Americans and more than 7 million people worldwide will die of
cancer. In the US, one in three women and one in two men will develop cancer
during their lifetime. A quarter of all American deaths will be attributed to
cancer.

GRAPHIC: Crab. (Getty Images)  A tumor spreads through the mind in a CAT scan of
brain cancer. (Getty Images) Medieval masectomy. Crab. (Getty Images)  A tumor
spreads through the mind in a CAT scan of brain cancer. (Getty Images)

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2010


                              18 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 13, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: Business; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: CADENCE'S STOCK SALE WILL RAISE $92 MILLION;
Biotech's issue of 11.5 million new shares follows FDA approval of IV
acetaminophen

BODY:

   Cadence Pharmaceuticals will raise $92 million from a stock sale set to close
on Tuesday, topping the $85 million the San Diego drug developer earlier had
predicted for the offering.

   After removing expenses, Cadence expects to net $86.2 million from the sale,
which priced 11.5 million new shares of common stock at $8 a share.

   The move comes less than a week after the Food and Drug Administration
approved Ofirmev, the company's intravenous acetaminophen therapy for treating
pain and fever in hospitals.

   The drug will be used as an alternative to opium-based painkillers such as
morphine and as a complement to smaller doses of those more traditional
treatments. It has been available as a prescription drug in Europe for several
years.

   Cadence said it will use some of the proceeds from the stock sale to pay for
the commercial launch of Ofirmev.

   Drug developer gets $11.5 million infusion

   Ceregene, a privately held San Diego drug developer, said it raised $11.5
million from four venture capital firms.

   The company will spend the money on a phase 2 clinical study of CERE-120, an
experimental gene therapy for Parkinson's disease that is surgically implanted
in the brain.

   Ceregene recently started recruiting 52 patients to participate in the study
nearly two years after an initial phase 2 study delivered disappointing results.

   The four investing venture firms were Hamilton BioVentures of Solana Beach,
Alta Partners of San Francisco, MPM Capital of Boston and Investor Growth
Capital of New York.

   KEITH DARCÉ o U-T

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2010


                              19 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 12, 2010 Friday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: How cats drink: A lesson in fluid mechanics

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   In the annals of animals who have contributed to science, there are Laika the
Soviet space dog; Koko, the gorilla who is said to use sign language; and
Lancelot, the blind dog who regained some vision after gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   And now, Cutta Cutta, the cat?

   The feline did not exactly provide a cure for cancer, but he has made
something of a ripple in the field of fluid mechanics with a mundane body part:
his tongue.

   Scientists used high-speed cameras to study how Cutta Cutta and other cats
lap up water, and the answer, reported online Thursday in the journal Science,
was a surprise:

   A cat's tongue scarcely brushes the surface - not scooping up liquid like a
dog, but pulling it up from above, in a manner that seems to defy gravity.

   More explanation later, but briefly: With each darting flick of the tongue,
the animal relies on the property of adhesion and Bernoulli's principle - the
same phenomenon involved in making baseballs curve and airplanes fly. Lions and
other larger cats do it, too, though their larger tongues lead them to do it
fewer times per second, at a speed the researchers were able to predict with a
mathematical formula.

   The study's authors, who hail from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Virginia Tech, and Princeton University, pursued the topic without funding,
largely out of intellectual curiosity. Yet in their paper, they wrote that the
findings could lead to research in soft robotics - a growing field that derives
inspiration from other flexible structures in the animal kingdom, such as
elephant trunks and octopus arms.

   Still, they are prepared for bemused reactions from those who may not
immediately perceive the beauty in commonplace things.

   Just ask Princeton's Jeffrey M. Aristoff, one of the authors. At a physics
conference later this month, he will be presenting research on another everyday
phenomenon, the aerodynamics of jumping rope.

   Frame by frame

   "It's something you see every day," Aristoff said of things such as the cat's
tongue or the jump rope, "but you never really think to ask: 'How does it work?
What is it useful for?' "

   The cat study began when Roman Stocker, Cutta Cutta's owner and an associate
professor of civil and environmental engineering at MIT, puzzled over how the
feline was getting milk or water into his mouth. The tongue moved too fast for
Stocker to see clearly, so he enlisted colleagues to help him capture it on
film, then advanced the pictures frame by frame.

   The images revealed that Cutta Cutta's tongue curled underneath until the top
of it was facing downward, toward the liquid, in a sort of J shape. When the
tongue was retracted, a column of water rose up with it for just a split second.

   The animal's mouth snapped shut at the exact moment the column was at its
highest, and the process began anew, the whole thing taking place four times a
second.

   Air pressure Here's why it works: A certain amount of liquid adheres to the
tongue just as if you dipped your finger into some water. But because the cat's
tongue is raised so quickly, its velocity creates a region of lower pressure
that, because of Bernoulli's principle, sucks more water from below, Stocker
said. The higher a fluid's speed, the lower its pressure.

   The same thing occurs with a shower curtain, Aristoff said. Warm air inside
the shower rises, causing the air pressure to drop relative to the air pressure
outside the curtain. The higher pressure on the outside pushes the curtain in.

   With a lapping cat, at a certain point the rising column becomes big enough
that its inertia is overcome by gravity. But at just that moment, the cat snaps
its mouth shut.

   "We find that it is a very elegant, refined mechanism," Stocker said. "Cats
seem to be very clever about their fluid mechanics."

   Though the researchers came from the fields of physics, mathematics, and
engineering, they have managed to challenge an assumption from the field of
biology.

   The conventional wisdom was that cats used their tongues more like a scoop or
ladle, like dogs, said John Lewis, assistant professor of dentistry and oral
surgery at the Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   "It's one of those gee-whiz articles, but in some ways it may have some
clinical applications as well," he said, such as when a vet treats a cat with an
injured tongue.

   Stocker, who used to live in Australia, named his pet after that country's
Cutta Cutta caves, known for their dramatic limestone formations. The name means
"many stars."

   The team studied the lapping frequency of larger cats from YouTube videos and
by filming them at two zoos operated by Zoo New England: Boston's Franklin Park
Zoo and the Stone Zoo in Stoneham, Mass.

   As the scientists predicted, animals with bigger tongues created a larger
column when dipping into the water, and thus dipped them into the fluid less
frequently. Tigers and lions lap about twice a second compared with the house
cat's four times, Stocker said.

   Just why felines use this odd mechanism remains unclear.

   It's just speculation, but the authors note that a cat's whiskers are
delicate sensory tools, which might not work as well when wet. The whiskers of a
lapping cat stay dry, said Princeton's Aristoff.

   "If they were to drink like a dog," he said, "they'd splash water
everywhere."

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril

   at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2010


                              20 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 9, 2010 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: What's Next: Rare Hits And Heaps Of Misses To Pay For

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Research, in any field of science, is not the risk-free business that might
easily be supposed from the confident promises of scientific spokesmen or the
daily reports of new advances.

   Nature yields her secrets with the greatest unwillingness, and in basic
research most experiments contribute little to further progress, as judged by
the rarity with which most scientific reports are cited by others.

   Basic research, the attempt to understand the fundamental principles of
science, is so risky, in fact, that only the federal government is willing to
keep pouring money into it. It is a venture that produces far fewer hits than
misses.

   Even the pharmaceutical industry, a major beneficiary of biomedical research,
does not like to invest too heavily in basic science. Rather, it lets private
venture capital support the small biotechnology companies that first try to
bring new findings to market, and then buys up the few winners of this harsh
winnowing process.

   If basic research is fraught with such a high failure rate, why then does it
yield such rich economic returns? The answer is that such government financing
agencies as the National Institutes of Health and the National Science
Foundation are like the managers of a stock index fund: they buy everything in
the market, and the few spectacular winners make up for all the disasters.

   But just as index fund managers often go astray when they try to improve on
the index's performance by overweighting the stocks they favor, the government
can go wrong when it tries to pick winners.

   This is why it was such a risk for California to earmark $3 billion
specifically for stem cell research over the next 10 years. Stem cells are just
one of many promising fields of biomedical research. They could yield great
advances, or become an exercise in sustained failure, as gene therapy has so far
been. By allocating so much money to a single field, California is placing an
enormous bet on a single horse, and the chances are substantial that its
taxpayers will lose their collective shirt.

   Stem cell researchers have created an illusion of progress by claiming
regular advances in the 12 years since human embryonic stem cells were first
developed. But a notable fraction of these claims have turned out to be wrong or
fraudulent, and many others have amounted to yet another new way of getting to
square one by finding better methods of deriving human embryonic stem cells.

   The major advances in stem cell biology have come from molecular biologists
who study transcription factors, the master control switches that govern the
cell's operations. The Japanese biologist Shinya Yamanaka showed that with a
mere four of these factors, which he cleverly guessed, he could force an
ordinary cell to walk back to embryonic state.

   But the finding illustrates what stem cell research is really about. It's not
about therapies and quick cures, it's about understanding the basic nature of
human cells and what makes one type different from another even though all have
the identical genome. In other words, it's a basic research program with little
likelihood of producing therapeutic gains in the near future. Stem cell
scientists, while generally avoiding rash promises themselves, have allowed
politicians to portray stem cells as a likely cure for all the major diseases.

   Strangely, for a project that is aimed at regenerative medicine, the arbiters
of stem cell research have largely neglected the free lesson that nature is
offering as to how regenerative medicine could actually work. Many little
animals, like newts and zebra fish, do regenerate parts of their bodies. But
their recipe is the reverse of that presented by the advocates of stem cell
therapy. Instead of taking a stem cell and trying to convert it into a
well-behaved adult tissue, animals like the zebra fish start with the adult cell
at the wound site, and walk it backward into a stemlike state from which a new
limb grows.

   For the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine to invest its $3
billion in studying newts, rather than building new science buildings on every
state campus, might seem the best way of understanding regeneration, but that
would be hard to explain to California's voters, who have been assured stem cell
cures are just around the corner. Even if governments do better to avoid picking
winners among basic research fields, they can play a necessary role in
supporting specific scientific infrastructure that lies beyond the means of
individual researchers or universities, like atom-smashers or the human genome
project. But even these projects are not guaranteed success. More powerful
atom-smashers let physicists explore new ranges of energy, but the expected new
atomic particles are not always found there. The HapMap, a catalog of human
genetic variation that grew out of the human genome project, was designed to
uncover the genetic roots of common diseases and help develop new treatments.
The project was well conceived and executed, but nature declined to provide many
very useful answers. Still, there is nothing wrong with the National Institutes
of Health having tried the experiment. The only shame would be in not having
tried.

   The same goes for the HapMap's successor, the 1000 Genomes Project, which is
an attempt to construct an even larger genetic catalog. It's well worth trying,
but success cannot be assumed -- and should be the more applauded if attained.

   To take scientific progress for granted is to underestimate the difficulties,
professional and otherwise, that scientists must overcome. A researcher spends
years in apprenticeship, mastering difficult techniques with a short useful
life. He or she then has a few years to strike it lucky and become a lab chief,
much of whose time is spent applying for grants and administering the work of
the next generation of apprentice scientists.

   It's amazing that the system works as well as it does. But its successes are
hard won, not the inevitable victories that scientific spokesmen sometimes
suggest when on the fund-raising trail.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY JOHN HERSEY) (D1)
 (D8)

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2010


                              21 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 9, 2010 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1289 words

HEADLINE: What's Next: Glimpsing The Future As Fields Heat Up

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   About 25 years ago, before I came to The Times, I had a job interview at U.S.
News & World Report. I really wanted the reporter position, and it seemed to me
that things were going well. Then I was asked, ''What will be the important
medical news next year?''

   I replied that the reason science reporting is exciting is that the big
discoveries are so unpredictable.

   But, the interviewer pressed, surely there must be some stories I was
following that were on the verge of a breakthrough. I realized I had to come up
with something, so I said: ''Gene therapy. It is likely that next year gene
therapy will be shown to work and medicine will be transformed.''

   Well, I am still waiting for that to happen. And, for whatever reason, I
never heard from U.S. News again.

   But was I right to say advances are unpredictable? Yes and no, scientists
say.

   ''I've learned over the years that the best predictor for what will be new
and exciting is, 'Expect the unexpected,' '' said Dr. Joseph L. Goldstein, a
Nobel laureate who is professor and chairman of the department of medical
genetics at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas.

   Dr. David Baltimore of CalTech, another Nobel laureate, said, ''If you could
predict it, it wouldn't be a breakthrough.''

   But even if it's impossible to predict a particular major discovery, one can
sometimes sense when a particular area of science is taking off, says Dr.
Richard Klausner, a former head of the National Cancer Institute who is now a
managing partner in the Column Group, a venture capital firm. ''It gets on a
Moore's Law curve,'' he said, referring to an observation in computer science
that the speed of computing keeps increasing exponentially.

   When that happens, Dr. Klausner said, ''barriers and unknowns seem to be
falling,'' and it is pretty much predictable that even more exciting discoveries
will be made.

   That's happening now in stem cell research, he said, though not in the
much-heralded sense of using embryonic stem cells to treat diseases. Rather, the
accelerating discoveries relate to what determines a cell's fate -- is it going
to be a heart cell, a liver cell, a brain cell? -- and how to turn one type of
cell into another.

   The field came to life in 1998 when scientists found very versatile cells,
stem cells in embryos that could turn into any cell in the body. As they worked
on finding ways to direct those cells to turn into various types of cells,
suddenly, Dr. Klausner said, ''this whole field took a turn.''

   In 2007, two groups of scientists discovered they did not have to start by
plucking stem cells from embryos. Instead, they could turn an already developed
cell, like a skin cell, into a stem cell by adding four genes. Then other
researchers learned that they did not need to add the genes -- they could add
instructions from genes instead.

   At this point the idea was to take a cell, like a skin cell, make it sort of
reverse its development and turn into a stem cell, then direct that stem cell to
develop into a different kind of cell, like a nerve cell.

   But was it really necessary to go through that process of backward, then
forward, development? With what Dr. Klausner sees as a sign of the breathless
pace of this field, scientists found over the past two years that they could do
what they call ''transdifferentiation.'' They are now taking cells, like nerve
cells, and turning them into other types of cells, like muscle cells.

   In theory, of course, it should be possible. All cells in the body have the
same genes -- what makes a nerve cell different from a muscle cell is that some
genes are silenced in a nerve cell and others are silenced in a muscle cell.
Only specific subsets of a cell's genes are used.

   But it is one thing to know this in theory. It is quite another to turn one
cell type into another.

   Yet now, three groups of researchers have done it. One group turned
connective tissue into nerve, another turned connective tissue into heart
muscles, and a third turned exocrine cells of the pancreas, which secrete
digestive enzymes, into the very different endocrine cells of the pancreas,
which make hormones like insulin. The value of being able to transform one type
of cell into another, Dr. Klausner said, is that now scientists have ''a totally
novel source'' of cells that they can convert.

   ''I find it so wild,'' Dr. Klausner said, ''You go from nobody being able to
do this to everybody being able to do it.''

   So maybe the likelihood of unpredictable discoveries can be predicted, once a
field really gets going.

   But often, the unpredictable is just that -- unpredictable. The result is a
well-recognized problem in deciding what research to finance.

   The National Institutes of Health, which pays for most research, evaluates
grant proposals with committees, called study sections, that give them scores.
The highest-scoring grants get financed.

   The difficulty, says Dr. Rudolph Leibel, head of the Division of Molecular
Genetics and co-director of the Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center at Columbia
University Medical Center, is the way grants must be written. Scientists must
state the problem and explain how they will approach it experimentally, giving a
relatively narrow view of what will be accomplished and predicting success.

   ''If you don't do that in a grant application, the study sections -- despite
all the blandishments to do otherwise -- will probably say your aims are too
diffuse,'' Dr. Leibel said.

   The result, he said, is that scientists abide by what he calls the
''Kabuki-like presentation.'' But all along, he adds, ''the unwritten message
is, 'Boy, we hope we stumble upon something that is novel and unique.' ''

   Yet it is not easy to change things, Dr. Leibel acknowledges. The National
Institutes of Health does have some grants that encourage high-risk proposals.
But most grants are the traditional sort. And, Dr. Leibel said, ''You can't take
every harebrained scheme and fund it and see if it works.''

   One result is that more and more private foundations are being formed to
support high-risk, high-reward research. Often they are founded by advocacy
groups frustrated by the slow pace of progress in understanding or treating a
particular disease. In Dr. Leibel's field there is the Helmsley Type 1 Diabetes
Research Consortium, which is trying to find a cure for Type 1 diabetes and is
led by four investigators from four institutions, including Dr. Leibel.

   In Alzheimer's, there is the Alzheimer's Cure Foundation. ''Our mission and
vision is to dramatically accelerate the cure for Alzheimer's disease,'' the
group writes on its Web site.

   Dr. Baltimore noted that even when breakthroughs occur, they are not always
recognized.

   For example, he says, micro-RNAs -- small molecules used to silence genes --
were discovered in 1993. But they were found in roundworms, and scientists did
not realize until around 2000 that they were a universal mechanism for gene
control.

   ''It's a breakthrough in retrospect,'' Dr. Baltimore said. ''That kind of
thing happens all the time. You don't recognize how important something is until
its generality becomes apparent.''

   Now the micro-RNA discoverers have gotten their well-deserved recognition.

   MAKING predictions about discoveries is usually to be avoided in the
cautious, peer-reviewed world of science: the danger of embarrassment is all too
present. But in this anniversary issue of Science Times (the first was published
Nov. 14, 1978), we yield to the temptation. We asked science reporters and top
researchers to identify which fields are hot -- in other words, where talent,
money and circumstance are converging. Their watch list for noteworthy advances
in 2011 touches areas as varied as dark matter, brain science, quantum computing
and the fight against AIDS.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS: DRAWING (D1)
DRAWING (DRAWINGS BY JOHN HERSEY)
 GRAPHICS: Accelerated Discovery: Stem cell researchers are becoming
increasingly adept at converting one type of cell into another (D6)

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2010


                              22 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            November 7, 2010 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: Finding hope in a spider's bite;
Venom holds a key to possible therapy for cruel illness

BYLINE: By Henry L. Davis - NEWS MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a cruel disease.

   By age 10, affected children, almost always boys, usually need braces to
walk.

   By their teen years, most depend on a wheelchair.

   And as they grow into manhood, they lose their ability to breathe. Few
survive beyond their 30s.

   There is no cure, and the standard treatment of steroids can slow -- but not
stop -- the progressive muscle weakness, forcing families into a race against
time.

   All of which is why Jeffrey Harvey, a Clarence stockbroker, couldn't sit
still when his grandson, also named Jeffrey, was diagnosed with the disease more
than a year ago.

   Harvey began to look for potential new treatments, surfing the Internet for
anything with promise. Out of curiosity, he searched in his hometown, which led
him to a laboratory at the University at Buffalo and to a tarantula spider named
Rosie.

   The story of his search highlights a novel potential treatment for muscular
dystrophy -- one of several therapies on the horizon. It also shows how
challenging it can be to bring a drug from the laboratory to a patient's
bedside.

   "There is just no drug for these kids other than the steroids to strengthen
the muscles, and the steroids have serious side effects," said Harvey, whose
grandson is now 3.

   UB biophysicists had found a protein in tarantula venom that showed promise
against muscular dystrophy, but the idea was greeted skeptically. No one
responded when they shopped it around to pharmaceutical companies earlier in the
decade.

   Then Harvey called.

   "I didn't know what to make of it at first," said Frederick Sachs, whose
laboratory discovered the protein known as GsMTx4 and is a world leader in
researching how cells respond mechanically to changes in their environment.

   A few months after meeting, Harvey, Sachs and two colleagues, Thomas Suchyna
and Philip Gottlieb, launched a small biotech company with hopes of doing what
the big drug companies wouldn't do.

   "I want my grandson to be able to have this drug," Harvey said.

   Muscular dystrophy -- the disease whose treatment is championed by comedian
Jerry Lewis -- is a group of nine inherited conditions that cause wasting away
of muscle. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, named after the French physician
credited with its discovery, is the most common childhood form and the most
severe.

   The gene that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy instructs the body how to
make a substance called dystrophin, a protein that helps muscle cells keep their
shape as they stretch and contract. In boys with errors in the gene, the
instructions get scrambled.

   The disorder affects 1 in 3,500 males, with an estimated 18,000 cases in the
United States.

   Much of the research on new treatments is focused on stem cell therapy that
can repair damaged muscle or gene therapy that can repair a defective gene or
block its bad instructions.

   Sachs' group takes a different approach.

   The body's cells depend on channels in their membranes that open and close
like valves. These gateways allow important substances, including calcium,
sodium and potassium, to enter or leave the cells. If the channels don't work
properly, people get sick or die.

   Sachs' laboratory in 1984 discovered a group of these channels in muscle
cells that respond to mechanical stress, such as being stretched by the
contraction of a muscle. The researchers figured that if they could find a
chemical that activated or shut off the channels, that chemical might serve as a
drug to treat disorders that arise from stress-sensitive channels that open too
much or too little.

   They didn't have access to a vast collection of chemicals that pharmaceutical
companies keep on hand. So they tested venoms, starting with those from
arachnids -- the scientific name of a class of animals that includes spiders and
scorpions.

   >Tarantula venom

   Venoms contain hundreds of compounds, the function of most of which is
unknown. Tarantula venom, which is obtained by anesthetizing and milking the
creatures, provided the researchers with their "aha!" moment, but led to much
more work. They had to find out which of the hundreds of compounds produced the
effect.

   The lack of dystrophin in boys with muscular dystrophy causes an influx of
calcium into muscle cells leading to atrophy. GsMTx4, which the researchers
learned to synthesize, couldn't repair the source of the problem, but could slow
the rate of degeneration.

   "Pharmaceutical companies weren't interested, probably because the idea that
this protein we found affected a mechanical problem in cells seemed foreign to
them," Sachs said.

   The new company, Rose Pharmaceuticals, is named after Rose, Sachs'
grandmother, and Rosie, his pet Chilean Rose tarantula. Tarantulas may look
scary but their venom is relatively harmless to humans.

   In collaboration with the Wellstone Muscular Dystrophy Center in Washington,
D.C., the team tested GsMTx4 on mice with muscular dystrophy. The substance
increased muscle strength and caused no deaths, sickness or side effects.

   Sachs sees GsMTx4 as potentially one element in a cocktail of drugs that
Duchenne muscular dystrophy patients will likely take as more therapies come on
the market.

   "You'll probably need a mix of drugs to repair cells, but it's better than
nothing," he said. "I'd love to see a kid get out of a wheelchair before I die."

   This summer, the Children's Guild Foundation awarded Sachs' group $125,000 to
improve the therapy, and the UB Center for Advanced Biomedical and
Bioengineering Technology awarded $80,000.

   In September, the Food and Drug Administration gave GsMTx4 orphan drug
status, a designation for experimental treatments of rare conditions that helps
speed development.

   >The difficult part

   Now, comes the difficult part -- seeking an estimated $3 million to fund
testing before the drug goes into trials in children.

   "The thing is, unlike a lot of others, we already have the drug. If we had
the money to get it through preclinical testing, we might have it on the market
in three years," Harvey said.

   That's not much money or time in the world of drug development, where
companies typically spend hundreds of millions of dollars and more than a decade
on one product. Still, it's frustrating with the short life expectancy of
children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   "These kids usually only live into their mid-20s," Harvey said.

   One possible source of help may be the Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, the
largest nonprofit organization in the United States focused on Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.

   "The tarantula venom is definitely a different approach, and we're interested
in it," said Sharon Hesterlee, the organization's senior director of research
and advocacy.

   Early next year, a consortium of dozens of institutions across Europe and
elsewhere that came together to improve treatment of neuromuscular diseases will
review Sachs' therapy. Based on its conclusions, Parent Project will put money
into the endeavor.

   For patients like Raymond Holcomb Jr. of Tonawanda, the slow progress toward
new treatments, let alone a cure, can be a source of frustration. The promise of
medical advances, whether from venom or elsewhere, hangs tantalizingly just out
of reach.

   "I'm 39 years old and realize my clock is ticking," he said. "But if I'm not
hopeful, life would be unbearable."

   e-mail: hdavis@buffnews.com

GRAPHIC: Derek Gee/Buffalo News Frederick Sachs, shown with his pet tarantula,
is seeking funding for preclinical testing of his drug.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2010


                              23 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 30, 2010 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 779 words

HEADLINE: In a Policy Reversal, U.S. Says Genes Should Not Be Eligible for
Patenting

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Reversing a longstanding policy, the federal government said on Friday that
human and other genes should not be eligible for patents because they are part
of nature. The new position could have a huge impact on medicine and on the
biotechnology industry.

   The new position was declared in a friend-of-the-court brief filed by the
Department of Justice late Friday in a case involving two human genes linked to
breast and ovarian cancer.

   ''We acknowledge that this conclusion is contrary to the longstanding
practice of the Patent and Trademark Office, as well as the practice of the
National Institutes of Health and other government agencies that have in the
past sought and obtained patents for isolated genomic DNA,'' the brief said.

   It is not clear if the position in the legal brief, which appears to have
been the result of discussions among various government agencies, will be put
into effect by the Patent Office.

   If it were, it is likely to draw protests from some biotechnology companies
that say such patents are vital to the development of diagnostic tests, drugs
and the emerging field of personalized medicine, in which drugs are tailored for
individual patients based on their genes.

   ''It's major when the United States, in a filing, reverses decades of
policies on an issue that everyone has been focused on for so long,'' said
Edward Reines, a patent attorney who represents biotechnology companies.

   The issue of gene patents has long been a controversial and emotional one.
Opponents say that genes are products of nature, not inventions, and should be
the common heritage of mankind. They say that locking up basic genetic
information in patents actually impedes medical progress. Proponents say genes
isolated from the body are chemicals that are different from those found in the
body and therefore are eligible for patents.

   The Patent and Trademark Office has sided with the proponents and has issued
thousands of patents on genes of various organisms, including on an estimated 20
percent of human genes.

   But in its brief, the government said it now believed that the mere isolation
of a gene, without further alteration or manipulation, does not change its
nature.

   ''The chemical structure of native human genes is a product of nature, and it
is no less a product of nature when that structure is 'isolated' from its
natural environment than are cotton fibers that have been separated from cotton
seeds or coal that has been extracted from the earth,'' the brief said.

   However, the government suggested such a change would have limited impact on
the biotechnology industry because man-made manipulations of DNA, like methods
to create genetically modified crops or gene therapies, could still be patented.
Dr. James P. Evans, a professor of genetics and medicine at the University of
North Carolina, who headed a government advisory task force on gene patents,
called the government's brief ''a bit of a landmark, kind of a line in the
sand.''

   He said that although gene patents had been issued for decades, the
patentability of genes had never been examined in court.

   That changed when the American Civil Liberties Union and the Public Patent
Foundation organized various individuals, medical researchers and societies to
file a lawsuit challenging patents held by Myriad Genetics and the University of
Utah Research Foundation. The patents cover two genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, and the
over $3,000 analysis Myriad performs on the genes to see if women carry
mutations that predispose them to breast and ovarian cancers.

   In a surprise ruling in March, Judge Robert W. Sweet of the United States
District Court in Manhattan ruled the patents invalid. He said that genes were
important for the information they convey, and in that sense, an isolated gene
was not really different from a gene in the body. The government said that that
ruling prompted it to re-evaluate its policy.

   Myriad and the University of Utah have appealed.

   Saying that the questions in the case were ''of great importance to the
national economy, to medical science and to the public health,'' the Justice
Department filed an amicus brief that sided with neither party. While the
government took the plaintiffs' side on the issue of isolated DNA, it sided with
Myriad on patentability of manipulated DNA.

   Myriad and the plaintiffs did not comment on the government's brief by
deadline for this article.

   Mr. Reines, the attorney, who is with the firm of Weil Gotshal & Manges and
is not involved in the main part of the Myriad case, said he thought the Patent
Office opposed the new position but was overruled by other agencies. A hint is
that no lawyer from the Patent Office was listed on the brief.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2010


                              24 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 2010 Friday

SECTION: Business; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: ACADIA ENDS DEAL WITH ITS CANADIAN PARTNER

BODY:

   Acadia Pharmaceuticals of San Diego said Thursday that it terminated its
collaboration and licensing agreement with Biovail Laboratories International of
Canada for pimavanserin, an experimental drug for treating of psychosis
Parkinson's disease patients.

   Biovail will pay Acadia $8.75 million to end the relationship, which started
in May 2009. Acadia regained the full rights to develop and market the drug.

   Shares of Acadia fell 12 cents, or 14 percent, to close at 76 cents.

   In September 2009, pimavanserin failed to meet the primary goal of a phase 3
study when patients taking the drug showed only marginal improvement over those
who received a placebo.

   The company launched a new phase 3 study in July that includes a design
change aimed at addressing the better-than-expected improvements recorded among
participants receiving placebos in the first test.

   "Acadia will continue to pursue the development of pimavanserin," the company
said Thursday.

   Parkinson's disease is a notoriously difficult space for drug developers.

   Last week, San Diego-based Ceregene launched a phase 2 trial of its
experimental gene therapy for Parkinson's, CERE-120, nearly two years after an
earlier study of the treatment delivered disappointing results.

   Regulus gets funding for fibrosis program

   Regulus Therapeutics of La Jolla said Thursday it received a $10 million
investment from Paris-based Sanofi-Aventis as part of an existing alliance.

   The company said the amount raised Regulus' total fundraising to $98 million.

   The alliance, which was signed on June 21, could deliver more than $750
million for the development and commercialization of the La Jolla company's
fibrosis program targeting microRNA-21 and other microRNA treatments.

   MicroRNAs are a short string of ribonucleic acid that play a role in the
expression of genes and the development of some diseases.

   KEITH DARCÉ o U-T

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2010


                              25 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2010 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           October 28, 2010 Thursday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Nanoshells appear to kill cancer at root Houston invention may
decrease stem cells that drive tumor growth NANO: Human trials could start in as
soon as 6 months

BYLINE: By TODD ACKERMAN, HOUSTON CHRONICLE

BODY:

   Heated gold nanoshells, the touted Houston invention now in cancer trials,
appears to help kill diseased cells at a previously unreachable root level,
according to new research.

   In a mouse study published Wednesday, Houston researchers showed that the use
of tiny gold-coated particles to deliver heat to breast cancer tumors already
treated with radiation not only shrank the tumor but also dramatically decreased
the population of cancer stem cells. Cancer stem cells self-renew and drive the
growth of tumors.

   "This is a study of extraordinary significance," said Dr. Wendy Woodard, a
radiation oncologist at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center who
participated in the research. "We have worked with every imaginable drug and
genetic therapy to make cancer stem cells sensitive to radiation without success
until this."

   Cancer stem cells, only discovered in the 1990s, are the subject of much
debate. Some researchers think they cause cancer to recur in patients who
respond favorably to standard therapy.

   The combination of radiation and nanoshells heated with a near-infrared laser
already is being tested in patients with head and neck cancers in trials in
Houston and Dallas. The trial wasn't designed to check the effect on cancer stem
cells, but Woodard said it's possible the technique is working at that level,
too. She said that a trial measuring the effect in human patients could be
started in as soon as six months.

   The technique, known as hyperthermia, can only currently be used on
superficial cancers (such as head and neck cancers and inflammatory breast
cancer) because the technology can't reach that deep into the body yet.

   A lucky find

   The mouse study, which appears in the journal Science Translational Medicine,
was triggered by the serendipitous discovery of a Baylor College of Medicine
graduate student working with radiation and cancer stem cells. Returning to her
lab one Monday, she was disappointed to find the cancer stem cells dead and the
normal cells fine.

   "But when I opened the incubator and my glasses fogged, I realized the
temperature had gone up over the weekend," said Rachel Atkinson, the student and
first author of the paper. "That was my clue that heat plus radiation seemed to
be effective against the cancer stem cells."

   Atkinson began working with the M.D. Anderson scientists whose research
already had showed hyperthermia delivered through nanoshells disrupts the blood
supply to the tumor and enhances radiation's effectiveness. They decided to
target one of the most aggressive and resistant breast tumor types - triple
negative breast cancer.

   Radiation alone shrank the tumors but left behind a large percentage of
cancer stem cells capable of regrowing the tumor. But using the nanoshells to
send nearly 9 additional degrees Fahrenheit of heat to the tumors reduced the
population of stem cells twenty-fold.

   No harm to healthy tissue

   Researchers worked with both mice tumors and transplanted human tumors.

   The advantage of nanoshells, a specially designed core of material with a
thin metal shell a little larger than a molecule, is that the whole body isn't
heated, said Jeffrey Rosen, a Baylor professor of biology and senior author of
the paper, who noted that previous mouse studies showed whole-body heating had
serious side effects. Nanoshells literally burn away tumor cells without harming
nearby skin.

   Ross called the new study "a proof of principle of hyperthermia's promise"
and a lesson that "just shrinking tumors isn't enough."

   The nanoshells, heated for about 20 minutes, invade the tumor through the
leaky blood vessels that feed it. The study found the additional heat prevented
the cancer stem cells from repairing DNA damage caused by chemotherapy and
radiation, usually the cells' great skill.

   The study thrilled the nanoshell's creator, Rice University scientist Naomi
Halas.

   "This illustrates the potential of nanotechnology," Halas said. "It's even
surprising to me - this accomplished something not done with conventional
therapy."

   todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2010


                              26 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2010 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                           October 21, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C-02

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: Sports Online

BODY:

   NFL CRACKDOWN ON

   BIG HITS GOOD MOVE

   Here's hoping that after the season, the NFL doesn't back down from the
backlash it's receiving for its plan to more severely punish helmet-to-helmet
and other extremely rough hits.

   It has to be done. The league has to protect the players from themselves -
most of whom are critical of the plan to further legislate.

   I wouldn't be shocked if 100 years from now, there is no NFL. The players
today are freakishly big and strong and fast. Can you imagine how big and strong
and fast they will become if you give them 100 more years of science?

   A former baseball trainer once told me the next step in the evolution of
performance-enhancing supplements and drugs is gene therapy, which will make
steroids look like a water pill in comparison.

   I support the NFL's decision to curtail these blowup hits, not necessarily
because of how violent the game is today, but how gravely dangerous it will be
50 to 100 years from now.

   I did some amateur research on this, and while different surveys have posted
different results, by and large the typical American male in 1910 stood
5-feet-8. He's about 5-10 today. More significant, males age 20 to 29 are about
30 pounds heavier, on average, than they were in 1960.

   I predict that within 50, 60 or 100 years, it won't be uncommon to see
athletes who weigh 285 pounds be able to run the 40-yard dash in 4.4 seconds.
Imagine getting hit by that while returning a kickoff.

   Mike Klis All Things Broncos

   Pressure on Bertuzzi

   just keeps fading

   It now appears that Steve Moore's Ontario lawsuit against Todd Bertuzzi, the
Vancouver Canucks and Marc Crawford still hadn't received a trial date - and
that when it does, that date most likely would be in late 2011 ... at the
earliest.

   As time has gone on:

   Avalanche icon Joe Sakic has vouched for Bertuzzi as a good guy who simply
made a mistake, took his negligible punishment and served his (limited) NHL
suspension.

   The Colorado organization, undoubtedly with prodding from the NHL, has
continued to pretend that Moore doesn't exist.

   The international revulsion over the incident has receded.

   Many of the figures involved have either changed organizations or left the
game.

   The Canucks ownership has changed hands.

   So what's that mean? The NHL might feel less pressure to push for a
settlement and instead might be willing to let events take their course in the
courtroom, theorizing that even the most ugly aspects can be waved off as, "Aw,
that was a long time ago."

   In this Twitterdom world of short shelf life, where something is out of date
in, oh, eight minutes, seven years is an eternity.

   So maybe this case actually will go to trial. If the Ontario courts ever can
get it on the calendar.

   Terry Frei, All Things Avalanche

   dp | denverpost.com/sports

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2010


                              27 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                           October 21, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Study: Gene therapy may help treat depression

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

BODY:

   Based on early studies,  researchers reported Wednesday that there may be
reason to think that mental illnesses such as depression could be treated with
gene therapy.

   Severe depression afflicts at least one in 15 adults nationwide. The study,
in the Science Translational Medicine journal, of mice and human brain cells
finds that a deficit of a protein called "p11" may play a role in depression and
that fixing the genes that produce those proteins could affect the course of
depression.

   "Psychological disorders, such as depression, are increasingly viewed as
brain disorders," says study author Michael Kaplitt of the Weill Cornell Medical
College in New York City. "If true, we may be able to help some patients by
bringing levels of this protein back to normal."

   Most modern depression drugs aim to affect brain levels of the hormone
serotonin, which was recently linked to p11 in its effects on mood. So, Kaplitt
and colleagues, who included Nobel Prize-winning brain cell researcher Paul
Greengard of Rockefeller University in New York City, first sought to cure mice
bred to have depressive symptoms such as listlessness by infecting the "reward
center" of their brain with a virus carrying a gene for the protein. The team
has pioneered safety experiments aimed at treating human Parkinson's patients
with gene therapy.

   Once treated, the mice behaved like regular mice instead of depressed ones,
Kaplitt says.

   Experiments involving human brain cells also showed that depressed people
display a deficit of the protein.  Combined with an existing technique for gene
therapy, the results suggest a new way to treat depression, as well as a new
target for drugs, Kaplitt concludes.

   "A very elegant and exciting study, it's going to have a major impact -- but
I would question any result pointing toward a simple cause for depression," says
neuroscientist Eric Stone of the New York  University School of Medicine.

   Drugs -- rather than direct treatment of a brain center, through gene therapy
or shunts -- seem like a safer avenue for treating depression, Stone says.

   Greengard and Kaplitt have financial ties to biomedical companies involved in
commercializing p11 treatments.

   "No single thing probably causes any human disease," Kaplitt says. "But we
can say there is evidence here of a role of this protein in depression."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Suzy Parker, USA TODAY (Illustration)

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2010


                              28 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 15, 2010 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: 3 Harvard Researchers Retract a Claim on the Aging of Stem Cells

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Harvard researchers have retracted a far-reaching claim they made in January
that the aging of stem cells might be reversible.

   The retraction was published in Thursday's issue of Nature and is signed by
the senior author, Amy J. Wagers, and two others. They say that serious
concerns, which they did not specify, have undermined their confidence in the
original report.

   A fourth author, Shane R. Mayack, maintained that the results were still
valid and refused to sign the retraction. All four scientists are affiliated
with Harvard University and the Joslin Diabetes Center, a Harvard affiliate.

   The original article, published by Nature in January, asserted that there was
a rejuvenating factor in the blood of young mice that could reverse symptoms of
aging in the blood-forming stem cells of elderly mice. The therapeutic use of
such a factor would be ''to extend the youthful function of the aging blood
system,'' Dr. Wagers and her colleagues wrote.

   The article states that Dr. Wagers designed and interpreted the experiments
and that Dr. Mayack, a post-doctoral student, performed and analyzed them.

   Dr. Wagers issued a statement saying that she had immediately brought the
disturbing information to the attention of Nature and the Harvard Medical
School, and that she was working to repeat the experiments. She said by e-mail
that the information came to light in the course of studies in her laboratory,
prompting her to re-examine the reported data.

   Press officers at Harvard Medical School, Joslin and the Harvard Stem Cell
Institute said the matter was being reviewed but declined to comment further.
Rachel Twinn, a Nature press officer, said she could not comment.

   Dr. Wagers has expressed her doubts about a second paper co-authored with Dr.
Mayack and published in the journal Blood in August 2008. In a statement issued
today, the journal said it was posting a ''Notice of Concern'' about the paper
pending further review.

   The two retracted papers follow the withdrawal of two other stem cell papers
noted by the blog Retraction Watch, which began only in August.

   The blog has recorded other high-profile retractions in its short lifetime.
Linda Buck, a Nobel winner, retracted two papers, and Savio Wu, an expert in
gene therapy, retracted four papers while firing two post-doctoral students from
his laboratory.

   ''We wondered if we'd have enough material,'' said Adam Marcus, one of the
two authors of Retraction Watch. Both of them are medical journalists.

   His co-author, Ivan Oransky, said many of the retractions involved
post-doctoral students who produced unreliable data. It is not clear whether the
competitive nature of science puts pressure on the students to cut corners, or
whether the laboratory chief creates an atmosphere that induces cheating, Dr.
Oransky said.

   Over all, the retractions are ''a sign that things are going well,'' Dr.
Oransky said, meaning that science is cleansing itself of error.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2010


                              29 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           October 14, 2010 Thursday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; P-com Obituaries; Pg. B09

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: Richard Carroll, cancer researcher

BYLINE: By Sally A. Downey; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Richard G. Carroll, 52, of Wallingford, a cancer researcher at the University
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, died Friday, Sept. 24, of complications from
pancreatic cancer at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.

   In 1999, Dr. Carroll joined the medical school's department of molecular and
cellular engineering. He later shifted to the department of pathology and
laboratory medicine.

   He was principal investigator at Penn for several grants from the National
Institutes of Health to explore ways to condition the immune system to fight
cancer. His last project was to determine how pancreatic tumors avoided the
immune system, said James Riley, associate professor of pathology and laboratory
medicine at Penn.

   After the diagnosis of his illness in November, Dr. Carroll was closely
involved in developing techniques that might fight pancreatic cancer, said Carl
June, a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine. Dr. Carroll was also
involved in research on other types of cancer.

   As his illness progressed, he volunteered to join early-stage clinical trials
at Penn and an experimental clinical trial developed in his own laboratory. As
recently as the day before his death, he was helping to edit research articles,
his colleagues said.

   Dr. Carroll grew up in Connecticut and spent his summers on Cape Cod fishing
with his grandmother. He became fascinated with biology after he cleaned his
first fish when he was around 9, said his wife, Laurie Kunkel Carroll.

   He earned a bachelor's degree in biology with a minor in chemistry from the
University of Notre Dame.

   For three years, he tested military demolition products for Ensign-Bickford
Co. in Simsbury, Conn.

   Dr. Carroll then earned a doctorate in biochemistry from the University of
Connecticut and took a fellowship to study how proteins could be produced in
test tubes to create drugs.

   He and his wife, who was earning a master's degree in physical anthropology,
met in a University of Connecticut lab when they dissected a dead cat together.
The story amused their daughters.

   Dr. Carroll did postgraduate work at the National Cancer Institute in
Frederick, Md. From 1992 to 1999, he was a researcher with the Henry M. Jackson
Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine in Maryland, developing
cell- and gene-therapy approaches to treat HIV-1 infection.

   He wrote or cowrote more than 50 articles published in scientific journals.

   An accomplished, self-taught guitar player, Dr. Carroll was a fan of the
Grateful Dead and the Rolling Stones.

   In addition to his wife, he is survived by daughters Megan and Bonnie; his
father and stepmother, Richard P. and Carol; and three sisters.

   A Funeral Mass was said Sept. 28 at St. John Chrysostom Church, Wallingford.
Burial was in SS. Peter and Paul Cemetery, Marple Township.

   Memorial donations may be made to the trustees of Penn in care of the Richard
Carroll Fund, 435 Creekside Dr., Downingtown, Pa. 19335.

   Contact staff writer Sally A. Downey at 215-854-2913 or
sdowney@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2010


                              30 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 12, 2010 Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; National; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: First test patient gets embryonic stem cell treatment;
Spinal cord therapy raises hopes and fears

BYLINE: By Rob Stein, Washington Post

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Doctors have injected millions of human embryonic stem cells
into a patient partially paralyzed by a spinal cord injury, marking the
beginning of the first carefully designed attempt to test the promising but
controversial therapy, officials said yesterday.

   The patient was treated Friday at the Shepherd Center, a 132-bed hospital in
Atlanta that specializes in spinal cord and brain injuries, according to an
announcement by the hospital and Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which is
sponsoring the research.

   The hospital is one of seven sites participating in the study, which is
primarily aimed at testing whether the therapy is safe.

   Doctors will also conduct tests to see whether the treatment restores
sensation or enables the patient to regain movement.

   No additional information about the first patient was released.

   The milestone was welcomed by scientists eager to finally move the research
from the laboratory to the clinic, as well as by advocates for patients and by
patients hoping for cures.

   Although the cells have been tested in animals, and some clinics around the
world claim to offer therapies using human embryonic stem cells, the trial is
the first to have been reviewed by a government entity and aimed at carefully
evaluating the strategy. After repeated delays, the Food and Drug Administration
gave the go-ahead in July.

   The move was criticized by those with moral objections to any research using
cells from human embryos, and it is raising concern even among proponents. Some
argue that the experiments are premature; others question whether they are
ethical or fear the trials risk disaster for the field if anything goes awry.

   ``Without knowing more clinical detail, there's little I can say,'' said
Steve Goldman, chairman of the department of neurology at the University of
Rochester in New York. ``In more general terms . . . I remain concerned about
the long-term safety of unpurified grafts of embryonic stem cell derivatives.
Time will tell.''

   David Prentice, senior fellow for life sciences at the Family Research
Council, said: ``Geron is helping their stock price, not science and especially
not patients. It will be years before there is hard evidence about safety or
effectiveness.''

   Supporters of the privately funded research are confident that it has been
exhaustively vetted. The FDA has demanded extensive experiments in the
laboratory and on animals to provide evidence that the cells hold promise and
are safe enough to test in people.

   ``Initiating the . . . clinical trial is a milestone for the field of human
embryonic stem cell-based therapies,'' said Thomas B. Okarma, Geron's chief
executive, in a statement. ``This accomplishment results from extensive research
and development and a succession of inventive steps.''

   Donald Peck Leslie, Shepherd's medical director, said: ``Our medical staff
will evaluate the patients' progress as part of this study. We look forward to
participating in clinical trials that may help people with spinal cord injury.''

   But some scientists worry that if patients are hurt by the cells - or if
there is no hint that the cells help - it could be a devastating blow to the
field. They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene
therapy experiment set that once-highly touted field back years.

   Although Geron eventually hopes to test the cells for many different medical
problems, the first trial will involve 10 patients who were partially paralyzed
by a spinal cord injury in the previous one to two weeks. Surgeons injected the
first patient with about 2 million ``oligodendrocyte progenitor cells,'' created
from embryonic stem cells, in the hopes they will form a restorative coating
around the damaged spinal cord. In tests in hundreds of rats, partially
paralyzed animals walked.

   In the meantime, officials at Advanced Cell Technology of Santa Monica,
Calif., are hoping for the FDA's go-ahead to start injecting stem cells into the
eyes of 12 patients with Stargardt's macular dystrophy. ``Retinal pigmented
epithelial cells,'' also made from human embryonic stem cells, should replace
those ravaged by the progressive loss of eyesight, which usually begins in
childhood.

   The company, which has laboratories in Marlborough, hopes that the approach
will work for many conditions, including macular degeneration, the leading cause
of blindness among the elderly.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2010


                              31 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            October 12, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 887 words

HEADLINE: Embryonic stem cell tests start in humans;
First case involves spinal cord injury

BYLINE: By Rob Stein - WASHINGTON POST

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Doctors have injected millions of human embryonic stem cells into a patient
partially paralyzed by a spinal cord injury, marking the beginning of the first
carefully designed attempt to test the promising but controversial therapy,
officials announced Monday.

   The patient was treated Friday in the Shepherd Center, a 132-bed hospital in
Atlanta that specializes in spinal cord and brain injuries, according to
announcement by the hospital and Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which is
sponsoring the research.

   The hospital is one of seven sites participating in the study, which is
primarily aimed at testing whether the therapy is safe. Doctors will also
conduct tests to see whether the treatment restores sensation or enables the
patient to regain movement. No additional information about the first patient
was released.

   The milestone was welcomed by scientists eager to finally move the research
from the laboratory to the clinic, as well as by advocates for patients and by
patients hoping for cures. Although the cells have been tested in animals, and
some clinics around the world claim to offer therapies using human embryonic
stem cells, the trial is the first to have been vetted by a government entity
and aimed at carefully evaluating the strategy. After repeated delays, the Food
and Drug Administration gave the go-ahead in July.

   But the move was criticized by those with moral objections to any research
using cells from human embryos, a practice they say is akin to abortion, and it
is raising concern even among many proponents. Some argue that the experiments
are premature;others question whether they are ethical; and many fear that the
trials risk disaster for the field if anything goes awry.

   "Without knowing more clinical detail, there's little I can say," said Steve
Goldman, chairman of the neurology department at the University of Rochester.
"In more general terms, I remain concerned about the long-term safety of
unpurified grafts of embryonic stem cell derivatives. Time will tell."

   David Prentice, senior fellow for life sciences at the Family Research
Council, said: "Geron is helping their stock price, not science and especially
not patients. It will be years before there is hard evidence about safety or
effectiveness. Adult stem cells have published evidence documenting effective
treatment of spinal cord injury."

   Supporters of the privately funded research are confident that it has been
exhaustively vetted. The FDA has demanded extensive experiments in the
laboratory and on animals to provide evidence that the cells hold promise and
are safe enough to test in people.

   "Initiating the clinical trial is a milestone for the field of human
embryonic stem cell-based therapies," Thomas B. Okarma, Geron's president and
CEO, said in a statement.

   But some scientists worry that if patients are hurt by the cells -- or even
if cells show no signs of helping -- the field could suffer a devastating blow.
They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene therapy
experiment set that once-highly touted field back years.

   Safety worries -- most prominently fears that the cells could cause tumors --
prompted the FDA to repeatedly demand additional data from Geron, including,
most recently, assurance that cysts that developed in mice injected with the
cells posed no threat.

   Although Geron eventually hopes to test the cells for many different medical
problems, the first trial will involve 10 patients who were partially paralyzed
by a spinal cord injury in the previous one to two weeks. Surgeons injected the
first patient with about 2 million "oligodendrocyte progenitor cells," created
from embryonic stem cells, in the hopes that the cells will form a restorative
coating around the damaged spinal cord. In tests in hundreds of rats, partially
paralyzed animals walked.

   Spinal cord injuries, however, are highly unpredictable. Patients often
improve on their own, for example, making it difficult to evaluate whether the
cells had any effect. Some wonder whether trauma victims who have so recently
suffered a life-altering injury will agree to the experiments out of desperation
without fully grasping the risks. There is also concern that the therapy risks
worsening the patients' conditions, perhaps making them fully paralyzed.

   In the meantime, officials at Advanced Cell Technology of Santa Monica,
Calif., are hoping for the FDA's go-ahead to start injecting 50,000 to 200,000
cells into the eyes of 12 patients with Stargardt's macular dystrophy. "Retinal
pigmented epithelial cells," also made from human embryonic stem cells, should
replace those ravaged by the progressive loss of eyesight, which usually begins
in childhood. Studies in rats found that the cells helped prevent further vision
loss and even restored some sight.

   The company hopes that the approach will work for many conditions, including
macular degeneration, the leading cause of blindness among the elderly.

   The announcement comes as the future of federal funding for embryonic stem
cell research remains in doubt. A federal judge ruled in August that the Obama
administration's more permissive policy for funding the research violated a
federal law prohibiting taxpayer money being used for research that involves the
destruction of human embryos. The Justice Department is appealing the decision.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2010


                              32 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             October 8, 2010 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY RESEARCH Scientists learn from gene therapy

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   When researchers began testing a genetic therapy on six Ohio boys with
muscular dystrophy in 2006, they had high hopes.

   In a perfect world, the agent would restore the biceps of boys with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, a debilitating and incurable disease characterized by the
absence of dystrophin, which makes the honeycomblike support system found in
healthy muscle.

   Although tests in animals had been promising, the therapy didn't produce
lasting benefit for any of the boys, according to the study led by researchers
at Nationwide Children's Hospital and published today in the New England Journal
of Medicine.

   But the researchers and other experts say that the small study did give
scientists the chance to learn more about the disease, particularly about the
role the immune system plays.

   "The way I've explained it to parents is, the importance of this is that it
really shows us the way forward," said Dr. Jerry Mendell, director of the Center
for Gene Therapy in the hospital's research institute.

   "Certainly, we had hoped that the results of the study had been more
positive," said Dr. Valerie Cwik, executive vice president for research and
medical director of the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

   "On the other hand, we shouldn't consider this a negative study. ... It
showed us that gene therapy is safe, at least short term, in a single medicine.
It also identified potential problems that could limit the success of the
therapy."

   In particular, the responses in two boys in the study offer insight that will
shape future studies, said Christopher Walker, who directs the Research
Institute's Center for Vaccines and Immunity.

   In one case, researchers discovered that a boy had an innate immunity to
dystrophin, the missing element that the researchers were trying to replace, and
that his immune response  intensified when the gene therapy was given.

   Another boy, whose disease was genetically different, had  an intense immune
response capable of destroying the muscles cells that had been corrected by the
gene therapy. In both cases, the immune response was by T-cells, which normally
protect people from viruses and cancer.

   None of the boys experienced serious side effects from the therapy,
researchers said.

   Walker said the study doesn't completely answer any questions about muscular
dystrophy but it nudges him, Mendell and others closer to answers that might
someday produce long-term treatments or even cures.

   Recently, the researchers were awarded a $7 million National Institutes of
Health grant that is helping to propel the research here in Columbus.

   mcrane@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2010


                              33 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                           October 6, 2010 Wednesday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: Invest Southwest taps 12 companies for new funding

BYLINE: By, John Yantis, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Invest Southwest Capital Conference, one of Phoenix's largest gatherings of
entrepreneurs and angel investors, named 12 companies that will present at its
annual meeting in December.

   The companies represent the best early-stage firms seeking funding in the
region, Stephanie Spong, Invest Southwest chair, said in a statement.

   "These companies have demonstrated business success and the need for capital
to get to the next level," she said. "We're here for them."

   Featuring the Miller Group as its title sponsor, the conference is set for
Dec. 8-10 at the Four Seasons Resort in Scottsdale.

   Presenting companies have raised more than $300 million in investment funds
at the conference since it began in 1992, organizers said. The companies
typically seek between $500,000 and $5 million in capital from investors.

   This year's presenting companies are:

   * ArmedZilla Inc. of Phoenix is a social-networking support system for the
military community.

   * Brain State Technologies of Scottsdale licenses a brainwave-optimization
program for brain-balance issues, including sleep disorders, anxiety, stress,
addictions, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, post-traumatic stress
disorder and brain trauma.

   * Calimmune of Tucson is developing a one-time outpatient gene therapy to
treat HIV-positive individuals and delay/eliminate the need for costly
anti-viral medications.

   * ClearData Networks of Phoenix sells data hosting to the health-care
industry mandated to move to electronic medical records and ensures HIPAA
compliance.

   * Cognivue Corp. of Gatineau, Quebec, solves the processor-performance
bottleneck while delivering best performance per area per milliwatt for
image-cognition processing.

   * Elliptical Mobile Solutions of Chandler offers a cost-effective,
energy-efficient, microcontainerized data center by making refrigerator units
for IT equipment.

   * Real Time Cos.  of Phoenix is a 3-D display and embedded-avionics company
that sells to Fortune 500 companies, and has a 3-D stereographic head display.

   * Seal Innotech of Chandler provides mobile business applications synced with
enterprise resource planning for Fortune 1000 sales representatives, executives,
operations and other staff.

   * Serious Integrated Inc. of Phoenix provides touch-screen interface
technology for industrial/medical/consumer device original equipment managers.

   * Sokikom of Chandler is developing a multiplayer online learning game to
help students learn math.

   * Thumbspeak LLC of Scottsdale allows companies to gain rapid insights by
sending targeted questions to smartphones.

   * WebPT LLC of Phoenix is a Web-based electronic medical-record solution for
independent physical-therapy clinics.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2010


                              34 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                             October 3, 2010 Sunday
                               STATEWIDE EDITION

SECTION: CTNOW; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: CARROLL, Richard G.

BODY:

   CARROLL, Richard G.


   Richard G. Carroll, age 52, of Wallingford, PA died unexpectedly on September
24, 2010 of complications associated with pancreatic cancer. He is survived by
his wife Laurie and his two daughters Megan, age 10, and Bonnie, age seven. He
is also survived by his father, Richard P. Carroll and his wife, Carol S.
Carroll of Granby, CT.

   and his three sisters; Virginia A. Mann and her husband David of Hamilton,
Georgia, Susan E. Carroll of Brooklyn, New York, and Patricia N. Carroll of
Boston, Massachusetts. He was predeceased by his mother, Mary A. Carroll.
Richard was born on December 10, 1957 in Springfield, Massachusetts and grew up
in Simsbury, CT. He received his BS in Biology with chemistry minor from the
University of Notre Dame in 1980 and his Ph.D. from the University of
Connecticut in 1989 in Biochemistry. Before entering graduate school he worked
as a Senior Technician/Associate Chemist at the Ensign Bickford Company
developing procedures for pilot production and scale-up work of new products
prior to commercial production. His professional career involved research in
cancer and infectious disease research. His post-graduate work at the National
Cancer Institute in Fredrick MD between 1989 and 1992 focused on understanding
molecular mechanisms of retrovirus infection and replication. At the Henry M.
Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine in Maryland
(1992-1999), he developed cell and gene therapy approaches to treat HIV-1
infection. His work led to the first Phase I clinical trial to treat HIV-1
infection with autologous CD4 T cells. Richard was the lead author of an article
that appeared in Science in 1997 that described how the T cells remained
resistant to HIV-1 infection during the T cell expansion process. Dr. Carroll
joined the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania in 1999 initially in the
Department of Molecular and Cellular Engineering and subsequently in the
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine. Here, Richard shifted focus to
develop immunotherapies to treat cancer. Ironically, Richard's last project was
to determine how pancreatic tumors avoided the immune system. Richard was an
exceptional scientist, having authored or co-authored more than fifty research
publications and was respected and admired by his colleagues. He served as both
a mentor and teacher to undergraduate and graduate students, fellows and medical
students and researchers. Richard was a devoted husband and father whose
greatest joy was to play with his daughters. He was an accomplished, self-taught
guitar player and an avid fan of The Grateful Dead and the Rolling Stones. He
was also a lifelong Red Sox fan and was willing to share that enthusiasm for the
Phillies. As a Notre Dame graduate he was a faithful football fan, unwilling to
be disturbed on football Saturdays. His funeral Mass at St. John Chrysostom
Church ended with the singing of the Notre Dame Alma Mater as the recessional
hymn. Richard is buried at the SS Peter and Paul Cemetery in Springfield,
Pennsylvania.

   To honor his memory and continue his work, a fund has been created in his
name. Contributions in his memory may be made to Trustees of the University of
Pennsylvania, c/o The Richard Carroll Fund, 435 Creekside Drive, Downingtown,
Pennsylvania 19335. He will be missed and never forgotten by his family, friends
and colleagues.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2010


                              35 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2010


                              36 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2010


                              37 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: D Business; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2010


                              38 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: D Business; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2010


                              39 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: D Business; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2010


                              40 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                           September 26, 2010 Sunday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: D Business; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurs thrive on sales of start-ups | Acquiring firms can also
bring benefits to state's economy /

BYLINE: KATHLEEN GALLAGHER, kgallagher@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal
Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When Gen-Probe Inc. raised its sign outside the former headquarters of
Prodesse Inc. - the Waukesha biotech company Tom Shannon once ran - he shed no
tears.

    Rather, it was a sweet moment for Shannon, who began running the start-up in
2002.

   After untold amounts of time and effort - and $4.5 million of funding -
Shannon had achieved with Prodesse one of the best outcomes a start-up can hope
for. San Diegobased Gen-Probe acquired the privately held maker of diagnostic
tests for an initial price of $60 million and pledged to keep its operations in
Wisconsin.

   It may seem counterintuitive that the sale of a start-up to an out-ofstate
firm would be good for Wisconsin, but Shannon and others say it helps set the
stage for a cycle that spurs innovation, creates wealth and even lures bigger
employers into the state.

   "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies, some of which are sold, some of which grow to a certain stage,
some of which grow to be really big companies," said Tom Still, president of the
Wisconsin Technology Council. "But all of them, if successful, to some degree
create wealth." In a state where the increase in average household income has
barely outpaced inflation over the last 20 years, that's a big deal.

   The $4.5 million that the 12 original investors put into Prodesse has grown
to $70 million and counting.

   Prodesse's investors received an- other $10 million on top of the original
$60 million when Gen-Probe received clearance from federal regulators in July to
market a Prodessedeveloped molecular diagnostic test for several flu subtypes.
They could pull in yet another $17 million if the company meets other milestones
in 2011, Shannon said. For the employee-owners of Prodesse, proceeds from the
sale have funded new houses, vacations, investment accounts, a BMW and an
in-ground swimming pool. More importantly, Shannon and other investors have
plowed their winnings into at least seven new start-ups, most of which are in
Wisconsin.

   Ripple effect Another Milwaukee-area start-up, Zystor Therapeutics Inc., was
acquired in August by BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., a Novato, Calif., drug
developer.

   The selling price of $22 million could rise to as much as $115 million if
milestones are met.

   Zystor, which develops enzyme replacement therapies, moved to Wisconsin from
St. Louis in early 2005 as a condition of an $8.5 million funding round led by
Venture Investors in Madison and Mason Wells in Milwaukee.

   The company had only nine employees, and BioMarin plans to move it to
California at the end of the year. But Zystor provided a good return for
investors, said Loren Peterson, its former top executive.

   "This is what's supposed to happen with biotech startups.

   They rarely are going to end up selling commercial products and having
revenue," Peterson said. A company like Zystor would have to raise $50 million
or more to move to the next stage of drug development, he said.

   The success investors had with Zystor could have a ripple effect.

   "The Zystor exit came at an appropriate time for Venture Investors, which may
be thinking about raising a new fund because the last one is winding down,"
Still said.

   "Zystor turned out extremely well," said Chris Prestigiacomo, private markets
portfolio manager for the State of Wisconsin Investment Board.

   A "good portion" of the companies SWIB has invested in have stayed in
Wisconsin, Prestigiacomo said. If the state can develop the targeted technology
clusters recommended in "Be Bold Wisconsin: The Wisconsin Competitiveness Study"
released by Competitive Wisconsin Inc. in August, it will have even greater
success keeping acquiring companies here, he said.

   Catalyst for growth There's no better example of how start-ups create their
magic than the Wisconsin presence of Swiss pharmaceutical company Roche, said
Tom Hefty, former head of Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wisconsin.

   Roche first entered Wisconsin in 2007 by acquiring NimbleGen Systems Inc., a
Madison maker of gene chips used in drug research, for $272.5 million. The next
year, Roche acquired Mirus Bio Corp., a Madison biotech focused on RNA
interference and gene therapies, for $125 million. Roche now has about 175
employees in the Madison area, said Kary Staples, a Roche spokesman.

   Start-ups also tend to breed more of the same. Madisonbased Promega Corp.,
which sells research tools to scientists and laboratory workers, has acted as a
catalyst for a growing cluster of companies that develop life sciences research
tools since the company was founded in 1978, Still said.

   For Prodesse's Shannon and Zystor's Peterson, the sale of their start-ups
doesn't mean they're done. Both are looking to do it again.

   That's another common benefit of having a healthy start-up scene.

   "It's hard to cure some entrepreneurs," Still said.

   .

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

    "The way to create an entrepreneurial economy is to constantly be creating
new companies." Tom Still, president of the Wisconsin Technology Council

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2010


                              41 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                          September 25, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Metro; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Hopes rise for lung transplant breakthrough

BYLINE: By Carolyn Y. Johnson, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The call came around 6 p.m. on a Tuesday in early June. An elderly organ
donor had died, but the patient's lungs had been turned down by hospitals
nationwide because they were not in good enough condition to transplant.

   For a team at Brigham and Women's Hospital, this was the first opportunity to
test an experimental procedure that could one day be used to revitalize donated
lungs. The technique, if successful, could help salvage some of the 80 percent
of donor lungs that are now discarded, even as 1,800 patients a year in the
United States wait for a lung transplant.

   The Brigham is one of three US centers selected for a clinical trial in
patients. The Boston doctors have used the technique successfully in animals,
but before attempting a transplant, they need to prove it will work with human
lungs.

   After retrieving the lungs, the transplant team arrived back at the hospital
with the organs in a cooler, and were met by a team of 20 surgeons, nurses, and
respiratory specialists. Doctors sewed tubes into the blood vessels in the lungs
to deliver a nutrient fluid. They hooked the lungs up to a ventilator and placed
them into a clear protective dome. The whole setup looked like a huge, and very
strange, snow globe.

   Then they slowly warmed up the lungs to body temperature and began to inflate
them. Gradually, the lungs came to life, alternatingly swelling with air and
then deflating. The lungs' delicate tissue had absorbed fluid as the donor died,
but over the next six hours, the water seeped out.

   ``When you first put it on the circuit, it's a very cold, uninflated lung . .
. and two hours later, it's completely warm and completely inflated and working
- I mean really working - as a lung,'' said Dr. Michael T. Jaklitsch, a thoracic
surgeon at Brigham and Women's. ``It was an amazing thing to see.''

   The Brigham doctors have now done two more organ resuscitations, and after
completing five, they will evaluate whether to proceed with the clinical trial,
which also must get federal clearance. Vitrolife, a Swedish company that makes
the nutrient fluid, is seeking approval for a trial. The transplant technique,
called ex vivo perfusion, was pioneered in Toronto but has not been done in this
country.

   Haley Dowdell of Wakefield, R.I., has cystic fibrosis and went on the lung
transplant waiting list in July after a bad bout of pneumonia. Just 23 years
old, she is eager for new techniques that could make more lungs available.

   ``You feel hopeful, but you know it's resigned hope because you never know if
those organs, those lungs, will come,'' Dowdell said. ``My biggest fear is that
I'm not going to make it to transplant. I'll be one of those people you hear
about that dies before organs become available.''

   Last year, 237 people died waiting on the lung transplant list, according to
federal data.

   Dowdell carries oxygen when she leaves the house and walks on a treadmill to
keep fit, but she has found that it takes much of her energy just to manage her
disease. Each breath feels like sucking in air through a straw, and every time
she gets a cold, she worries it will turn into something worse.

   Waiting, she says, is excruciating, and anything doctors can do to give
people like her a better chance for a transplant is exciting.

   ``People I've talked to say the change is immediate - you take that first
breath post-op, and it's like having a whole new body,'' Dowdell said.

   The new technique, if it works, would transform the practice of lung
transplantation, in which many donor lungs are discarded because their viability
can't be ensured.

   ``You don't know until . . . you literally put them into the patient'' how
well they'll work, said Dr. David S. Wilkes, executive associate dean for
research affairs at the Indiana University School of Medicine, who studies the
biology of transplant rejection and is not involved in the ex vivo perfusion
research. ``If this really works, you may be able to not only salvage lungs that
may not be otherwise ideal for transplant, but you may actually increase the
pool of potential donors, which is huge.''

   The first transplant of a lung using this technique was done in Toronto in
October 2008, and those surgeons have now done 27 such transplants. The Toronto
team has yet to publish the results of its clinical trial, but Dr. Shaf
Keshavjee, director of the Toronto lung transplant program and professor of
thoracic surgery at the University of Toronto, said that outcomes have been
good.

   ``We've shown using lungs that couldn't normally be used, we can get
equivalent or better results than standard lungs. That was a surprising
result,'' Keshavjee said.

   Keshavjee's team has begun testing additional ways of improving donor lungs.
In a paper published last year in the journal Science Translational Medicine,
the Toronto group took donated lungs preserved outside the body and did gene
therapy on them. The treatment generated proteins that dampen inflammation, and
the team found that the condition of the lung tissue improved.

   In Boston, the doctors estimated they might be able to salvage lungs from 35
New England donors a year with the new technique, which they said would have a
profound impact. There are 86 people on the lung waiting list in New England,
according to federal data, and there were 54 transplants last year in the
region.

   ``I wouldn't have any patients waiting short of breath, hoping for a
miracle,'' said Dr. Phillip C. Camp, director of the lung transplant program at
the Brigham. ``We could produce the miracle for them.''

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2010


                              42 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 25, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: Business; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: VICAL TO SELL MORE SHARES;
New stock offering will be at significant discount of 22%

BYLINE: KEITH DARCÉ, U-T

BODY:

   Vical's stock price tumbled again Friday after the San Diego drug developer
announced plans to sell 15 million new shares to the public at a steep discount.

   The move came two days after Vical shares fell 32 percent on news that the
experimental gene therapy Temusi had failed in a Phase 3 clinical trial.

   The blood vessel growth treatment was developed by Vical and licensed to
Sanofi-Aventis. Vical could earn royalty payments of 5 percent of sales if the
therapy ever makes it to the market.

   On Friday, shares dropped an additional 21 percent, or 60 cents, to close at
$2.27 after the securities offering was announced.

   The plan priced the new shares at $2.25, or 22 percent below the stock's
closing price of $2.87 a day earlier.

   Calls to Vical Friday weren't returned.

   Underwriters of the sale, who will have a chance to purchase some of the
shares, probably demanded the discount in light of the disappointing news from
Sanofi-Aventis, said Raghuram Selvaraju, a stock analyst with Noble Financial
Group in New York.

   "My sense is that the company needed cash and didn't know if it would be able
to consummate a financing in the future," he said.

   In addition to Temusi, Vical has 13 other gene therapies and vaccines under
development on its own and with partners. Only one of them -- a treatment for
skin cancer -- is in late-stage development.

   Because of those factors, underwriters of the stock offering "were only
willing to invest if they got shares at a significant discount," Selvaraju
surmised.

   In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Vical didn't explain
how it plans to spend the $33.8 million expected from the stock sale.

   "We cannot specify with certainty all of the particular uses for the proceeds
from this offering," it said in the filing.

   At least one shareholder was angered by the plan.

   "Offering shares at a significant discount to people who don't currently own
the company -- to the detriment of people who do own the company -- is an
outrage," said John Damshroder, a Dublin, Ohio, political communications
manager. He said he owns about 50,000 shares of Vical stock.

   Vical executives should have done a better job explaining their reasoning for
pricing the new stock, Damshroder said.

   Vical Chief Executive Vijay Samant "doesn't work for the underwriters,"
Damshroder said. "He works for the shareholders."

GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; CAPTIONS: Vical stock price. SHAFFER GRUBB o U-T

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2010


                              43 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 23, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: Business; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: VICAL'S PHASE 3 RESULTS DISAPPOINT;
Shares fall 32 percent on news of trial from partner Sanofi-Aventis

BYLINE: KEITH DARCÉ, U-T

BODY:

   A therapy developed by San Diego-based Vical for growing new blood vessels in
legs damaged by blood clots failed to prevent leg amputations and death in a
Phase 3 trial of the experimental treatment, researchers said Wednesday.

   The results were disappointing to Vical and its big pharmaceutical partner
Sanofi- Aventis, which licensed the therapy, NV1FGF, in 2000, and funded and
orchestrated development efforts since then.

   Vical could earn royalty payments of 5 percent of sales if the treatment ever
wins regulatory approval and makes it to the market, said Eric Schmidt, a
biotechnology stock analyst for Cowen & Co. in New York.

   Shares of Vical fell $1.24, or 32 percent, to close at $2.62 Wednesday on the
Nasdaq.

   Calls to Vical officials were not returned.

   Sanofi-Aventis announced the preliminary trial results Wednesday morning. The
company said full results will be presented at the American Heart Association's
Scientific Sessions 2010 in Chicago on Nov. 16.

   "We are disappointed that NV1FGF failed to achieve significance in the
trial," said Dr. Marc Cluzel, executive vice president of research and
development for the French drug company. "We are evaluating all options on the
NV1FGF development."

   The treatment uses a specially programmed human protein to promote the growth
of new blood vessels. It is injected into leg muscles in the areas where
restricted blood flow has caused tissue damage.

   NV1FGF and other gene therapies have been shown to work in animals, but
researchers have struggled to produce similar results in studies on large groups
of humans.

   In 2006, Sanofi-Aventis said that a Phase 2 clinical trial of the therapy in
humans had produced "encouraging" results.

   However, many people remained doubtful that the treatment would prove
effective, said Schmidt, the analyst. "The expectations for this opportunity
were very low," he said.

   Vical's website lists 13 other gene therapies and experimental vaccines that
it's developing both alone and with outside partners.

   Schmidt said shareholders are most optimistic about Allovectin-7, a treatment
for skin cancer now in Phase 3 clinical trials, and TransVax, a vaccine for a
salivary gland herpes virus being tested in patients with compromised immune
systems.

   "The stock reaction (to the NV1FGF trial failure) is very surprising to me,"
the analyst said.

   "While this would have been a nice option for Vical shareholders, it hasn't
been the meat of the story."

   keith.darce@uniontrib.com (619) 293-1020 Twitter @keithdarce

GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; CAPTIONS: Vical stock price. SHAFFER GRUBB o U-T

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2010


                              44 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 19, 2010 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section MB; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; AT THE TABLE TRE OTTO; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: Medical Talk, With Antipasti and Pasta on the Side

BYLINE: By DIANE CARDWELL

BODY:

   At this Italian restaurant on Madison Avenue between 97th and 98th Streets,
the appeal of eating local has nothing to do with the provenance of the food.
Opened in February and with Salvatore Fraterrigo as the executive chef, Tre Otto
was carved out of an old dress shop by Lauren and Louis Cangiano, who live
around the corner. He comes from a family that ran Italian specialty
supermarkets for decades on Staten Island and in Brooklyn; she is a real estate
agent. With exposed-brick walls, dark-wood furnishings and a menu including
casual starters and composed entrees, the place has quickly found a following
among residents -- of both the neighborhood and medical variety -- at the
crossroads of Carnegie Hill and East Harlem, near Mount Sinai Medical Center. On
Wednesday, that following included a group of medical professionals talking
shop.

   IN THE SEATS Dr. Natan Bar-Chama, a urologist who directs male reproductive
medicine and surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital and teaches in its medical school,
and three executives from American Medical Systems: Gary Nava, Ray Tantillo and
Geoff Higgins. The company, based in Minnetonka, Minn., makes devices to correct
erectile, incontinence and other pelvic problems.

   ON THE PLATES Shared antipasti of caprese salad ($9), caponata con crostini
($10) and mixed olives ($5), followed by trenette al pesto Trapanese for Mr.
Higgins (linguine-like pasta with almonds, garlic, tomatoes and basil, $13) and
spaghetti alla chitarra for everyone else (spaghetti with lamb ragout and goat
cheese, $15). Plus a glass of Nero d'Avola ($11) for Mr. Nava, an iced
cappuccino for Dr. Bar-Chama ($4.50) and Pellegrino for the table ($5).

   WHY THEY CAME To trade ideas about treating erectile dysfunction; the
restaurant is Dr. Bar-Chama's go-to spot. ''I've been at Sinai for 15 years, and
we've never had an upscale, fresh, true Italian restaurant in close proximity,''
he said. ''When people want to have lunch and they like Italian food, it's an
easy call.''

   WHAT THEY TALKED ABOUT Penile implants (''Now you've opened a can of worms,''
Mr. Tantillo said, joking, after Dr. Bar-Chama revealed what they were up to),
surgeries and gene therapy, which is ''basically what's on the horizon for
erectile dysfunction,'' Dr. Bar-Chama said. And the need for education, so that
men know there are other options when drugs like Viagra or Cialis fail.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: TRADING IDEAS: Italian near Mount Sinai Medical Center.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY TINA FINEBERG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2010


                              45 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                          September 18, 2010 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; bad desk code; Science Desk; Part A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 528 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
HIV virus used as a cure;
A 'defanged' version treats a patient with beta-thalassemia, a blood disorder.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II

BODY:

   For the second time, researchers have used the HIV virus in gene therapy to
cure a severe genetic disease, this time the blood disorder beta-thalassemia,
which causes life-threatening anemia.

   French researchers had previously used a "defanged" version of the virus that
causes AIDS to cure two boys with the rare disorder adrenoleukodystrophy, which
was at the heart of the popular movie "Lorenzo's Oil." Beta-thalassemia is a
much more common disease, and although the new research involved only one
patient, it suggests that this approach could have wide applicability.

   "This work represents a major step forward for the gene therapy of hemoglobin
disorders," wrote Dr. Derek A. Persons of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
in Memphis, Tenn., in an editorial accompanying the report in the journal
Nature.

   The feat marks at least the sixth disease for which gene therapy has recently
been shown to be beneficial.

   Beta-thalassemia is caused by defects in the production of the beta-globin
chain, a key component of hemoglobin, the molecule that carries oxygen in red
blood cells. It affects primarily people of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, South
Asian, Southeast Asian and Chinese descent; about 60,000 children are diagnosed
with it worldwide each year.

   Treatment generally involves frequent blood transfusions -- typically monthly
-- but that leads to a buildup of iron that can damage organs. As a result,
patients must also undergo chelation therapy to remove as much of the iron as
possible. The disease can be cured by bone marrow transplants, but only if a
suitable donor is found.

   The researchers in the new study used an HIV virus that had been engineered
to carry the correct version of the hemoglobin gene. Most previous research on
gene therapy has used other retroviruses to carry the desired gene into cells.
But those so-called vectors had a tendency to insert genes in the wrong
locations, leading in some cases to cancer. Attempts to try gene therapy in
patients were put on hold until scientists could overcome the problem.

   Dr. Philippe Leboulch of the University of Paris and his colleagues used the
HIV-based vector -- produced by Bluebird Bio of Cambridge, Mass., and Paris --
to treat an 18-year-old Frenchman who had been diagnosed with beta-thalassemia
at age 3. Before the treatment, he was receiving three packs of red blood cells
monthly and chelation therapy to remove iron, but was still ill. No suitable
bone marrow donor was available.

   The team removed blood-forming stem cells from the patient's bone marrow and
treated them in a test tube to add the working gene. He was given chemotherapy
to destroy as many of the remaining stem cells as possible, then the treated
cells were injected.

   Within a year, the young man was able to stop receiving transfusions, and he
has remained stable for 22 months since then.

   "He is happy to have a normal life back, and for the first time has a
full-time job in a main restaurant in Paris," Dr. Francoise Bernaudin, the
clinical hematologist who has been monitoring his condition, said in a
statement.

   The researchers are planning to enroll an additional 10 patients for more
studies.

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2010


                              46 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2010 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           September 17, 2010 Friday
                                 METRO EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 821 words

HEADLINE: Premiere of U film suddenly up in the air;
It's unclear why a university VP canceled the TV debut of the Mississippi River
documentary.

BYLINE: TOM MEERSMAN; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

BODY:

   "Troubled Waters" is the name of a new documentary about the Mississippi
River, but it also describes the turmoil at the University of Minnesota about
the cancellation of the film's scheduled premiere and broadcast on Twin Cities
Public Television.

   Karen Himle, vice president of university relations, informed the U's Bell
Museum of Natural History last week that she canceled the film's Oct. 5
broadcast on TPT. The decision so close to the airing and Oct. 3 premiere
screening at the museum has disappointed and dumbfounded those who produced and
funded the program.

   Martin Moen, associate director for communications and operations at the Bell
Museum, said he could not elaborate on why the program was pulled. "Karen said a
lot more but I can't get into that," he said.

   Filmmakers under contract to the museum produced the documentary, "Troubled
Waters: A Mississippi River Story," during the past two years with about
$500,000 in state lottery proceeds and foundation grants. Among other topics, it
details pollution problems in the Mississippi from farm chemicals and other
sources, and profiles both conventional and organic farmers who are making
changes to reduce runoff and improve water quality.

   Daniel Wolter, director of the University of Minnesota News Service, said
that several university officials and faculty previewed the documentary, and
raised questions about whether it is "factually accurate, objective and balanced
in its presentation" and meets the goals of public funding. "Accordingly, the
premiere was delayed to allow for proper scientific and institutional review,"
Wolter said.

   Fact-checking galore

   The decision drew quick reaction from Brian DeVore, communications
coordinator for the Land Stewardship Project, a nonprofit group that works
closely with farmers on sustainable agriculture.

   DeVore said he had seen a recent version of the documentary, and that it
"bent over backwards to be fair to farmers," while presenting real problems and
promoting on-the-ground solutions. "This is outrageous," DeVore said. "I'm not
sure why public relations at the U is making decisions about what scientific
information is released. It's pretty troubling."

   Wolter said that Himle was not available for interviews, but that it's
perfectly appropriate for her office to make such decisions. Himle did so after
consulting with Al Levine, dean of the College of Food, Agricultural and Natural
Resource Sciences, he said, which oversees the Bell Museum.

   The film's director, producer and writer Larkin McPhee said that scientists
at the U and elsewhere reviewed the project extensively at all stages of
production. "My training was at National Geographic Television, so I've always
adhered to a very rigorous fact-checking process," McPhee said. She has won
Peabody and Emmy awards during her two decades of documentaries on topics that
include Chernobyl, the Mississippi's great flood of 1993, gene therapy, eating
disorders and personal finance. "In all my years of working with PBS on national
productions -- and this one was locally produced -- I've never had a film more
closely scrutinized already," McPhee said.

   Funders of the documentary have asked to meet with university officials to
learn what happened.

   "We don't know what's going on," said Ron Kroese, environmental program
director for the McKnight Foundation, which contributed $130,000 to the
documentary over a two-year period. Kroese said he viewed the program recently,
and it seemed fair and balanced and consistent with a 2008 study about the
Mississippi River by top scientists at the National Research Council.

   Another $349,000 for the project came from the Minnesota Environment and
Natural Resources Trust Fund.

   Bell Museum officials said that they are now charged with reviewing the film,
but Moen said he doesn't know yet what the issues are, who will do the
reviewing, or how long it might take. The controversy has sparked considerable
chatter on Facebook, Twitter and various e-mail lists. Much of it speculates
that Himle pulled the program because large-scale farming groups complained.
Some have expressed displeasure publicly in the past when university research
and projects raised questions about environmental problems and conventional
agriculture.

   Wolter said the concerns and action about "Troubled Waters" came only from
within the U. "There was no influence from outside to not broadcast this," he
said.

   Katie Nyberg, executive director of the Mississippi River Fund, which
contributed $25,000 to the documentary, said she is troubled by the decision and
still waiting to hear a better explanation. University President Robert
Bruininks is on the fund's board and was slated to speak at the Oct. 3 screening
premiere, she said, which has also now been canceled.

   "Our fear is it'll get shelved," Nyberg said. "It's a great production and a
lot of people in our state and beyond are going to learn a lot from it."

   Tom Meersman - 612-673-7388

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2010


                              47 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                          September 16, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: Cambridge firm hopeful, cautious on gene therapy

BYLINE: By Carolyn Y. Johnson, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   A Cambridge biotechnology company has developed a gene therapy that
successfully treated a 21-year-old French man who suffers from an inherited
blood disorder called beta thalassemia, allowing him to forgo monthly
transfusions that he has depended on since childhood.

   The case, reported yesterday in the journal Nature, is the latest example of
progress in the field of gene therapy. Bluebird Bio, the company developing the
therapy, plans to recruit nine additional patients for its clinical trial, which
will include patients with beta thalassemia and sickle cell anemia.

   ``Now, the patient has been without any transfusions for two years. . . . I
must say we want to be cautious - nevertheless, at this point it's good to see
the patient lives a normal life for the first time, has a full-time job in a
restaurant in Paris as a cook,'' said Dr. Philippe Leboulch, a visiting
professor at Harvard Medical School and a professor of medicine at the
University of Paris, who is the senior author of the study.

   Leboulch, who is a member of Bluebird's scientific advisory board, said he
began the work that led to the new therapy 20 years ago. In June 2007,
researchers removed the patient's bone marrow and used a virus to insert
corrected copies of the defective gene in marrow cells. They gave the patient
chemotherapy to eliminate his blood cell precursors that carried the genetic
defect, before returning the modified cells to the patient.

   Leboulch said that the results were promising, but emphasized that scientists
were proceeding with caution and carefully monitoring the patient for side
effects.

   He noted that they are monitoring cells in the patient that overproduce a
protein that has been found to contribute to tumors, but the patient is healthy.

   Outside researchers said that this was an exciting success.

   ``This is a very significant study. Beta thalassemia is really challenging
for gene therapy,'' said Guangping Gao, the director of the gene therapy center
at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, who was not involved in the
study. ``One patient is a very small study, but this is really a milestone.''

   Bluebird Bio was until very recently known as Genetix Pharmaceuticals, and
for the company the trial is part of a larger thrust into gene therapy. The
company recently received $35 million in venture capital funding.

   Beta thalassemia is a genetic disease that causes anemia, and patients need
monthly blood transfusions over their lifetime. Those transfusions cause iron to
build up in the body, potentially damaging organs and requiring further
treatment.

   The disease is more common out side the United States, and 60,000 children
worldwide are diagnosed with it each year.

   ``This is a huge public health problem outside the US,'' said Nick Leschly,
the chief executive of Bluebird.

   The company also has a program in gene therapy treatments for
adrenoleukodystrophy, a brain-wasting disease. Researchers published a paper in
the journal Science last year showing positive results in two patients with that
illness.

   In an accompanying opinion piece published in Nature, Derek A. Parsons of the
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis noted that a decade ago, gene
therapy research paused. Viruses that were used to deliver the genes caused
leukemia in some patients.

   Most prominently, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a genetic liver
disease, died after being treated with gene therapy in 1999, when viruses
triggered a massive immune response.

   But recently, gene therapy has had a string of successes, including against a
rare disease that causes blindness, called Leber's congenital amaurosis.
Researchers have also reported good results with ``bubble boy disease,'' a lack
of natural immunity that leaves children vulnerable to infections.

   ``I think the work started too fast in the field, because the name coined -
gene therapy - was appealing to many. People wanted to have cures tomorrow,''
Leboulch said. ``But it took a little bit of time to try the waters.''

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2010


                              48 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                          September 15, 2010 Wednesday
                                 no-dot Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: Funding vital to finding cures

BYLINE: By, Julie Kusku Special to the Detroit News

BODY:

   More than 10 million Americans are affected by diseases such as retinitis
pigmentosa and age-related macular degeneration that cause blindness.
Alarmingly, with an aging population that number is expected to increase 50
percent by 2020.

   While many of us have never heard of these diseases, let alone understand
their causes and effects, the possibility of their impact on our lives or the
lives of those around us is significant. Here, in neighborhoods across Detroit,
people of all ages meet the challenges of life with blinding diseases every day.

   Twenty years ago, my then 5-year-old son was diagnosed with retinitis
pigmentosa. Our doctor informed us that people with this condition lose their
vision at some point during their life. He gave us hope when he told us that he
believed during my son's life a cure would be found. Soon after the diagnosis,
we joined the local Foundation Fighting Blindness chapter for support and
information. My son has a very small field of vision and cannot see anything in
the dark. Despite his condition, he teaches math at a high school in the Greater
Detroit area and runs marathons. We are always working toward finding a cure.

   It is thrilling that for the first time in history, there is real hope for
restored vision for people affected by retinal diseases. Recently published
results from a breakthrough study, funded in part by the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, show that gene therapy restored significant vision in five children
and seven adults who were previously blind due to a severe form of retinitis
pigmentosa, a blinding genetic disease that affects people from birth. By
injecting a missing gene directly into the back of the eye, patients experienced
dramatic improvements in visual acuity, peripheral vision and light sensitivity.
With a variety of ongoing clinical trials, this breakthrough sets the stage for
the use of gene therapy in many more retinal diseases, with hope for further
success.

   This trial would not have been possible without the essential financial
support provided by foundations and other funding organizations. Nonprofit
organizations often provide the start-up venture philanthropy capital necessary
to begin new research not funded by the government.

   With federal funding for medical research limited to supporting studies with
proven results, unexplored research receives little to no funding. In essence,
venture philanthropy funding is the catalyst that can drive research to
widespread funding from federal sources, such as the National Institute of
Health.

   Each of us has the opportunity to play a pivotal role in such venture
philanthropy, whether by investing our time as volunteers or our dollars as
funders.

   Our involvement and dedication to nonprofit organizations that offer support
for medical research is critical.

   Now more than ever, supporting early research can significantly impact the
lives of our neighbors, friends and families today and for generations to come.

   Julie Kusku, Detroit

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2010


                              49 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           September 14, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: FROM THE BLOGS;
PICTURE OF HEALTH

BODY:

   UM scientist gets $11.4 million for gene therapy research

   The National Institutes of Health has awarded a University of Maryland
scientist an $11.4 million, five-year grant to study whether anti-platelet drugs
that prevent blood clots based on a patient's genetic makeup can be used to
treat cardiac arrest.

   The grant was given to Alan R. Shuldiner, a professor of medicine and
director of the Program in Genetics and Genome Medicine at the University of
Maryland School of Medicine.

   The study of the 2,400 cardiac patients at five sites will build on previous
research by Shuldiner. The research found that the anti-platelet drug Plavix is
not effective for people who have a certain variant of gene. The variant appears
to affect a person's ability to activate the drug.

   Plavix prevents platelets from clumping together and causing blood clots that
can lead to heart attacks and strokes.

   People with the gene variant who take Plavix after angioplasty or having a
stent implanted have more than twice the risk of dying or having cardiac
problems from a blocked artery, Shuldiner said.

   Shuldiner will work with other institutions including the Johns Hopkins
University and Sinai Hospital in Baltimore.

   Study of Alzheimer's in those with Down syndrome

   The Kennedy Krieger Institute has been awarded $8.5 million to study
Alzheimer's disease in people with Down syndrome.

   The medical institution said that Alzheimer's is hard to detect in any
patient, but even more difficult in people with Down syndrome. It is important
to detect the disease early so treatment can be started immediately, scientists
have found.

   The grant was awarded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development. It will allow Kennedy Krieger to continue a
program it began in 1987 looking at aging and dementia in adults with Down
syndrome. The program will now last through May 31, 2015.

   The new study will include research on whether risk for Alzhiemer's in the
Down syndrome population is associated with insulin resistance.

   Hopkins researchers find genes tied to ovarian cancer

   Johns Hopkins scientists have found two genes whose mutations appear to be
linked to one of the deadliest forms of ovarian cancer.

   The researchers, from the Johns Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center, found an
average of 20 mutated genes in each ovarian clear cell cancer studied. Clear
cell cancer is generally resistant to standard therapy.

   Two of the genes were more commonly mutated. ARID1A is a gene that suppresses
tumors and was found in 57 percent of the tumors studied. PPP2R1A helps turn
normal cells into tumor cells and was found in 7.1 percent of the tumors
studied.

   The scientists looked at 18,000 genes for the study in ovarian clear cell
tumors from eight patients. The patients came from Hopkins and institutions in
Taiwan and Japan. Researchers found 268 mutations in 253 genes from the eight
tumors. There were an average of 20 mutations per tumor.

   Kids with HIV may need vaccine booster shots

   Children who take antiretroviral therapy drugs to combat HIV infection may
need to be revaccinated against other preventable diseases, according to
researchers at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

   The researchers looked at 38 published studies to see the immune responses to
vaccines. Most on the antiretrovirals remained susceptible to the diseases, but
responded well to revaccination.

   They published their finding in the latest issue of The Lancet Infectious
Diseases.

   The studies looked at the kids' short-term immune response (less than three
months) and long-term response (more than three months) and found that those on
antiretrovirals since infancy - before routine childhood vaccines - might have
long-lasting immunity to those diseases.

   - Andrea K. Walker

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2010


                              50 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2010 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           September 4, 2010 Saturday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: Research ahead of cheating trend Scientists find sure way to check for
gene doping

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   LONDON - Two groups of scientists have developed tests for gene doping in
what the World Anti-Doping Agency hailed Friday as a major breakthrough in
fighting the next frontier in cheating in sports.

   Scientists in Germany said they have come up with a blood test that can
provide conclusive proof of gene doping, even going back as far as 56 days from
when the doping took place.

   And a U.S.-French research team has devised its own method for detect- ing
genetic doping in muscles.

   In time for 2012? Maybe

   The discoveries raise the possibility that a valid gene-doping test can be
implemented by the 2012 London Olympics.

   "This is a really significant and major breakthrough," WADA director general
David Howman told the Associated Press. "This is a project we've been engaged in
since 2002. Now we've reached the situation where we're pretty certain that it
can be detected."

   Gene doping is the practice of using genetic engineering to artificially
enhance athletic performance. It is a spinoff of gene therapy, which alters a
person's DNA to fight disease. The method is banned by WADA and the
International Olympic Committee.

   No probability involved

   WADA funded $2 million in research projects to devise reliable tests, which
have taken about four years to develop. Researchers said the tests can detect
gene doping directly through blood samples.

   "It's not through markers, it's through actual detection," Howman said.
"There's a significant difference there. Using the marker method is more a
probability approach, whereas the method these researchers have come up with is
stone-cold dead, 100 percent."

   Howman said the tests must go through a scientific validation process but
should be implemented "within two years."

   Asked whether they would be ready for the London Olympics, he said, "It's
certainly possible."

   Experts say they don't believe gene doping is being abused, but they suspect
it's only a matter of time.

   In Germany, scientists at Tuebingen and Mainz universities said they found a
relatively low-cost method for detecting gene doping through conventional blood
samples. The findings were published in the online edition of the scientific
journal "Gene Therapy" Thursday.

   "The body of a gene-doped athlete produces the performance-enhancing hormones
itself without having to introduce any foreign substances to the body," said
Perikles Simon of Johannes Gutenberg University in Mainz. "Over time, the body
becomes its own doping supplier."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2010


                              51 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 4, 2010 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Sports Desk; SPORTS BRIEFING DOPING; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: Gene Doping Test Developed

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   Two groups of scientists have developed tests for gene doping in what the
World Anti-Doping Agency hailed as a major breakthrough in fighting the next
frontier in cheating in sports. Scientists in Germany said they had come up with
a blood test that could provide ''conclusive proof'' of gene doping, going back
as far as 56 days from when the doping took place. And a United States-French
research team has devised its own method for detecting genetic doping in
muscles. The discoveries raise the possibility that a valid gene-doping test
could be in place by the 2012 London Olympics. Gene doping is the practice of
using genetic engineering to artificially enhance athletic performance. It is a
spinoff of gene therapy, which alters a person's DNA to fight disease. The
method is banned by WADA and the International Olympic Committee.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2010


                              52 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 4, 2010 Saturday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 040

LENGTH: 331 words

HEADLINE: Scientists break through with tests that detect gene doping

BYLINE: Stephen Wilson, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:

   OLYMPICS

   Two groups of scientists have developed tests for gene doping in what the
World Anti-Doping Agency hailed yesterday as a major breakthrough in fighting
the next frontier in sports cheating.

   Scientists in Germany said they have come up with a blood test that can
provide "conclusive proof" of gene doping, even going back as far as 56 days
from the doping.

   And a U.S.-French research team has devised its own method for detecting
genetic doping in muscles.

   The discoveries raise the possibility that a valid gene-doping test can be
implemented by the 2012 London Olympics.

   "This is a really significant and major breakthrough," WADA director general
David Howman told the Associated Press in a telephone interview. "This is a
project we've been engaged in since 2002. Now we've reached the situation where
we're pretty certain that it can be detected."

   Gene doping is the practice of using genetic engineering to artificially
enhance athletic performance. It is a spinoff of gene therapy, which alters a
person's DNA to fight disease. The method is banned by WADA and the
International Olympic Committee.

   WADA funded $2 million in research projects to devise reliable tests, which
have taken about four years to develop. Researchers said the tests can detect
gene doping directly through blood samples.

   "It's not through markers, it's through actual detection," Howman said.
"There's a significant difference there. Using the marker method is more a
probability approach, whereas the method these researchers have come up with is
stone cold dead, 100 percent."

   Howman said the tests must still go through a scientific validation process
but are expected to be implemented "within two years."

   Asked whether they would be ready in time for the London Olympics, he said,
"It's certainly possible."

   In any case, samples will be stored so they can retested later, Howman said.

   While experts say they don't believe gene doping is being abused yet by
athletes, they suspect it's only a matter of time.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2010


                              53 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           September 4, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B 04

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: Embryonic stems cells needed

BODY:

   Re: "In defense of innocent life," Your Opinions, Sept. 1.

   Embryonic stem cell research is crucial to the development of cures to
many-life threatening andd debilitating diseases. In our case, the ban on this
valuable research has prevented gene therapy trials to treat my 13 year old
daughter who has a terminal an incurable genetic brain disease.

   My daughter, Lisette Guth, has Canavan disease. She received gene therapy at
age 18 months. Shortly thereafter, the ban prevented further treatment and
research, and she has lost abilities such as sight, hearing, the ability to hold
her head up and other neurological functions. My daughter remains infantile with
no treatment options due to a ban on embryonic stem cell research that was put
into place by ignorant politicians without regard the medical necessity of these
treatments.

   There are indeed adult stem cells used for some conditions, but these adult
cells do not have the unique regenerative abilities of embryonic cells, and they
are insufficient for the majority of uses. To divert funds away from the
development of embryonic stem cells is a sad victory of politics over science.

   Desiree Loeb-Guth, R.N., M.P.H.

   New Orleans

NOTES: Letters

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2010


                              54 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           September 2, 2010 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Q&A: DR. LESLIE W. MILLER; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 904 words

HEADLINE: MATTERS OF THE HEART

BYLINE: IRENE MAHER, HEALTH WRITER

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   Dr. Leslie W. Miller hasn't yet started his new job at USF Health. But his
vision already is clear: turning Tampa into a major destination for patients
seeking the latest procedures, drugs and devices to treat damaged hearts. - "I
don't dream small," says Miller, who will lead a new, expanded department of
cardiovascular sciences at USF Health. "I really want to see this as the
dominant institution in the state with niches where we're a national leader."

   Miller, 62, comes to USF from Washington Hospital Center and Georgetown
University School of Medicine in Washington, D.C.

   A researcher and clinician for 28 years, Miller specializes in the treatment
of heart failure and the use of ventricular assist devices - mechanical heart
pumps known as VADs - in heart transplant patients. At USF, Miller hopes to move
cardiac research forward at a rapid clip, particularly in the use of stem cells
to regrow damaged tissue, and personalized medicine based on a patient's gene
profile.

   "Heart disease is still the No. 1 killer of Americans,'' he said in an
interview at USF on Monday. "By age 65, 10 percent of the population is
afflicted with heart failure. We're going to take a very aggressive tack to have
these new therapies ready for patients in a very short period of time.''

   Miller's first day on the job is Sept. 15, but while in Tampa this week for
meetings, he sat down with the Times to discuss his goals for the program he'll
oversee and how it will benefit patients in the Tampa Bay area and beyond.

   How will cardiac care at USF Health, Tampa General Hospital (USF's primary
teaching affiliate) and in the Tampa Bay area change with your arrival?

   To be sure, I'm joining a team. And I think it's going to be an amazing fit
with all that's already going on here and the talented people who are here. My
focus is going to be new research, new therapies. What will that mean to the
people of Tampa Bay? It will start with conferences and educational
opportunities for medical professionals; health fairs, lectures and events for
the general public; training the best and the brightest in medicine to increase
the quality of health care in the community. I plan to spend time each week
visiting community cardiologists, seeing their most difficult heart failure
patients and letting them know what USF has to offer. One of the new things that
will be coming here is the Regenerative Medicine Institute. It really is part of
what brought me here. Using stem cells to repair the heart - I'm really
interested in putting them in the patient to regain heart function.

   You'll be working with USF's Paul Sanberg, who has done a lot of research
using stem cells for brain repair.

   Yes, we really hit it off. His work with umbilical cord cells is very
provocative because they don't require an embryo. Those umbilical cord cells
have not been used in patients with heart failure. That's the cell I want to try
to go after early on and try and put those in heart failure patients who are
candidates for ventricular assist devices. At the time you put in the VAD, the
chest is open, it takes us about five minutes to inject the stem cells. Then,
when the donor heart is found we'll have the benefit of studying the heart we
treated to find out how the stem cells reacted, what dose is most effective,
what are the side effects. We've never been able to take the entire heart out of
a patient and study it in total. So it will markedly advance the research.

   How far away is that from happening here?

   That will happen within the year, I hope. There will be a trial here with
stem cells within the next six months, I'm pretty comfortable with that. Will it
meet the potential that everybody hopes for? That we can use stem cells in
diabetes and Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's and really have local tissue
regenerate? We think that the data thus far suggests that it's possible. And we
will have a whole institute to try to understand how we get there. That's the
goal.

   What else can we expect to see?

   Personalized medicine. We can now understand racial differences, gender
differences, age differences and how you're likely to respond to heart failure
medications. So we'll have your genomic profile and say, "Okay, you have this
alteration, you probably wouldn't respond to that drug, you may respond to this
drug.'' Or the ultimate is to be able to tell you, "You have a predisposition to
diabetes or heart disease and we can decide how to intervene on that early.''

   Sum it all up.

   We'll have stem cell therapy, gene therapy, new drug therapies and other
research drugs, four kinds of ventricular assist devices, we have a spectacular
heart transplant program. So I don't think you can go anywhere in the country
and get something that isn't going to be offered here. That's my real goal.

   Irene Maher can be reached at imaher@sptimes.com

   * * *

   At a glance

   Dr. Leslie W. Miller

   Training: University of Missouri School of Medicine; resident, Washington
University and Barnes Hospital; cardiology fellow, Peter Bent Brigham Hospital,
Boston.

   Previous posts: chief of integrated cardiology programs, Washington Hospital
Center and Georgetown University School of Medicine; Walters Chair in
Cardiovascular Medicine at Georgetown University; director of heart
failure/transplant and VAD program, Washington Hospital Center.

   Title at USF: director/CEO of the University of South Florida Cardiovascular
Clinical and Research Integrated Strategic Program.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - WILLIE J. ALLEN JR. - Times: Dr. Leslie W. Miller, who takes
over as director of the University of South Florida Cardiovascular Clinical and
Research Integrated Strategic Program, wants to focus on research and new
therapies, including stem cells.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2010


                              55 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 30, 2010 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; National; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: With first stem cell tests on horizon, even backers are concerned;
Some fear setback could devastate the nascent field

BYLINE: By Rob Stein, Washington Post

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Even as supporters of human embryonic stem cell research are
reeling from last week's sudden cutoff of federal funding, another portentous
landmark is quietly approaching: the world's first attempt to carefully test the
cells in people.

   Scientists are poised to inject cells created from embryonic stem cells into
some patients with a progressive form of blindness and others with devastating
spinal cord injuries. That is a welcome step for researchers eager to move from
the laboratory to the clinic and for patients hoping for cures.

   But beyond being loathsome to those with moral objections to any research
using cells from human embryos, the tests are worrying many proponents: Some
argue that the experiments are premature, others question whether they are
ethical, and many fear that the trials risk disaster for the field if anything
goes awry.

   ``We desperately need to know how these cells are going to perform in the
human setting,'' said John Gearhart, a stem cell pioneer at the University of
Pennsylvania. ``But are we transplanting cells that are going to cause tumors?
Will they stay where you put them and do what you want them to do?''

   Supporters of these privately funded, government-sanctioned tests, including
patients' advocates, bioethicists, and officials at the companies sponsoring
them, are confident the research has been exhaustively vetted. The Food and Drug
Administration has demanded extensive experiments in the laboratory and on
animals to provide evidence that the cells are safe enough to test in people and
hold great promise.

   ``We're very optimistic,'' said Thomas Okarma, president and chief executive
of Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which after years of delay received a
green light in July from the FDA to study patients partially paralyzed by spinal
cord injuries. ``If we're right, we'll revolutionize the treatment of many
chronic diseases.''

   But some researchers fear that the stakes jumped even higher with the federal
judge's blocking of federal funding. If patients are hurt by the cells - or even
if there's no hint the cells help - that could be a devastating blow just as
scientists are scrambling for funding from private foundations and benefactors.

   They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene therapy
experiment set that once highly touted field back years.

   ``There's a lot of angst around these trials,'' said Evan Snyder, director of
the stem cell program at the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute in San
Diego. ``There's going to be this perception that if the cells do not perform
well, the entire field will be illegitimate.''

   Most of the apprehension focuses on the Geron trial. Safety worries - most
prominently fears that the cells could cause tumors - prompted the FDA to
repeatedly demand additional data from Geron, including most recently assurance
that cysts that developed in mice injected with the cells posed no threat.

   While Geron eventually hopes to test the cells on many patients, the first
trial will involve 10 people partially paralyzed by a spinal cord injury in the
previous one to two weeks. Surgeons will inject the first patient with about 2
million ``oligodendrocyte progenitor cells,'' created from embryonic stem cells,
in the hopes the cells will form a restorative coating around the damaged spinal
cord. In tests in hundreds of rats, partly paralyzed animals walked.

   The trial is designed primarily to ensure the cells are safe. But researchers
will look for signs that the therapy restores sensation or enables patients to
regain movement.

   Officials at Advanced Cell Technology of Menlo Park, Calif., are hoping for
the FDA's go-ahead to start, possibly even sooner, injecting 50,000 to 200,000
cells into the eyes of 12 patients suffering from Stargardt's macular dystrophy.

   Retinal pigmented epithelial cells, also made from human embryonic stem
cells, should replace those ravaged by the progressive loss of eyesight, usually
beginning in childhood. Studies in rats found the cells helped prevent further
vision loss and even restored some sight.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2010


                              56 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             August 30, 2010 Monday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 504 words

HEADLINE: FIRST HUMAN TESTS ON STEM CELLS ARE NEAR

BYLINE: Rob Stein, The Washington Post\

BODY:

   Even as supporters of human embryonic stem cell research are reeling from
last week's sudden cutoff of federal funding, another portentous landmark is
quietly approaching: the world's first attempt to carefully test the cells in
people.

   Scientists are poised to inject cells created from embryonic stem cells into
some patients with a progressive form of blindness and others with devastating
spinal cord injuries. That's a welcome step for researchers eager to move from
the laboratory to the clinic and for patients hoping for cures.

   But beyond being loathsome to those with moral objections to any research
using cells from human embryos, the tests are worrying many proponents: Some
argue that the experiments are premature, others question whether they are
ethical, and many fear that the trials risk disaster for the field if anything
goes awry.

   "We desperately need to know how these cells are going to perform in the
human setting," said John Gearhart, a stem cell pioneer at the University of
Pennsylvania. "But are we transplanting cells that are going to cause tumors?
Will they will stay where you put them and do what you want them to do?"

   Supporters of these privately funded, government-sanctioned tests, including
patients' advocates, bioethicists and officials at the companies sponsoring
them, are confident the research has been exhaustively vetted. The Food and Drug
Administration has demanded extensive experiments in the laboratory and on
animals to provide evidence that the cells are safe enough to test in people and
hold great promise.

   "We're very optimistic," said Thomas Okarma, president and chief executive of
Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which after years of delay received a green
light in July from the FDA to study patients partially paralyzed by spinal cord
injuries. "If we're right, we'll revolutionize the treatment of many chronic
diseases."

   But some researchers fear that the stakes jumped even higher with the federal
judge's blocking federal funding. If patients are hurt by the cells -- or even
if there's no hint the cells help -- that could be a devastating blow just as
scientists are scrambling for funding from private foundations and benefactors.
They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene therapy
experiment set that once highly touted field back years.

   "There's a lot of angst around these trials," said Evan Snyder, director of
the stem cell program at the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute in San
Diego. "There's going to be this perception that if the cells do not perform
well, the entire field will be illegitimate."

   Most of the apprehension focuses on the Geron trial. Safety worries -- most
prominently fears that the cells could cause tumors -- prompted the FDA to
repeatedly demand additional data from Geron, including most recently assurance
cysts that developed in mice injected with the cells posed no threat.

   "We jumped through a lot of hoops to convince a lot of audiences," Mr. Okarma
said. "No one wants another Jesse Gelsinger."

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2010


                              57 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 30, 2010 Monday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 007

LENGTH: 702 words

BYLINE: STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   CALIFORNIA

   New anxieties

   for stem cell

   researchers

   Even as supporters of human embryonic stem cell research are reeling from
last week's sudden cutoff of federal funding, another portentous landmark is
quietly approaching: the world's first attempt to carefully test the cells in
people.

   Scientists are poised to inject cells created from embryonic stem cells into
some patients with a progressive form of blindness and others with devastating
spinal cord injuries. That's a welcome step for researchers eager to move from
the laboratory to the clinic and for patients hoping for cures.

   But beyond being loathsome to those with moral objections to any research
using cells from human embryos, the tests are worrying many proponents. Some
argue that the experiments are premature, others question whether they are
ethical and many fear that the trials risk disaster for the field if anything
goes awry.

   "We desperately need to know how these cells are going to perform in the
human setting," said John Gearhart, a stem cell pioneer at the University of
Pennsylvania. "But are we transplanting cells that are going to cause tumors?
Will they stay where you put them and do what you want them to do?"

   Supporters of these privately funded, government-sanctioned tests, including
patients' advocates, bioethicists and officials at the companies sponsoring
them, are confident the research has been exhaustively vetted. The Food and Drug
Administration has demanded extensive experiments in the laboratory and on
animals to provide evidence that the cells are safe enough to test in people and
hold great promise.

   But some researchers fear that the stakes jumped even higher with the federal
judge's blocking federal funding. If patients are hurt by the cells -- or even
if there's no hint the cells help -- that could be a devastating blow just as
scientists are scrambling for funding from private foundations and benefactors.
They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene-therapy
experiment set that once highly touted field back years.

   ARIZONA

   Police say gunman

   kills five, plus self

   A gunman entered a western Arizona home and began shooting, killing the
mother of his two children and four others before fleeing with his two children,
police said.

   Police say the alleged gunman, identified as 26-year-old Brian Diez, was
found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot wound early yesterday at a California
home. The two young children, ages 4 and 1, were safe at the home with
relatives, Lake Havasu City police said. Police said Diez and the children's
mother had been estranged.

   Police dispatchers received an emergency call at 11:57 p.m. Saturday from a
woman who said an intruder had come into a home and shot several people.

   Officers responding to the scene said they found four people dead and two
others wounded. One of the injured died early yesterday at a local hospital,
while the other person was being treated at a Las Vegas hospital, police said.

   CALIFORNIA

   4.1 earthquake hits

   near Mexican border

   A 4.1 earthquake struck the California border region yesterday -- the latest
of thousands of aftershocks from the Easter Sunday Mexicali temblor.

   The latest quake occurred at 8:53 a.m. about 33 miles from Mexicali, Mexico.
There were no immediate reports of injuries or damage.

   The region has seen a series of aftershocks and triggered quakes since the
massive 7.2 temblor, which was the largest in the region in nearly 20 years.

   Earthquake experts have said that temblor has resulted in a more seismically
active period in California compared with the last few years.

   LOUISIANA

   Mistaken identity leads

   to minister's arrest

   A series of unfortunate coincidences led to a case of mistaken identity that
put a Louisiana minister behind bars for nearly eight hours. Gregory Jones,
pastor at Eden Worship Center, was pulled over for speeding and arrested as a
man wanted for violating parole in Texas.

   The minister not only had the same name as the wanted man, but the same birth
date -- and a Texas driver's license. So he wound up handcuffed and taken to a
Shreveport jail. Jones says deputies treated him well. Caddo Parish Lt. Don
Gibbs says the department is sorry for Jones' inconvenience.

   Star-Ledger wire services

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2010


                              58 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             August 30, 2010 Monday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A05

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

LENGTH: 2403 words

HEADLINE: Human tests set for stem cells

BYLINE: Rob Stein

BODY:

   Even as supporters of human embryonic stem cell research are reeling from
last week's sudden cutoff of federal funding, another portentous landmark is
quietly approaching: the world's first attempt to carefully test the cells in
people.

   Scientists are poised to inject cells created from embryonic stem cells into
some patients with a progressive form of blindness and others with devastating
spinal cord injuries. That's a welcome step for researchers eager to move from
the laboratory to the clinic and for patients hoping for cures . But beyond
being loathsome to those with moral objections to any research using cells from
human embryos, the tests are worrying many proponents: Some argue that the
experiments are premature, others question whether they are ethical, and many
fear that the trials risk disaster for the field if anything goes awry.

   "We desperately need to know how these cells are going to perform in the
human setting," said John Gearhart, a stem cell pioneer at the University of
Pennsylvania. "But are we transplanting cells that are going to cause tumors?
Will they will stay where you put them and do what you want them to do?"

   Supporters of these privately funded, government-sanctioned tests, including
patients' advocates, bioethicists and officials at the companies sponsoring
them, are confident the research has been exhaustively vetted. The Food and Drug
Administration has demanded extensive experiments in the laboratory and on
animals to provide evidence that the cells are safe enough to test in people and
hold great promise.

   "We're very optimistic," said Thomas B. Okarma, president and chief executive
of Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which after years of delay received a
green light in July from the FDA to study patients partially paralyzed by spinal
cord injuries. "If we're right, we'll revolutionize the treatment of many
chronic diseases."

   But some researchers fear that the stakes jumped even higher with the federal
judge's decision  blocking federal funding. If patients are hurt by the cells -
or even if there's no hint the cells help - that could be a devastating blow
just as scientists are scrambling for funding from private foundations and
benefactors. They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene
therapy experiment set that once highly touted field back years.

   "There's a lot of angst around these trials," said Evan Y. Snyder, director
of the stem cell program at the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute in
San Diego. "There's going to be this perception that if the cells do not perform
well, the entire field will be illegitimate."

   Most of the apprehension focuses on the Geron trial. Safety worries - most
prominently fears that the cells could cause tumors - prompted the FDA to
repeatedly demand additional data from Geron, including most recently assurance
cysts that developed in mice injected with the cells posed no threat.

   "We jumped through a lot of hoops to convince a lot of audiences," Okarma
said. "No one wants another Jesse Gelsinger."

   While Geron eventually hopes to test the cells on many patients the first
trial will involve 10 partially paralyzed by a spinal cord injury in the
previous one to two weeks. Surgeons will inject the first patient with about 2
million "oligodendrocyte progenitor cells," created from embryonic stem cells,
in the hopes the cells will form a restorative coating around the damaged spinal
cord. In tests in hundreds of rats, partially paralyzed animals walked.

   The trial is designed primarily to ensure the cells are safe. But researchers
will look for signs that the therapy restores sensation or enables patients to
regain movement.

   "If we were able to do that, it would be a phenomenally positive result,"
Okarma said.

   Spinal cord injuries, however, are highly unpredictable and in many ways
mysterious. Patients can often improve on their own, for example, which will
make it difficult to evaluate whether the cells had any effect. Some wonder
whether trauma victims who have so recently suffered a life-altering injury will
agree to the experiments out of desperation without fully grasping the risks.

   "Think of it this way: You are a healthy young person, you have had a
terrible accident, you wake up in the hospital and are told that you will never
walk again, that you will paralyzed for the rest of your life," Stanford
University bioethicist David Magnus wrote in an e-mail. "Then you are told that
there is a Phase I stem cell clinical trial that you are eligible for, but a
decision needs to be made quickly. It would be hard to imagine that would be the
optimal scenario from the point of view of informed consent."

   In the meantime, officials at Advanced Cell Technology of Menlo Park, Calif.,
are hoping for the FDA's go-ahead to start possibly even sooner injecting 50,000
to 200,000 cells into the eyes of 12 patients suffering from Stargardt's macular
dystrophy. Retinal pigmented epithelial cells, also made from human embryonic
stem cells, should replace those ravaged by the progressive loss of eyesight,
usually beginning in childhood. Studies in rats found the cells helped prevent
further vision loss and even restored some sight. The company hopes the approach
will work for many conditions, including the leading cause of blindness among
the elderly.

   "These diseases are devastating," said Robert Lanza, Advanced Cell
Technology's chief scientific officer. "If we could make a difference, it would
be profoundly important."

   Christopher Goodrich, 55, of Portland, Ore., whose eyes started failing at
age 7 and who now sees the world as if looking through a dense fog, hopes he
will be one of the first patients.

   "The thought of being able to regain some of my vision - to be able to go
back to work, to ride a bike, to even be able to see the moon - would just be so
awesome," Goodrich said.

   But safety worries linger for both studies. Patients risk making their
conditions worse - perhaps becoming fully paralyzed or losing whatever vision
they have left.

   "It's one thing if you are doing a treatment for a disease where the patient
is going to die without treatment," Magnus said. "It's another if they could
have a relatively good functioning life."

   Okarma and Lanza said they are confident the therapies are safe. Only
patients 18 or older will be initially considered for the eye study, and the
treatment will only be administered to one eye to ensure the patients retain at
least some vision in a worst-case scenario, Lanza said. Even if there are
problems with the victims of spinal cord damage, Geron's research shows the
cells do not leave the site of the injury, indicating patients would not suffer
any ill effects, Okarma said. Extra precautions, including assigning each
subject an independent advocate, will guarantee that volunteers fully understand
their decisions, he said.

   "If human embryonic stem cells are going to be useful in treating humans,
someone has to be the first one to try it," said Hank Greely, a Stanford lawyer
and bioethicist. "They need to have their fingers crossed and hold their lucky
rabbit's foot and be really careful in their preparations, because before you
try something in humans you never know what's going to happen."

   Even as supporters of human embryonic stem cell research are reeling from
last week's sudden cutoff of federal funding, another portentous landmark is
quietly approaching: the world's first attempt to carefully test the cells in
people.

   Scientists are poised to inject cells created from embryonic stem cells into
some patients with a progressive form of blindness and others with devastating
spinal cord injuries. That's a welcome step for researchers eager to move from
the laboratory to the clinic and for patients hoping for cures . But beyond
being loathsome to those with moral objections to any research using cells from
human embryos, the tests are worrying many proponents: Some argue that the
experiments are premature, others question whether they are ethical, and many
fear that the trials risk disaster for the field if anything goes awry.

   "We desperately need to know how these cells are going to perform in the
human setting," said John Gearhart, a stem cell pioneer at the University of
Pennsylvania. "But are we transplanting cells that are going to cause tumors?
Will they will stay where you put them and do what you want them to do?"

   Supporters of these privately funded, government-sanctioned tests, including
patients' advocates, bioethicists and officials at the companies sponsoring
them, are confident that research has been exhaustively vetted. The Food and
Drug Administration has demanded extensive experiments in the laboratory and on
animals to provide evidence that the cells are safe enough to test in people and
hold great promise.

   "We're very optimistic," said Thomas B. Okarma, president and chief executive
of Geron Corp. of Menlo Park, Calif., which after years of delay received a
green light in July from the FDA to study patients partially paralyzed by spinal
cord injuries. "If we're right, we'll revolutionize the treatment of many
chronic diseases."

   But some researchers fear that the stakes jumped even higher with the federal
judge's decision  blocking federal funding. If patients are hurt by the cells -
or even if there's no hint the cells help - that could be a devastating blow
just as scientists are scrambling for funding from private foundations and
benefactors. They cite the case of Jesse Gelsinger, whose 1999 death from a gene
therapy experiment set that once highly touted field back years.

   "There's a lot of angst around these trials," said Evan Y. Snyder, director
of the stem cell program at the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute in
San Diego. "There's going to be this perception that if the cells do not perform
well, the entire field will be illegitimate."

   Most of the apprehension focuses on the Geron trial. Safety worries - most
prominently fears that the cells could cause tumors - prompted the FDA to
repeatedly demand additional data from Geron, including most recently assurance
cysts that developed in mice injected with the cells posed no threat.

   "We jumped through a lot of hoops to convince a lot of audiences," Okarma
said. No one wants another Jesse Gelsinger."

   While Geron eventually hopes to test the cells on many patients the first
trial will involve 10 partially paralyzed by a spinal cord injury in the
previous one to two weeks. Surgeons will inject the first patient with about 2
million "oligodendrocyte progenitor cells," created from embryonic stem cells,
in the hopes the cells will form a restorative coating around the damaged spinal
cord. In tests in hundreds of rats, partially paralyzed animals walked.

   The trial is designed primarily to ensure the cells are safe. But researchers
will look for signs that the therapy restores sensation or enables patients to
regain movement.

   "If we were able to do that, it would be a phenomenally positive result,"
Okarma said.

   Spinal cord injuries, however, are highly unpredictable and in many ways
mysterious. Patients can often improve on their own, for example, which will
make it difficult to evaluate whether the cells had any effect. Some wonder
whether trauma victims who have so recently suffered a life-altering injury will
agree to the experiments out of desperation without fully grasping the risks.

   "Think of it this way: You are a healthy young person, you have had a
terrible accident, you wake up in the hospital and are told that you will never
walk again, that you will paralyzed for the rest of your life," Stanford
University bioethicist David Magnus wrote in an e-mail. "Then you are told that
there is a Phase I stem cell clinical trial that you are eligible for, but a
decision needs to be made quickly. It would be hard to imagine that would be the
optimal scenario from the point of view of informed consent."

   In the meantime, officials at Advanced Cell Technology of Menlo Park, Calif.,
are hoping for the FDA's go-ahead to start possibly even sooner injecting 50,000
to 200,000 cells into the eyes of 12 patients suffering from Stargardt's macular
dystrophy. Retinal pigmented epithelial cells, also made from human embryonic
stem cells, should replace those ravaged by the progressive loss of eyesight,
usually beginning in childhood. Studies in rats found the cells helped prevent
further vision loss and even restored some sight. The company hopes the approach
will work for many conditions, including the leading cause of blindness among
the elderly.

   "These diseases are devastating," said Robert Lanza, Advanced Cell
Technology's chief scientific officer. "If we could make difference, it would be
profoundly important."

   Christopher Goodrich, 55, of Portland, Ore., whose eyes started failing at
age 7 and now sees the world as if looking through a dense fog, hopes he might
be one of the first patients.

   "The thought of being able to regain some of my vision - to be able to go
back to work, to ride a bike, to even be able to see the moon - would just be so
awesome," Goodrich said.

   But safety worries linger for both studies. Patients risk making their
conditions worse - perhaps becoming fully paralyzed or losing whatever vision
they have left.

   "It's one thing if you are doing a treatment for a disease where the patient
is going to die without treatment," Magnus said. "It's another if they could
have a relatively good functioning life."

   Okarma and Lanza said they are confident the therapies are safe. Only
patients 18 or older will be initially considered for the eye study, and the
treatment will only be administered to one eye to ensure the patients retain at
least some vision in a worst-case scenario, Lanza said. Even if there are
problems with the spinal cord damage victims, Geron's research shows the cells
do not leave the site of the injury, indicating patients would not suffer any
ill effects, Okarma said. Extra precautions, including assigning each subject an
independent advocate, will guarantee that volunteers fully understand their
decisions, he said.

   "If human embryonic stem cells are going to be useful in treating humans,
someone has to be the first one to try it," said Hank Greely, a Stanford lawyer
and bioethicist. "They need to have their fingers crossed and hold their lucky
rabbit's foot and be really careful in their preparations, because before you
try something in humans you never know what's going to happen."

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2010


                              59 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 27, 2010 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 965 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme bouncing back after shortage;
As Sanofi watches, drug output rising

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp., moving to reassure customers and fend off rising competition,
has sent letters notifying thousands of US patients and their doctors that it
plans to double shipments next month of the two drugs it has been rationing for
the past year.

   The ramp-up of enzyme replacement treatments for Gaucher and Fabry diseases,
a pair of rare genetic disorders, comes as the Cambridge biotechnology company
continues to haggle with French drug maker Sanofi-Aventis SA over Sanofi's
proposal to acquire Genzyme.

   A key factor for Sanofi will be assessing how quickly Genzyme can recover
from production problems at its Boston plant. But the target company is
reportedly holding out for a higher threshold offer before letting Sanofi
conduct due diligence at its Allston Landing site.

   Genzyme also faces intensified competition from Shire PLC, a British
biopharmaceutical company marketing a rival to Cerezyme, Genzyme's drug for
Gaucher disease. Shire said yesterday that its drug, called Vpriv, won approval
from the European Commission to be sold in 30 European countries. Vpriv was
approved by the Food and Drug Administration in February for sale in the United
States.

   Patients taking Cerezyme have been receiving only one dose a month since
Februarybut will receive two doses in September, according to a let ter Genzyme
sent to patients and doctors this week. That is effectively the normal dosage
they received before Genzyme began its rationing program.

   Those taking Fabrazyme, a drug for Fabry disease, were told they will get one
dose in September and one in October. They had been receiving just a single dose
every two months, roughly 20 to 30 percent of the normal dosage, since last
summer. The company could not say when it will resume shipping the normal
twice-a-month doses of Fabrazyme.

   Gaucher and Fabry each afflict fewer than 10,000 people worldwide. Both cause
waste to build up in the body, shutting down vital organs and weakening bones.
Treatments can cost up to $300,000 a year per patient.

   The increased shipments will mark a milestone in Genzyme's efforts to move
beyond the production woes that have dogged its Allston Landing plant for more
than a year, said John P. Butler, president of the Genzyme personalized genetics
health division, its largest unit. The increased shipments disclosed yesterday
are consistent with what company executives projected in a conference call with
Wall Street stock analysts last month.

   ``This is an important milestone in executing on the things we said we were
going to do,'' Butler said. ``The significance for the patients is really hard
to describe. These are patients who have been extremely loyal to Genzyme and
have been wanting to get up to full dose.''

   Capitalizing on Genzyme's supply interruptions, Shire has built up a base of
850 customers for Vpriv, more than a third of them in the United States. Many
are former Cerezyme patients worried or angry over rationing. American and
European regulators accelerated Shire's approval process and allowed it to treat
more patients in clinical trials because of Genzyme's shortages.

   Shire can treat up to 1,000 patients worldwide from the Vpriv currently
produced at its Cambridge plant, said Sylvie Grégoire, president of Shire's
human genetic therapies division in Lexington.

   ``We are rapidly approaching that number,'' Grégoire said. ``The fact that
there wasn't enough Cerezyme around to cover the Gaucher community was one
reason the uptake was so rapid.''

   Shares of Genzyme and Shire both tumbled on the Nasdaq Stock Market
yesterday. Genzyme stock shed 74 cents, falling 1.1 percent to $66.84. Shire
fell 95 cents, or 1.5 percent, to $64.52.

   Kevin R. Kline, a West Orange, N.J., resident who had been taking Genzyme's
drug for Gaucher for more than 20 years, said he switched to Shire's drug last
month after his wife gave birth to their first child.

   ``I no longer could think solely of myself and needed something with more
regularity,'' Kline said.

   Now that Genzyme is resuming shipments of full doses, Kline said he would
consider returning to Cerezyme if the company can show it has overcome its
supply constraints.

   ``I want to see how they progress,'' he said. ``I don't want to switch and
then yo-yo back.''

   The supply interruptions were caused by a virus discovered in the Allston
building last summer. Genzyme had to suspend production and decontaminate the
site before resuming shipments.

   Butler said he expects Gaucher patients worldwide will be on full doses this
fall, though this week's letter went out only to US patients. But the company
will keep working with limited inventory, meaning that any production disruption
in Allston over the coming year could derail its recovery, he cautioned.

   Genzyme is completing construction of a Framingham plant that will boost its
capacity to make Cerezyme and Fabrazyme. If the plant gets FDA approval, the
company has said it will open late next year. That will allow for a ``safety
stock'' of three to six months worth of Cerezyme, said Butler. It will also help
the company recover from its Fabrazyme shortage, he said.

   Shire, meanwhile, is building its own plant in Lexington to expand its
capacity to produce Vpriv. If the plant is approved, company officials expect it
can open by early 2012.

   Unlike the Genzyme drug, produced from genetically modified hamster ovaries,
Shire's is derived from a human cell line. A third competitor, Protalix
Biotherapeutics Inc. from Israel, is in clinical trials with a Gaucher disease
treatment derived from genetically engineered carrot cells.

   Butler would not disclose Genzyme's estimates of how many patients have
defected to rival treatments since Genzyme's rationing began.

   ``There's always the opportunity to get patients back,'' he said.

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2010


                              60 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Plain Dealer (Cleveland, OH)

                            August 24, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 859 words

HEADLINE: Pancreatic cancer vaccine shows promise in trial

BYLINE: Angela Townsend, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   CORRECTIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS

   The following published correction appeared on September 2, 2010:

   A story that ran Aug. 24 on the development of a vaccine to help treat
patients with pancreatic cancer incorrectly stated the number of people
currently enrolled in the vaccine's Phase 3 national clinical trial. According
to a public relations associate working with NewLink Genetics Corp., the company
does not release those figures.

   In June, Dr. Jeffrey Hardacre presented preliminary data on a Phase 2 study
for a therapeutic vaccine for pancreatic cancer. The vaccine is designed to help
fight cancer once a patient begins treatment, starting with surgery.

   Feedback at the annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical
Oncologists was encouraging for Hardacre, a surgeon at University Hospitals Case
Medical Center, who has been working with the vaccine since the Phase 2 clinical
trial began in late 2008.

   "When you compare the data to historical [survival rate] data, it suggests
that the vaccine might be something real and have some positive effects for
patients," he said of the study data, collected from UH and sites across the
country.

   The therapeutic vaccine, developed by Iowa-based NewLink Genetics Corp., is
designed to strengthen and stimulate a patient's immune system so it can more
effectively destroy cancer cells. The overall hope is that the vaccine can one
day improve a patient's long-term survival.

   The Phase 2 study, which is ongoing but not enrolling new patients, tested
the vaccine in 70 patients (including 14 at UH) at 18 different sites.

   "We think the data is extremely encouraging, and so do the physicians," said
Gordon Link, NewLink's chief financial officer. "We hope we can improve overall
survival long term."

   Because the trial is seeking sites where surgeons have done a lot of
surgeries, Phase 3 is concentrated in a relatively small number of hospitals -
50 - and may take up to three years to hit the target enrollment of 700
patients, Link said.

   (SEE CORRECTION NOTE)

   More than 60 patients nationally already have enrolled, including three at
UH. Enrollment is ongoing. "We're moving as fast as we can," Link said.

   Pancreatic cancer is the fourth-leading cause of cancer death in the United
States. Less than 5 percent of people diagnosed with pancreatic cancer survive
five years. Because it is so deadly and strikes so quickly, success is measured
in months rather than in long-term survival.

   "The one-year survival for patients who [eventually] died or reached the
one-year follow-up was 96 percent," Hardacre said of the Phase 2 results.
"Historically it has been at 70 percent.

   "We can't really comment further on that because the data hasn't matured
enough. But it's promising enough to have made us [start] a Phase 3 trial," he
said.

   Researchers and physicians have come a long way since the start of the study
in fall 2008 at eight sites around the country.

   UH has averaged about one new patient per month since joining the Phase 2
trial.

   In the Phase 2 trial, everyone received the vaccine, which was given within
six weeks of surgery. In Phase 3, only half of patients get the vaccine added to
the standard treatment therapy, within eight weeks of surgery.

   Another significant difference: In order to expand the patient population as
much as possible, physicians are allowed to choose whether the standard therapy
they give their Phase 3 patients is chemotherapy alone or a combination of chemo
and radiation. The latter was the sole therapy option in the Phase 2 trial.

   Carolyn Holloway of suburban Akron received her last vaccine shot earlier
this summer as part of the Phase 2 study at UH.

   Holloway, 71, was diagnosed with Stage 3 pancreatic cancer in September 2009.

   An endoscopy found that a bile duct in Holloway's liver was clogged, which
explained the jaundice that caused her to go to the doctor in the first place.
The procedure also found signs of pancreatic cancer.

   "I said, 'Well, that's it,' " Holloway said, recalling her first conversation
with Hardacre. "He said, 'No! What do you mean, "That's it"? There isn't any
reason why we can't beat this.' "

   In November, following surgery in which 40 percent of her pancreas and some
of her lymph nodes were removed (nearly half of them were malignant), Holloway
joined the clinical trial.

   "The vaccine is just part of what [I] had to do," said Holloway, whose energy
level is good enough for her to chauffeur her 6-year-old granddaughter to the
swimming pool and also keep an eye on a newly adopted cat and dog.

   Holloway will get the results of her latest CT scan this week.

   "We keep hoping that the CT scans are clear," she said.

   The average survival for someone who undergoes surgery for pancreatic cancer
- the best long-term option - is between 1½ and two years, Hardacre said.

   "If you can prolong survival by three months . . . three months out of two
years, that's more than a 10 percent increase," he said.

   "A number of centers are working very hard to try to find better treatments
for pancreatic cancer," he said. "The only way we're going to be able to do that
is with clinical trials."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: atownsend@plaind.com, 216-999-3894

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2010


                              61 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 22, 2010 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; bad desk code; Science Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1256 words

HEADLINE: Anti-HIV cells show promise

BYLINE: Rachel Bernstein

BODY:

   Clad in a yellow gown, blue foot covers, hairnet, face mask and latex gloves,
Paula Cannon pushed open the door to the animal room. "I hate this smell," she
said, wrinkling her nose.

   The stink came from scores of little white mice scurrying about in cages.
Some of the cages were marked with red biohazard signs, indicating mice that had
been injected with HIV.

   Yet, in some of the animals -- ones with a small genetic change -- the virus
never took hold.

   Like mouse, like man? Maybe so.

   In early 2007, a patient in Berlin needed a bone marrow transplant to treat
his leukemia. He was also HIV positive, and his doctor had an idea: Why not use
the marrow from one of the rare individuals who are naturally resistant to HIV
and try to eradicate both diseases at once?

   It worked. Sixty-one days after the patient's transplant, his virus levels
were undetectable, and they've stayed that way.

   Since news of the man's cure broke, HIV patients have been telephoning
doctors to ask for bone marrow transplants. But it's not that simple. The
treatment is too risky and impractical for widespread use.

   "A bone marrow transplant -- it's a horrible process you would not wish on
your worst enemy unless they needed one to save their life," said Cannon, a
biology professor at USC's Keck School of Medicine. There are grueling
treatments to prepare a patient for transplant; the danger of rejecting the
marrow; and the risk of graft-versus-host disease, wherein the marrow attacks
the patient.

   And that's assuming the patient can find a matching donor -- a difficult
proposition in itself -- with the right HIV-resistant genetic constitution,
which is present in only about 1% of the white population.

   But there could be another way.

   Instead of sifting through the sands for a rare donor and then subjecting a
patient to the dangers of a bone marrow transplant, Cannon and her colleague
Philip Gregory, chief scientific officer at the Richmond, Calif.-based biotech
company Sangamo BioSciences, began to think: They could use gene therapy
instead, to tweak a patient's own cells to resistance -- and recovery.

   The mouse "cure," they say, suggests they're on the right track.

   Now, with $14.5 million from the California Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, the San Francisco-based stem cell research-funding center created by
2004's Proposition 71, Cannon, Gregory and researchers at the City of Hope
cancer center in Duarte are working toward bringing the technique to clinical
trials within four years.

   Cannon and other HIV researchers believe that, despite cancers and deaths
associated with past gene therapy trials, it's the right way to target the
disease. They cite recent successes, including treatments that cured children
with the "bubble boy" syndrome and helped blind children regain their vision.

   "I don't think anyone would want to do gene therapy if there were an
alternative," said Caltech biologist David Baltimore, one of the many L.A.-based
researchers pursuing gene therapy strategies to prevent or cure HIV. "I think
it's absolutely necessary. Nothing else will work."

   Since AIDS emerged in the early 1980s, development of anti-HIV medications
has turned the disease from a virtual death sentence into a chronic, manageable
condition.

   But the clamor for a cure hasn't quieted.

   Vaccine trials have failed; drug-resistant strains are on the rise; and the
medications, which can have uncomfortable side effects such as fatigue, nausea
and redistribution of body fat that creates a so-called buffalo hump, cost about
$20,000 a year.

   A bone marrow transplant is about five times as expensive, but it would have
to be done only once.

   The question was, could researchers create bone marrow stem cells that --
like the marrow the Berlin patient received -- lack the gene, CCR5, that
normally lets HIV into the key immune cells it destroys?

   In 2006, Gregory asked Cannon if she was interested in testing whether a tool
his company developed, called a zinc finger nuclease, could do the trick.

   Zinc finger nucleases are genetic scissors that cut DNA at a specific site --
say, in the middle of the CCR5 gene. When the cell glues the gene back together,
it usually makes a mistake, resulting in a gene that no longer works.

   "It just jumped out at me as, 'Oh my gosh, that's actually something that
could work,' " Cannon said.

   The team spent about a year optimizing the procedure for treating delicate
stem cells with the CCR5 snippers.

   They tested the method using so-called humanized mice -- ones engineered to
have human-like immune systems -- because HIV doesn't infect normal mice. When
stem cells were treated with the molecular scissors before being injected into
mice, the resulting immune system lacked CCR5, exactly as the scientists had
hoped.

   These mice acted just like the Berlin patient -- they fought off the virus.

   Ready to make the leap from mouse to man, Gregory found a third leg for the
team: researchers at City of Hope, who had extensive bone marrow transplant
expertise.

   "They brought Paula's data to us and we said, 'Wow, this looks fantastic,' "
said Dr. John Zaia, City of Hope's deputy director for clinical research.

   Researchers there are now working toward clinical trials, optimizing every
element of the treatment for safety, effectiveness and reproducibility.

   On a wiltingly hot afternoon in July, lab manager Lucy Brown maneuvered a
computer mouse across three screens speckled with red, yellow and green dots.

   The computer was hooked to a flow cytometer -- a collection of black boxes,
green wires and silver knobs that can detect subtle differences between cells
and separate them at a rate of 50,000 per second. This is how the scientists
will separate stem cells from patients' blood once trials are underway, to be
sure that the genetic fix in the CCR5 gene was made, and kept.

   Upstairs, machines with mazes of sterile tubes and pumps stood ready to
prepare cells for CCR5-snipping. Here, the scientists will purify the bone
marrow stem cells, increasing their numbers first to 5% of total cells, up from
a measly 0.1% in the starting mixture, and then to 99%.

   At this point they can begin testing methods to clip the cells' DNA.

   When all is perfected, the scientists will have a precise recipe for
producing batches of engineered stem cells, including exactly how long the cells
should be treated, how much of each chemical needs to be added, how pure the
cells need to be, and thousands of other details.

   "We are literally writing the book on how you do this," said David DiGiusto,
director of City of Hope's bone marrow stem cell therapy research.

   To receive FDA approval for clinical trials -- a goal they hope to achieve in
three to four years -- the researchers must prove they can safely and reliably
prepare the cells. Once they get the green light, the first cases will probably
be people like the Berlin patient who need bone marrow transplants to treat
AIDS-related lymphoma.

   They'll modify the patients' cells in the stringently sterile manufacturing
lab that DiGiusto designed with details such as cove molding and seamless floors
so there are no corners or cracks to collect dust. Anyone who enters must wear a
full protective lab suit, much like the one Cannon wears in her mouse room, to
keep from contaminating the delicate cells.

   Some have advertised the effort as a quest for a cure, but Cannon doesn't
quite see it that way.

   "People say we're trying to cure HIV," she said. "I think of it more as,
we're just trying to make the body live quite happily and healthily with a small
amount of virus."

   rachel.bernstein@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NEW HOPE: HIV injected into mice at a USC lab didn't take hold
in those with a small genetic change.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Allen J. Schaben Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2010


                              62 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2010 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            August 17, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 441 words

HEADLINE: Cardiologist from Georgetown joins USF Health

BYLINE: LINDSAY PETERSON, lpeterson@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   The renowned doctor will lead the cardiovascular program.

   By LINDSAY PETERSON

   lpeterson@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA » A renowned cardiologist from Georgetown University School of Medicine
has been hired to lead an expanded department of cardiovascular sciences at the
University of South Florida.

   Leslie W. Miller said he plans to link his gene therapy research with
stemcell brain repair work by USF researcher

   and inventor Paul Sanberg to create a center for regenerative medicine at the
university some day.

   "We'd focus on how to recover impaired organ function across the body,"
Miller said. "With the team already in

   place I think we have the opportunity to create something extraordinary."

   Miller starts next month. His initial focus will be on heart treatments.

   "We hope to bring some newer therapies to the community," he said. "We
envision that we will care for any person

   with any stage or form of cardiovascular disease."

   In addition to gene therapy, Miller is known for his work on heart-assist
devices, particularly the use of continuous-

   flow heart pumps to bolster the heart function of patients waiting for
transplants.

   Miller will work with USF Health, the former USF Medical Center, which
encompasses the colleges of Public

   Health, Nursing and Medicine, and the health care delivered by its
clinicians.

   Miller's hiring demonstrates that USF Health is ready to make fundamental
changes in health care across the Tampa Bay region, said Stephen Klasko, dean of
the USF College of Medicine.

   Klasko called this the most significant hiring since he became dean of the
medical school in 2004.

   "For the first time, USF will be the epicenter of hospital transplant
research," Klasko said.

   Miller replaces Anne Curtis, who accepted a position at the University at
Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences.

   Miller has served as president of the International Society for Heart & Lung
Transplantation and the American Society of Transplant Physicians. He is widely
published and has been involved in nearly 100 clinical trials.

   He comes to USF from Georgetown and Washington Hospital Center. Before that
he was at the St. Louis University School of Medicine and the University of
Minnesota.

   Miller said he's also eager to work with Jackson Laboratories, a Mainebased
biotech firm planning a biomedical

   center in Naples in partnership with USF.

   "I think we're in a new era of science and medicine," Miller said. "I think
the university in a short time will have even

   greater national recognition."

   Reporter Lindsay Peterson can be reached at (813) 259-7834.

   Copyright © 2010, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2010


                              63 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            August 14, 2010 Saturday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B05

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: Scientist falsified dog-research data while at Penn, HHS says

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A scientist studying retinal disease in dogs falsified research data while he
was at the University of Pennsylvania, investigators said this week.

   University officials said the misconduct by Gerardo L. Paez was first
discovered by the school and then confirmed by the Office of Research Integrity
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

   A postdoctoral fellow at Penn, Paez left in 2007 and is now listed as a
faculty member of the University of Michigan-Flint. He did not return requests
for comment.

   According to a case summary from federal officials, Paez agreed to a
three-year voluntary settlement during which he will receive special supervision
if he takes part in any federally funded research.

   The Penn research involved studying genetic activity in the eyes of dogs with
a form of inherited blindness.

   The case summary said that Paez falsified data presented at academic
conferences in 2006 and 2007. He also falsely labeled files in a university
computer, it said.

   Ron Ozio, a university spokesman, said Friday that no other researchers were
involved in the misconduct.

   One of the senior faculty with whom Paez worked was Gustavo Aguirre, whose
groundbreaking work led to a gene-therapy treatment for another form of
blindness in humans. Aguirre did not return a request for comment.

   PETA, the animal welfare group, urged federal officials to order Penn to
repay funds used in the research. Justin Goodman, a PETA associate director,
criticized the Penn researchers for cutting out dogs' eyes for examination
before they were euthanized.

   "These dogs are brought into the world only to be cut up and disposed of as
laboratory equipment," he said.

   It was unclear whether the falsified research involved removing the animals'
eyes, but this practice, which takes place under anesthetic, is described in
another paper by Paez and Penn colleagues.

   In a statement, Ozio said the research followed all federal rules for the
humane treatment of lab animals: "The misconduct that occurred in this case did
not involve any issues relating to animal welfare."

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2010


                              64 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             August 13, 2010 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. FN

LENGTH: 239 words

HEADLINE: Funeral Notice ;
ROBINSON

BODY:

   Burnell Donald Robinson, native of Bertrandville, LA, departed this life on
Monday, August 9, 2010 at the age of 65. He was the son of the late Percy and
Irma LeBlanc Robinson. Beloved husband of Sharon Rogers Robinson. He was the
loving and devoted father of Kimberly, Todd, Trista (Omar) Robinson, and
Christopher. Brother of Iona (Rudolph) Evans, Dwight, and Emma Wilson. Brother
in law of Margie, Marion, and Bessie Robinson, also Roschelle Hicks, Pamela
(Rafael) Sanchez, Vicki Rogers. He was preceded in death by siblings: Percy Jr,
Melvin, Ellis Robinson Sr and Emelda Robinson Griffin. Burnell is also survived
by a host of nephews, nieces, cousins, other relatives and friends.

   Family and friends of the family are invited to attend a memorial service at
Gregg L. Mason Funeral Home, 10936 N.E. 6th Ave, Miami, FL 33161, on Saturday,
8/14/10 at 11:00am.

   In lieu of flowers, please make a donation to the Robinson Gene Therapy
Research Fund at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Division of
Cardiovascular Medicine. Donations may be sent to: UM Office of Medical
Development, Attn: Beth Goldberg, P.O. Box 016960 (R-100), Miami, Florida 33101.
Checks should be payable to: University of Miami and in the memo portion of the
check, indicate "in memory of Burnell Robinson". To make a gift over the phone
or with any questions about the fund, please contact Beth Goldberg at
305-243-3492 or egoldberg@med.miami.edu

NOTES: Deaths

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2010


                              65 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            August 12, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: The side effects of a Genzyme deal;
Already benefiting from firm's production woes, rivals foresee wider opening

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The potential buyout of Genzyme Corp., the state's largest biotechnology
company, could be a boon for a pair of foreign-based competitors that have been
aggressively marketing rival treatments to challenge Genzyme's lucrative enzyme
replacement drugs.

   Production glitches at Genzyme's plant in Boston, which forced the rationing
of treatments for two rare genetic disorders - Gaucher and Fabry diseases -
already have lifted the fortunes of Irish-based Shire PLC and Protalix
Biotherapeutics Inc. of Israel.

   In response to requests from regulators to help counter Genzyme's supply
shortage, both companies have fast-tracked their own drug development programs
to treat the conditions. And both have accelerated their outreach to patients
who suffer from the diseases.

   Now the rivals hope to capitalize on transition or integration snags that
might result from Genzyme's sale. Genzyme's leaders, who received a takeover
offer from French drug maker Sanofi-Aventis SA last month, have been talking
with Sanofi executives while also exploring interest from other prospective
partners.

   In the meantime, competitors have been watching with interest from the
sidelines. While they have remained silent about the state of play at Genzyme,
Shire and Protalix have not been shy about trumpeting the progress they are
making in their own programs to treat enzyme deficiencies, which cause waste
materials to build up in the body, damaging vital organs and weakening bones.

   ``We think the landscape has changed,'' said Protalix chief executive David
Aviezer, who was in Boston to attend a conference this week. ``Everyone
understands the rules of the game are not what they were. People understand
there will be two or three treatments out there. They all work, they all do the
job, and that's a good thing.''

   Genzyme has long dominated the market for drugs that treat enzyme
deficiencies, such as Cerezyme for Gaucher disease and Fabrazyme for Fabry
disease. To do so, it deploys specialists who build long-term relationships with
physicians, patients, and advocacy groups. Worldwide, an estimated 10,000
patients suffer from Gaucher or Fabry diseases. The drugs to treat the
conditions can cost between $200,000 and $300,000 a year per person, with much
of the expense covered by insurance.

   ``This is a very different model from the large pharmaceutical sales and
marketing model,'' said Suzanne L. Bruhn, senior vice president and program
manager for Shire's human genetic therapies division in Lexington, which makes
drugs to treat Gaucher and Fabry diseases in a Cambridge plant near the Alewife
T station. ``It will be interesting to see if they [Sanofi] will be able to
adapt their processes to this kind of specialized market. It's a market where
there's no advantage to scale.''

   But with the clinical success of pharmaceutical companies declining over the
past decade, their appetites for biotech acquisitions has grown, said Jeremy
J.A. Buzzard, associate principal for consulting firm McKinsey & Co.'s
pharmaceutical practice in New York.

   ``They're filling their pipelines,'' Buzzard said. ``Much of the merger and
acquisition activity in the next few years is going to be buying into faster
growing areas. The biotech revolution has created new ways of treating rare
diseases, and that area's been growing because there was no way of treating
these diseases in the past.''

   A key factor for any buyer of a company focused on rare disease treatments
will be maintaining the commercial infrastructure that supports its programs -
functions like medical science liaisons, specialist physician services, and
reimbursement operations - said Kevin J. Gorman, managing partner at Putnam
Associates, a Burlington consulting firm specializing in life sciences.

   ``These functions represent an important competitive advantage if you can
keep them intact,'' Gorman said. ``If you don't, you can lose concentration on
the science or disrupt relationships. That could open the door to competition if
the buyer's commitment to these rare diseases is called into question.''

   Representatives of Genzyme and Sanofi-Aventis declined to comment for this
report.

   Shire, which has about 1,300 employees in Massachusetts, already has
registered sales and market share gains since Genzyme rationed drugs to treat
Gaucher and Fabry diseases. ``That's given us an opportunity to get our products
out more broadly,'' Bruhn said.

   In its second-quarter earnings posted last week, the Irish company reported
sales of Replagal, its nine-year-old treatment for Fabry disease, rose 84
percent from the previous year. It also said 850 patients worldwide are now
treated by its new Vpriv drug for Gaucher disease, some of whom defected from
Cerezyme after it was rationed.

   Vpriv was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in February. But even
before the approval, Shire was permitted to provide the drug to patients
worldwide under an emergency access program.

   Bruhn said Shire expects to have signed up 1,000 patients for Vpriv by the
end of the year. Overall, the company projects the human genetic therapies
division will account for about 30 percent of its revenue by 2015, up from 23
percent today.

   Protalix, which struck a marketing alliance with US pharmaceutical giant
Pfizer Inc., has been waiting in the wings with a plant-based treatment for
Gaucher disease and - potentially - other genetic disorders. Unlike the Genzyme
and Shire drugs, which are based on genetically modified hamster cells,
Protalix's treatment is derived from genetically engineered carrot cells. That
means it is not susceptible to the kind of mammalian virus that caused Genzyme
to suspend production at its Allston Landing plant last summer, said Protalix
chief Aviezer.

   ``We have a built-in firewall against infection,'' he said.

   Under a treatment protocol approved by the FDA last summer, Protalix has been
able to make its experimental drug for Gaucher disease, called Uplyso, available
to patients on a wider basis through clinical trials. FDA officials have set a
date of Feb. 25 for deciding whether to formally approve the Protalix treatment
in the United States.

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2010


                              66 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            August 12, 2010 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: UW study gives hope for anxiety disorder | Apparent hereditary facet
could bring gene therapy /

BYLINE: SARAH PERDUE, sperdue@journalsentinel.com Milwaukee Journal Sentinel,
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI)

BODY:

   When a child encounters strangers, it is normal for him to freeze and be
quiet for a few moments.

    When that child's reaction lasts too long or he is too apprehensive, he may
have a disorder known as anxious temperament, a risk factor for depression or
other anxiety disorders that develop later in life.

   Psychiatrists are able to identify the disorder, but treatments are difficult
to develop because the cause of anxious temperament is unknown.

   In the largest non-human primate neuroimaging study to date, University of
Wisconsin-Madison researchers have identified brain regions that are overactive
in the most anxious monkeys, and they were able to show that the response in one
of those regions is likely an inherited genetic condition.

   The researchers hope to use their data to find the genes that predispose
people to the disorder and provide a target for drug therapy, and it may help to
identify children who are at-risk based on a family history of depression and
anxiety.

   The study appears in the current issue of the journal Nature. The impacts of
the study are twofold, according to Andrew Fox, a graduate student in psychology
at UW-Madison and co-lead author of the study.

   He said the size of the study - 238 young monkeys - gave researchers
statistical significance that the two brain regions identified were likely to be
the most important and confirmed the validity of an animal model for studying
this mood disorder.

   More importantly, Fox said, "because we have shown this in such a large
sample of animals, and because they were from a single family, we were able to
look at heritability within a single family tree." On the hunt for genes By
identifying which brain regions have an inherited component that contributes to
disease development, the researchers can start to look for genes that are active
specifically in that region.

   "The idea is that we have tons of different genes expressed in our bodies,
and if we look at everything going on everywhere we don't know where to start,"
Fox said.

   To figure out where to start, the researchers injected monkeys with a mostly
harmless radioactive variant of the sugar glucose (it is used in humans to
diagnose Parkinson's, for example), then immediately challenged the animals in
an "intruder" test designed to mimic a stranger approaching a child in a
non-threatening way.

   They assessed how the animals responded, and assigned them to a relative
scale of anxious temperament based on how long the animal froze, how quiet it
was, and how high its stress hormone levels were.

   Next, they anesthetized the monkeys and imaged their brains, using the
radioactive sugar to indicate which brain regions were the most active - and
thus needed the most energy. They found that the more anxious behavior the
monkey displayed, the more active its amygdala and hippocampus were.

   "If you ask most neuroscientists what area of the brain would be critical in
anxious temperament and emotion, most would say the amygdala," said Jonathan
Oler, an associate scientist at the Health Emotions Research Institute at
UW-Madison and co-lead author of the study.

   The amygdala is known to have a strong correlation with anxiety and stress
responses. The hippocampus, however, was previously thought to be mostly
involved with memory.

   "But the data are the data, and the hippocampus and the amygdala predicted
anxiety in the monkey equally," Oler said. "What was different between them was
the heritability component." "The exciting part was that the hippocampus was the
region that was most affected by genes," said Ned Kalin, chairman of psychiatry
at the UW School of Medicine and Public Health and senior author of the study.

   A closer look "Now we can go and ask which genes that have to do with
hippocampal function are inherited," Kalin said. "The amygdala, which has been
the focus of attention for lots of reasons, is less heritable than the
hippocampus." "Mental health researchers currently are struggling to develop
more effective treatments for a range of mental disorders, including mood and
anxiety disorders," said Daniel S. Pine, chief of the section on development and
affective neuroscience at the National Institute of Mental Health, who was not
involved in the study.

   "This work is one vital step towards developing coherent understanding of
neural processes that cause mood and anxiety disorders."

   Copyright 2010, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

   Copyright, 2010, Journal Sentinel, All Rights Reserved.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2010


                              67 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                            August 12, 2010 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: Bone marrow offers hope for life;
Devastating skin disease claims young

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:

   To anyone else, the prospect of putting a small child through a bone-marrow
transplant might be terrifying.

   Theresa Liao, mother of two sons  born with a rare and excruciatingly painful
skin disease, saw the risky procedure as their only chance for a normal life.

   Bone-marrow transplants, usually used to treat leukemia, are perhaps the most
harrowing of all medical therapies. Doctors first flood patients with enough
toxic chemotherapy to destroy their immune systems, leaving them incapable of
fighting off even the slightest infection. Doctors then rebuild the immune
system by transplanting donated stem cells.

   If all goes well, donor cells replace a child's original, diseased cells, and
the patient is cured.

   But the transplants carry enormous risks. Sometimes, in spite of massive,
poisonous doses of chemo, children reject the donated cells or develop other,
potentially fatal complications.

   Doctors at the University of Minnesota launched a bold experiment to try the
procedure on children with severe forms of epidermolysis bullosa, or EB, an
inherited condition in which children are born without a crucial protein that
keeps their skin attached to their bodies.

   Patients like Nate and Jake Liao, whose story has been chronicled by USA
TODAY since 2007, develop huge, painful blisters from a simple hug. Their
fingers become so scarred that their hands turn into mittens. About 60% die by
age 15, says Jakub Tolar, a University of Minnesota bone marrow transplant
specialist treating the Liao children.

   "For kids with EB, it's very unsafe to be alive," Tolar says.

   In a study published in today's New England Journal of Medicine, Tolar and
his colleagues tried to replace the children's defective cells with ones from
healthy donors, giving them the potential to make the crucial protein.

   At 15 months, Nate became the first patient, receiving donated stem cells
from his healthy older brother, Julian. His brother's cells were a perfect
match, and Nate had few complications.

   But Julian, a carrier for Nate's disease, makes only half as much of the
protein as other kids, says the University of Minnesota's John Wagner, another
developer of the therapy. So while Nate's skin improved, he hasn't been cured.

   Five-year-old Jake received the next transplant. Doctors knew the procedure
would be riskier for Jake, because they were unable to find a perfectly matched
sibling donor. Although Jake's skin also improved, he developed severe
complications and died in November 2008, shortly before his sixth birthday.

   Another girl died from the chemotherapy, even before getting the transplant.

   Researchers persevered, transplanting donor cells into nine more patients.
All have survived. One, 8-year-old Keric Boyd of Missouri, has improved enough
to jump on a trampoline, says his mother, Krista Boyd.

   Hundreds of patients with EB are on a waiting list for the transplant, Wagner
says. Most won't receive it, because few insurance companies will cover such an
experimental therapy, which costs hundreds of thousands of dollars.

   But Wagner remains hopeful.

   While doctors have long been using stem cells from bone marrow to cure
leukemia,  this is the first time that doctors have shown that stem cells can
build new skin, Wagner says. Although he's working to improve the therapy for
children with EB, he also hopes his research will help scientists working on
gene therapy and other stem cell research.

   Wagner already has given Nate a "booster" infusion of stem cells from his
brother. Because Nate's immune system is now identical to Julian's, he can
safety receive an unlimited number of donations, Wagner says. About 11% of the
cells in Nate's skin, in fact, came from his brother.

   Today, Theresa Liao holds out hope that Nate will continue to improve.

   But she says she remains devastated by the loss of Jake, with whom she lived
in the hospital for the last seven months of his life. Her family moved to a new
home after he died, unable to live in the house that reminded them so much of
Jake.

   While her other sons miss Jake, they're also "happy to have me back," Liao
says. "I had been at the hospital 23 hours a day."

   Although Liao says she would like to curl up in a ball, she forces herself to
go on for the sake of her other children. It comforts her to think that Jake
will never really be gone, she says, because he will live on through research
that may help other families.

   "Jake died at 9:11 a.m.," Liao says. "I would have been on the roof at 9:12
if I had a choice. But the kids need me. And when I see him again, I don't want
him to be mad at me. I want him to be proud."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, 2007 photos by Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY (2)

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2010


                              68 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 2, 2010 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAKEOVERS;
To treat 2 rare disorders, firm uses defanged HIV virus to get `corrected'
genetic material into cells

BODY:

   A 17-year-old Cambridge biotechnology firm is betting $35 million in new
financing on the success of its budding gene therapy program. This spring,
Genetix Pharmaceuticals reinvented itself as the developer of treatments for two
rare and devastating genetic disorders.

   Left untreated, both diseases - the blood disorder beta-thalassemia major and
the brain-wasting disease Adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD - are fatal. And existing
treatments can be as dangerous as the diseases.

   Enter gene therapy. If it works safely, it will overcome current treatment
risks, providing effective, enduring care.

   Gene therapy has advanced substantially since 1999, when it gained notoriety
after an 18-year-old named Jesse Gelsinger died in a research study. Recently,
gene therapy has been shown to be effective in a handful of small human trials.

   ``I think that things have changed pretty dramatically for gene therapy over
the last couple of years,'' said Dr. Katherine A. High, an investigator with the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and director of the Center for Cellular and
Molecular Therapeutics at Children's Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
High has acted as a consultant to Genetix. ``I think that this is a good time to
be getting into gene therapy, from a company's standpoint.''

   High and Dr. Stephen A. Sherwin, chairman of BIO, the biotechnology
industry's national trade organization, both compared gene therapy to the
development of monoclonal antibodies. It took two decades for monoclonal
antibody therapy to advance enough to help patients. Now, there are dozens of
monoclonal antibody drugs for diseases from cancer to rheumatoid arthritis.

   ``I believe that same story, however unlikely it might look to some today,
will be told in due course for gene therapy,'' said Sherwin, who does not have a
financial interest in Genetix.

   The premise of gene therapy is that well-functioning genes can be substituted
for missing or mutated ones - producing the crucial protein the patient is
lacking.

   Because viruses are so good at getting around cellular defenses, these
replacement genes are delivered to affected cells via a virus.

   But those viral vectors have been tricky to manage. They triggered a fatal
immune response in Gelsinger and have sparked leukemia in other patients.

   But in recent years, researchers have developed viral delivery systems they
believe can safely deliver replacement genes to cells that need them.

   Genetix is using an HIV virus that has been defanged so it cannot cause AIDS,
but will deliver the corrected gene. Called lentivirus, it can ``infect'' stem
cells in the blood. When those cells divide to produce red blood cells, the
corrected gene is passed on to its daughter cells and all future cell
generations.

   The virus itself dies, and researchers say it is a safe way to deliver drugs.

   ``If you are successful in getting enough genes into enough of those cells,
you can have the presence of your therapeutic genes for the remainder of the
life of the organism,'' said Mitchell H. Finer, Genetix's chief scientific
officer.

   (Another viral vector, adeno-associated virus, or AAV, works better for cells
that do not divide after early childhood, and is being tested by other companies
in diseases of the central nervous system, including the eye.)

   Genetix's therapy is done on a patient's own cells - which are withdrawn,
tinkered with, and reinserted - so there's no risk the immune system will reject
the fix. And because the virus is inserted into cells that have been removed
from the body, it does not travel beyond the bloodstream once the cells are put
back, Finer said.

   So far, there have been no major side effects from the ALD treatment, which
was first given to a 7-year-old boy three years ago, said Dr. Nathalie Cartier,
the French scientist who led the study and is now a consultant to Genetix. The
boy and two other patients who are about the same age are doing as well on the
gene therapy treatment as they would have with the bone marrow transplant that
is the standard of care for ALD, she said, but they were not good transplant
candidates.

   The major challenges facing Genetix, Finer and Cartier said, are
demonstrating continued success in clinical trials, maximizing the amount of the
corrected gene that gets into the cells, and developing a safe production
process that can produce the therapy on a scale large enough to treat many more
patients. ``What it really comes down to is manufacturing and quality control,''
Finer said.

   Genetix's president, Nick Leschly, said the new funding will allow the
company to expand clinical trials already underway in Europe and to scale up
production. Assuming all goes well, Leschly said, the gene therapy developed for
these two diseases could work for many other genetic diseases.

   ``Just ALD and thalassemia alone more than justifies our investment,'' he
said. But ``when you start looking at these other opportunities, then this is a
giant platform.''

   Genetix's original investors, TVM Capital, Forbion Capital Partners, and
Easton Capital Investment Group, all contributed to the second round of
financing.

   New to this round were Third Rock Ventures, a Boston venture capital firm
where Leschly is a partner, and Genzyme Ventures, a fund the biotechnology giant
Genzyme Corp., of Cambridge, uses to invest in companies that work in its areas
of interest.

   Alan Walts, managing director of Genzyme Ventures, said his company decided
to invest in Genetix because of the smaller company's ``innovative product for a
very rare disease.''

   ``The ultimate goal is that Genzyme would be able to be in a position to talk
to the company about either a product license or an acquisition - whatever would
be appropriate at the time,'' Walts said.

   ``If the product works, if the trial is successful, we would love to have the
opportunity to talk to them about commercializing the product.''

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2010


                              69 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                             July 24, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1317 words

HEADLINE: Ex-athlete faces uphill skin cancer battle;
GLENDALE - Two years ago, Andy Caress was tan and buff and competing in
marathons and triathlons.

BYLINE: By, Peggy O'Farrell

BODY:

   Now, the 25-year-old is fighting for his life.

   On Nov. 4, 2008, while living in Colorado, the Glendale native found a growth
on the back of his neck. It turned out to be melanoma, the deadliest form of
skin cancer.

   "I was pretty devastated, but I didn't think it was life-threatening," Caress
said.

   He was wrong.

   Doctors initially thought they'd caught the cancer at its earliest stage. But
within a few months of the diagnosis, Caress learned the cancer had spread to
the surrounding lymph nodes in his neck, the muscles and bones in his legs and
his brain.

   Despite several rounds of radiation and chemotherapy regimens and several
surgeries, the cancer keeps recurring.

   "It's relentless," said his mother, Candi Taggart. "It just keeps coming
back."

   Most worrisome right now are several cancerous lesions in Caress's brain.

   He's taking a type of immunotherapy in hopes that it will shrink the lesions
enough so he can qualify for an experimental therapy trial that will begin in a
few months at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

   The therapy, a drug called ipilimumab, is designed to let the immune system
more effectively use T cells to attack and kill the tumors. Research has shown
it to be effective in patients like Caress.

   In addition to the brain lesions, he has large tumors in the bones and muscle
in his left leg.

   Between the immune therapy and the pain medicines he's taking, he's often
weak and tired.

   He looks frail, nothing like the strapping athlete who taught tennis and ran
marathons in his spare time. Since his diagnosis, he's lost about 30 pounds. In
addition to the weight loss, he's had some muscle and other tissue in his neck
and throat removed. That loss adds to his gaunt appearance.

   But his spirit has grown stronger, Taggart said, as has his determination to
help others learn from his struggle.

   In May, Caress and his family launched the Mela-Know-More Foundation
(www.mela-know-more.org), which aims to raise awareness of melanoma and its risk
factors and raise money for research.

   They've already raised $10,000 for M.D. Anderson, where Caress has undergone
some of his treatments.

   He's also set up a Web site, www.andycaress.com, that includes a blog of his
cancer journey.

   Melanoma is cancer that develops in the melanocytes, or cells that make skin
pigment. It is the most serious form of skin cancer, and it's on the rise: Rates
have more than doubled in the United States in the last 30 years.

   As with most cancers, incidence is highest among adults 70 and older, but 7.5
percent of people with the disease are diagnosed between the ages of 20 and 34.

   Melanoma is a notoriously difficult cancer to treat, said Tim Turnham,
executive director of the Melanoma Research Foundation in Hillsborough, N.J.

   In most cancers, about 10 percent of tumor cells have the ability to generate
new tumors, Turnham said. But in melanoma, every cell can spawn a new tumor.
That's one of the reasons the cancer spreads so rapidly.

   The fact that it affects skin cells - which are exposed to ultraviolet rays
that can cause genetic mutations - also plays into the cancer's aggressive
spread.

   Surgery is the primary treatment for melanoma, said Olivier Rixe, a melanoma
researcher and director of the experimental therapeutics program at the
University of Cincinnati and University Hospital. Rixe developed the guidelines
surgeons use when removing melanoma tumors so they're most likely to get all of
the cancerous cells.

   For patients whose disease hasn't spread, it works well. But in patients like
Caress, whose cancer has spread widely, treatment is trickier.

   Immune therapies show the most promise, Rixe said. .But the genetic therapies
available don't work on everyone. As Caress has learned, they may work for a
while and then stop. Melanoma has a unique ability to sneak around the barriers
medications throw in its way.

   Protecting people - especially young children - from sun exposure is the most
important factor in stopping the increase in melanoma, Rixe said.

   "Prevention is really the future of melanoma care," he said.

   When Caress found the growth on the back of his neck, it didn't look like
cancer, he said.

   It didn't even look like a mole, Taggart said. "It was just a spot," she
said.

   It's important to get those spots and moles and growths checked annually,
Caress said.

   And it's important to protect the skin from sun exposure, the biggest risk
factor for all forms of skin cancer.

   "Sunscreen, sunscreen, sunscreen," Taggart said.

   No one gave Caress that message when he was growing up. He played tennis and
worked as a lifeguard and ran, all without thinking much about sunblock.

   Most summers, he didn't even open the umbrella over the lifeguard chair.

   This year, more than 68,000 new cases of melanoma will be identified in the
United States and an estimated 8,700 people will die from the cancer. Men are
more likely than women to develop the cancer - rates are 25.6 per 100,000 for
men, compared to 16.2 for women.

   A family history of skin cancer is also a risk factor. Caress's father, Bob,
has had small skin cancers removed.

   Caress lives with his parents now, but was living in Steamboat Springs,
Colo., when the first cancer was found in 2008.

   Since then, it's been one round of treatments after another, including an
experimental treatment last year that almost worked.

   Caress started the treatment, which suppressed the action of a mutated gene
that let the cancer spread and grow, in December in Houston.

   Within days, the lesions in his brain stopped growing. Most shrank. Some
disappeared entirely.

   So did other lesions around his body, including those in his legs.

   He left his parents' house in Glendale and moved back to Colorado. He got an
apartment and went back to work.

   But in April, he noticed a severe ache in his left thigh, where he'd had
surgery before to have a tumor in the bone removed.

   Tests confirmed the worst: The cancer was back, worse than before.

   Scans showed some 40 lesions in his brain alone.

   The miracle they'd hoped for had failed.

   "We're working against the odds right now, but we don't focus on any of those
numbers," Taggart said. "We just work on getting him to the next step."

   Another trial will soon be available, a multiple-drug regimen that could
help.

   Caress couldn't qualify for the first phase of the experiment because the
lesions in his brain were still growing.

   He's taking treatment now from an oncologist in Columbus in the hopes of
getting the lesions under control so he can sign up for the second phase of the
experimental treatment in Houston.

   Caress is determined the experiment will be a success.

   "I think I'm going to get better and get back to my normal life," he said. "I
have to believe that. I know the bad possibilities are out there. But I plan on
getting better."

   Added his mother:

   "We plan on it. We're a team."

   ABCD's of skin cancer

   The first sign of melanoma might be changes in the appearance of an existing
mole. Do skin checks regularly, and remember the ABCDs of spotting skin cancer:

   Asymmetry: The two "halves" of the mole don't match.

   Border: The edges of the mole are ragged, notched or irregular.

   Color: The color of the mole is uneven; pink, brown and black pigmentation
may be mixed together.

   Diameter: The size of the mole has changed, usually an increase. Most
melanomas are bigger in diameter than a pencil eraser.

   Source: The National Cancer Institute (www.cancer.gov)

   Skin cancer prevention

   Sun exposure is the biggest risk factor for melanoma and other skin cancers.
Here's how to cut your risk:

   Stay in the shade from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. when the sun's rays are strongest.

   Wear a hat and sun protective clothing.

   Use sunblock with an SPF rating of 15 or higher. Apply 1 ounce over all
exposed skin every two hours.

   Keep newborns out of the sun. Use sunblock on babies 6 months and older.

   Check your skin yourself every month for suspicious moles. Get a professional
skin exam once a year.

   Source: The Skin Cancer Foundation (www.skincancer.org)

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2010


                              70 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             July 22, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. B 05

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Academic success pays off for strivers

BYLINE: To the Rim Tina Soong

BODY:

   We continue to recognize Asian American academic achievers from area schools.

   This week, I profile Geoffrey Liu, 2010 valedictorian from Isidore Newman
School; Stephen James Lee, a 2010 valedictorian from Jesuit High School; and
Thien Nguyen, second time winner of United Health Foundation Diverse Scholar
Initiative Scholarships.

   Liu, who is interested in medicine and music, plans to enroll in the premed
program and minor in music at the University of Chicago this fall. Liu has been
on the Newman honor roll since his freshman year. He received an LSU Health
Sciences Center summer internship, was named a Scholar with Distinction and was
a National Merit Scholarship semifinalist.

   Talented in music, Liu plays both the clarinet and guitar. He was first chair
clarinetist and captain of the Newman Concert Band, co-founder of the Newman
Wind Ensemble, and played in the school honor band.

   He is a guitarist and vocalist for local band Assonance and is currently
taking clarinet lessons and guitar lessons at Loyola University as well as
attending the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts Jazz Workshop.

   In addition, he is a member of Newman Cross Country and the Newman Quiz Bowl
team.

   Liu served as president of Thinkers Society, treasurer of Newman Players
Drama Society, co-founder of Spanish Club and is a member of Newman Green
Environmental Club, the Mu Alpha Theta Club and the Indian Club.

   Liu has participated in the Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium Internship
in the pediatric lab at Tulane Medical School, and in the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium Internship in genetic lab at Stanley Scott Cancer Center.

   "What I enjoyed most of all is the intellectual challenge," Liu said.
"Whether the challenge comes from my calculus teacher or myself, I delight in
pushing my mind to its limits and succeeding."

   Lee will attend Tulane University and major in biomedical engineering. He has
received multiple scholarships, including the Tulane University Valedictorian
Scholarship, the Dean's Honors Scholarship, as well as scholarship offers from
the University of Texas, the University of Miami and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.

   He has won numerous awards in different subjects at district and state
rallies. Lee is also a National Merit finalist. His extracurricular activities
included track and field, Student Council, Spanish Honor Society, National Honor
Society, Mu Alpha Theta, Big Brother, Asian Club, Spirit Club, Tailgate Team,
Pro-life Club, Intramural football and Ultimate Frisbee Team.

   Lee's work and volunteer experience include Habitat for Humanity, Youth
Rebuilding New Orleans, the Beacon of Hope, Start the Adventure in Reading, and
Jesuit's Thanksgiving food drive.

   "My goal is to utilize my skills and knowledge so that I can make a positive
impact on society," Lee said.

   Nguyen is currently a student at the Louisiana State University Dental
School. He is the recipient of the UHF Diverse Scholar Initiative Scholarship.

   The UHF scholarships, averaging $5,000, per student, are awarded to Asian
American, Hispanic/Latino American, African American and American Indian
students, who plan to pursue careers in healthcare. The scholarships are given
to support and develop these diverse future healthcare professionals as one way
the UHF works toward strengthening the healthcare system of the nation.

   Nguyen, born in Vietnam, immigrated with his parents to New Orleans when he
was 11. His father works as a ship welder and his mother is a manicurist. He is
an only child and was the first in his family to pursue a college education.

   After his graduation from John Ehret High School, Nguyen earned a bachelor of
science degree from Xavier University with honors in 2009.

   He was accepted into the dental school for the class of 2014.

   "It is a dream of mine to use my specialty to serve as a dentist in the U.S.
Navy after graduation from LSU Dental School," Nguyen said. He also plans to use
his knowledge and specialty to assist policymakers with their decisions.

   . . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2010


                              71 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             July 22, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: KENNER PICAYUNE; Pg. D 07

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Academic success pays off for strivers

BYLINE: To the Rim Tina Soong

BODY:

   We continue to recognize Asian American academic achievers from area schools.

   This week, I profile Geoffrey Liu, 2010 valedictorian from Isidore Newman
School; Stephen James Lee, a 2010 valedictorian from Jesuit High School; and
Thien Nguyen, second time winner of United Health Foundation Diverse Scholar
Initiative Scholarships.

   Liu, who is interested in medicine and music, plans to enroll in the premed
program and minor in music at the University of Chicago this fall. Liu has been
on the Newman honor roll since his freshman year. He received an LSU Health
Sciences Center summer internship, was named a Scholar with Distinction and was
a National Merit Scholarship semifinalist.

   Talented in music, Liu plays both the clarinet and guitar. He was first chair
clarinetist and captain of the Newman Concert Band, co-founder of the Newman
Wind Ensemble, and played in the school honor band.

   He is a guitarist and vocalist for local band Assonance and is currently
taking clarinet lessons and guitar lessons at Loyola University as well as
attending the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts Jazz Workshop.

   In addition, he is a member of Newman Cross Country and the Newman Quiz Bowl
team.

   Liu served as president of Thinkers Society, treasurer of Newman Players
Drama Society, co-founder of Spanish Club and is a member of Newman Green
Environmental Club, the Mu Alpha Theta Club and the Indian Club.

   Liu has participated in the Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium Internship
in the pediatric lab at Tulane Medical School, and in the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium Internship in genetic lab at Stanley Scott Cancer Center.

   "What I enjoyed most of all is the intellectual challenge," Liu said.
"Whether the challenge comes from my calculus teacher or myself, I delight in
pushing my mind to its limits and succeeding."

   Lee will attend Tulane University and major in biomedical engineering. He has
received multiple scholarships, including the Tulane University Valedictorian
Scholarship, the Dean's Honors Scholarship, as well as scholarship offers from
the University of Texas, the University of Miami and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.

   He has won numerous awards in different subjects at district and state
rallies. Lee is also a National Merit finalist. His extracurricular activities
included track and field, Student Council, Spanish Honor Society, National Honor
Society, Mu Alpha Theta, Big Brother, Asian Club, Spirit Club, Tailgate Team,
Pro-life Club, Intramural football and Ultimate Frisbee Team.

   Lee's work and volunteer experience include Habitat for Humanity, Youth
Rebuilding New Orleans, the Beacon of Hope, Start the Adventure in Reading, and
Jesuit's Thanksgiving food drive.

   "My goal is to utilize my skills and knowledge so that I can make a positive
impact on society," Lee said.

   Nguyen is currently a student at the Louisiana State University Dental
School. He is the recipient of the UHF Diverse Scholar Initiative Scholarship.

   The UHF scholarships, averaging $5,000, per student, are awarded to Asian
American, Hispanic/Latino American, African American and American Indian
students, who plan to pursue careers in healthcare. The scholarships are given
to support and develop these diverse future healthcare professionals as one way
the UHF works toward strengthening the healthcare system of the nation.

   Nguyen, born in Vietnam, immigrated with his parents to New Orleans when he
was 11. His father works as a ship welder and his mother is a manicurist. He is
an only child and was the first in his family to pursue a college education.

   After his graduation from John Ehret High School, Nguyen earned a bachelor of
science degree from Xavier University with honors in 2009.

   He was accepted into the dental school for the class of 2014.

   "It is a dream of mine to use my specialty to serve as a dentist in the U.S.
Navy after graduation from LSU Dental School," Nguyen said. He also plans to use
his knowledge and specialty to assist policymakers with their decisions.

   . . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2010


                              72 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             July 22, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: GRETNA PICAYUNE; Pg. F 09

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: Academic success pays off for strivers

BYLINE: To the Rim Tina Soong

BODY:

   We continue to recognize Asian-American academic achievers from area schools.

   This week, I profile Geoffrey Liu, 2010 valedictorian from Isidore Newman
School; Stephen James Lee, a 2010 valedictorian from Jesuit High School; and
Thien Nguyen, second time winner of United Health Foundation Diverse Scholar
Initiative Scholarships.

   Liu, who is interested in medicine and music, plans to enroll in the premed
program and minor in music at the University of Chicago this fall. Liu has been
on the Newman honor roll since his freshman year. He received an LSU Health
Sciences Center summer internship, was named a Scholar with Distinction and was
a National Merit Scholarship semifinalist.

   Talented in music, Liu plays both the clarinet and guitar. He was first chair
clarinetist and captain of the Newman Concert Band, co-founder of the Newman
Wind Ensemble, and played in the school honor band.

   He is a guitarist and vocalist for local band Assonance and is currently
taking clarinet lessons and guitar lessons at Loyola University as well as
attending the New Orleans Center for Creative Arts Jazz Workshop.

   In addition, he is a member of Newman Cross Country and the Newman Quiz Bowl
team.

   Liu served as president of Thinkers Society, treasurer of Newman Players
Drama Society, co-founder of Spanish Club and is a member of Newman Green
Environmental Club, the Mu Alpha Theta Club and the Indian Club.

   Liu has participated in the Louisiana Cancer Research Consortium Internship
in the pediatric lab at Tulane Medical School, and in the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium Internship in genetic lab at Stanley Scott Cancer Center.

   "What I enjoyed most of all is the intellectual challenge," Liu said.
"Whether the challenge comes from my calculus teacher or myself, I delight in
pushing my mind to its limits and succeeding."

   Lee will attend Tulane University and major in biomedical engineering. He has
received multiple scholarships, including the Tulane University Valedictorian
Scholarship, the Dean's Honors Scholarship, as well as scholarship offers from
the University of Texas, the University of Miami and Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.

   He has won numerous awards in different subjects at district and state
rallies. Lee is also a National Merit finalist. His extracurricular activities
included track and field, Student Council, Spanish Honor Society, National Honor
Society, Mu Alpha Theta, Big Brother, Asian Club, Spirit Club, Tailgate Team,
Pro-life Club, Intramural football and Ultimate Frisbee Team.

   Lee's work and volunteer experience include Habitat for Humanity, Youth
Rebuilding New Orleans, the Beacon of Hope, Start the Adventure in Reading, and
Jesuit's Thanksgiving food drive.

   Nguyen is currently a student at the Louisiana State University Dental
School. He is the recipient of the UHF Diverse Scholar Initiative Scholarship.

   The UHF scholarships, averaging $5,000, per student, are awarded to Asian
American, Hispanic/Latino American, African American and American Indian
students, who plan to pursue careers in health care. The scholarships are given
to support and develop these diverse future healthcare professionals as one way
the UHF works toward strengthening the healthcare system of the nation.

   Nguyen, born in Vietnam, immigrated with his parents to New Orleans when he
was 11.

   After his graduation from John Ehret High School, Nguyen earned a bachelor of
science degree from Xavier University with honors in 2009. He was accepted into
the dental school for the class of 2014.

   . . . . . . . .

   Members of the Asian/Pacific-American communities in the New Orleans area are
invited to e-mail news items to Tina Soong at tsoongtotherim@aol.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2010


                              73 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                              July 18, 2010 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE/ENVIRONMENT; Pg. G6

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: Fighting for memories;
With half a million new cases a year, Alzheimer's disease draws intense research

BYLINE: By Shari Roan - Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   Gloria Lucio had two pencil-sized holes drilled into her skull in April, part
of a procedure to possibly combat her Alzheimer's disease.

   The surgeon may have injected an experimental gene therapy drug deep into her
brain. Or, after months of tests, consultations and preparation, the Pasadena,
Calif., woman may not have received any treatment at all.

   The willingness to endure such a surgery for a clinical trial with no
guarantee of treatment seems extraordinary. But Lucio and her husband, Don
Jones, acknowledge a biting reality: Even if she did get the drug, it may not
work.

   The substance that may have been injected -- a virus carrying genes intended
to produce a chemical called nerve growth factor -- looked promising in a
preliminary trial, but so have many other now-failed treatments.

   Such are the options for someone with Alzheimer's disease in 2010.

   The Alzheimer's Association recently estimated that cases of the neurological
disease, now affecting about 5 million Americans, will more than double in the
next 40 years -- at enormous personal, social and economic costs.

   The report was the latest in a drumbeat of dismal news about Alzheimer's. In
March, a Phase 3 clinical trial of the promising drug Dimebon failed to produce
positive results, another highly anticipated experiment gone bust. Medications
currently in use can only mitigate early symptoms; none have been found to slow
the disease.

   "There's a feeling of desperation, not only among people with Alzheimer's
disease or mild cognitive impairment but also with their family caregivers,"
said Gail Hunt, president of the National Alliance for Caregiving.

   But behind the gloomy headlines, researchers say they know more about the
cunning illness than ever before. They're developing techniques to identify it
in its earliest stages, and within the next decade they expect treatments to
slow or forestall the disease.

   The predominant theory for the cause of Alzheimer's is a buildup of two types
of proteins in the brain: beta-amyloid and tau. Scientists believe that plaques
of beta-amyloid (which accumulate between nerve cells) and tangles of tau (which
build up inside nerve cells) block the cells' ability to communicate and
ultimately destroy them.

   But the disease process is now thought to begin far earlier than anyone
suspected -- as long as 15 years before symptoms appear. In a study published in
December in the Archives of Neurology, researchers found amyloid deposits in the
brains of people who had no symptoms of dementia but later developed
Alzheimer's.

   Such knowledge is changing efforts to fight the disease.

   "I think that the impact of the treatments is likely to be greater if we use
them earlier," said Dr. Paul Aisen, director of the Alzheimer's Disease
Cooperative Study at UC San Diego. "For disease-modifying treatments, a late
stage may be too late to benefit."

   Until recently, plaques could be verified only during an autopsy, so
Alzheimer's diagnosis is based on highly subjective paper-and-pencil memory
tests. That could change.

   Biomarkers -- physical signs of the disease -- have been identified and are
expected to soon replace memory tests. One detection method uses a PET scan with
a radioactive chemical to detect beta-amyloid in the brain. Another measures tau
and beta-amyloid proteins in spinal fluid.

   Diagnosing and intervening earlier in the disease process, scientists
predict, will bring about treatment successes.

   Bristol-Myers Squibb is testing a compound, gamma secretase inhibitor, that
could slow progression of the disease in people with mild cognitive impairment,
considered a precursor to Alzheimer's. The study of gamma secretase inhibitor,
an enzyme that appears to slow or stop the buildup of amyloid plaques, is in the
very early stages, but other companies are planning early-stage clinical trials
as well.

   Though the emphasis has shifted to early treatment, researchers also are
employing innovative, even risky, strategies on patients whose Alzheimer's is
more advanced.

   Among the 175 Alzheimer's medications in development are ones that could
combat the buildup of tau tangles and others that could help protect neurons,
such as the nerve-growth factor study Lucio opted to try.

   As for the nerve growth factor itself, the substance controls the development
of nerve cells throughout the body. It is also thought to work as a nutrient to
protect brain cells that typically die off because of Alzheimer's disease.
Getting nerve growth factor into the brain, however, is difficult, and
researchers have done it only by delivering genes that make it directly into the
brain.

   "The study represents how far science has come," says Joshua Grill, a
neuroscientist and the investigator conducting the UCLA arm of the study. "We're
no longer throwing spaghetti at the wall to see what will stick. We're targeting
things. We're going after what we know is happening with the disease."

GRAPHIC: Photos by McClatchy Newspapers Gloria Lucio nervously awaits an
operation, at top. She draws comfort from her husband, Don Jones, above.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2010


                              74 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              July 11, 2010 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 16A

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: ALZHEIMER'S TREATMENTS AIM TO TURN BACK TIME

BYLINE: Shari Roan, Tribune Newspapers

BODY:

   Gloria Lucio had two pencil-size holes drilled into her skull in April, part
of a procedure to possibly combat her Alzheimer's disease.

   The surgeon may have injected an experimental gene therapy drug deep into her
brain. Or, after months of tests, consultations and preparation, the Pasadena,
Calif., woman may not have received any treatment at all.

   The willingness to endure such a surgery for a clinical trial with no
guarantee of treatment seems extraordinary. But Lucio and her husband, Don
Jones, acknowledge a biting reality: Even if she did get the drug, it may not
work.

   The substance that may have been injected - a virus carrying genes intended
to produce a chemical called nerve growth factor - looked promising in a
preliminary trial, but so have many other now-failed treatments.

   Such are the options for someone with Alzheimer's disease in 2010.

   The Alzheimer's Association recently estimated that cases of the neurological
disease, which now affects about 5 million Americans, will more than double in
the next 40 years.

   The report was the latest in a drumbeat of dismal news about Alzheimer's. In
March, a Phase 3 clinical trial of the promising drug Dimebon failed to produce
positive results - another highly anticipated experiment gone bust. Medications
currently in use can only mitigate early symptoms; none have been found to slow
the disease.

   But behind the gloomy headlines, researchers say they know more about the
illness than ever before. They're developing techniques to identify it in its
earliest stages, and within the next decade they expect treatments to slow or
forestall the disease.

   Given the swelling numbers of those afflicted, any advance can't come too
soon.

   Lucio was reluctant to undergo the experimental treatment but, with a clear
understanding of the situation, felt she had no choice. The disease had been
making steady advances for years, quietly stealing pieces of her identity.

   A former nurse-practitioner and political activist, she was afflicted with
Alzheimer's at an earlier age than most patients. Lucio, 57, is homebound now
and no longer fixes meals or pays bills. Her short-term memory is a sieve, and
her husband and son don't leave her alone for long.

   The predominant theory for the cause of Alzheimer's is a buildup of two types
of proteins in the brain: beta-amyloid and tau. Scientists believe that plaques
of beta-amyloid (which accumulate between nerve cells) and tangles of tau (which
build up inside nerve cells) block the cells' ability to communicate and
ultimately destroy them.

   But the disease process is now thought to begin far earlier than anyone
suspected: as long as 15 years before symptoms appear. In a study published in
December in the Archives of Neurology, researchers found amyloid deposits in the
brains of people who had no symptoms of dementia but later developed
Alzheimer's.

   Such knowledge is changing efforts to fight the disease.

   Until recently, plaques could be verified only during an autopsy, so
Alzheimer's diagnosis is based on highly subjective memory tests. That could
change.

   Biomarkers - physical signs of the disease - have been identified and are
expected to soon replace memory tests. One detection method uses a PET scan with
a radioactive chemical to detect beta-amyloid in the brain. Another measures tau
and beta-amyloid proteins in spinal fluid.

   Diagnosing and intervening earlier in the disease process, scientists
predict, will bring about treatment successes.

   Though the emphasis has shifted to early treatment, researchers also are
employing innovative, even risky, strategies on patients with more advanced
Alzheimer's.

   Among the 175 Alzheimer's medications in development are ones that could
combat the buildup of tau tangles and others that could help protect neurons,
such as the nerve-growth factor study Lucio opted to try.

   Lucio checked into UCLA Medical Center on April 15.

   During the procedure, neurosurgeon Antonio De Salles attached a frame to her
skull that enabled a portable CT scan to calculate the exact part of the brain
for the injection. He then began burrowing two holes - stopping to open a sealed
document that told him whether to administer nerve growth factor.

   He then may have cut into the dura mater, the tough tissue that envelops the
brain, and injected the gene therapy drug into a region called the nucleus
basalis of Meynert; there, Alzheimer's destroys neurons important to short-term
memory and other cognitive functions.

   "The study represents how far science has come," says Joshua Grill, a
neuroscientist and the investigator conducting the UCLA arm of the study. "We're
no longer throwing spaghetti at the wall to see what will stick. We're targeting
things. We're going after what we know is happening with the disease."

   Lucio is more upbeat. On a sunny June morning, she and her husband are
looking ahead.

   "I'm absolutely sure she received the treatment," Jones said. "Gloria is
doing so much better. She's engaging in conversation. She's relaying messages to
us. I came home one day, and she was making her own lunch."

   The researchers warn against any expectations. And, until the two-year study
is completed, they cannot be sure whether Lucio received the treatment.

   sroan2@tribune.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. Gloria Lucio, 57, looks to her family as nurses prepare her for surgery. The
study participant would not find out if she received an experimental Alzheimer's
drug or no treatment at all. 2. Don Jones, right, hugs his son Valentin, 18, as
his wife, Gloria Lucio, who has Alzheimer's disease, is prepped for an
experimental surgery.
 1. Al Seib/Tribune Newspapers photo

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2010


                              75 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                             July 10, 2010 Saturday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: SURPRISE REPUBLIC 1; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: Peoria City Council OKs grant to pursue bioscience group

BYLINE: By, Sonu Munshi, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Peoria's bioscience business-attraction strategy is on track.

   The Peoria City Council on Tuesday unanimously approved $200,000 to help
Phoenix-based Translational Genomics Research Institute, or TGen, apply for a
grant to establish an international bioscience consortium in the city.

   TGen will partner with Thunderbird School of Global Management in Glendale to
set up the consortium, which would provide members with a global network of
resources to help save on costs and time for startups to translate bioscience
ideas into products. It would reduce the failure rate of commercializing
bioscience ventures, said James Walbom, director of commercialization at TGen.

   TGen will apply by next week for a competitive grant from the U.S. Economic
Development Administration. A decision on the grant is expected this fall, but
no timeline beyond that has been provided.

   Along with a letter from the city to show its commitment to the partnership,
city funds would help TGen come up with $500,000 in cash and in-kind
contributions necessary to receive the maximum federal match of $1 million.
Peoria's commitment would be paid from a half-cent-per-dollar sales-tax fund,
which partly provides for capital and economic development.  For Peoria,
bioscience is among the industries it aims to attract. The industry targets
practical uses in medicine such as manufacturing medical devices, pacemakers and
gene therapy.

   Economic-development chief Scott Whyte said the partnership could place
well-known organizations within the city, which could attract high-paying jobs
and possibly manufacturers that would want to build products close to the
originating resource. No location has been planned.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2010


                              76 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                              July 9, 2010 Friday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: PEORIA REPUBLIC 2; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: City grant to allow TGen to seek bioscience group

BYLINE: By, Sonu Munshi, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Peoria's bioscience business attraction strategy is on track.

   The Peoria City Council on Tuesday unanimously approved $200,000 to help
Phoenix-based Translational Genomics Research Institute, or TGen, apply for a
grant to establish an international bioscience consortium in the city.

   TGen will partner with Thunderbird School of Global Management in Glendale to
set up the consortium, which would provide members with a global network of
resources to help save on costs and time for startups to translate bioscience
ideas into products. It would reduce the failure rate of commercializing
bioscience ventures, said James Walbom, director of commercialization at TGen.

   TGen will apply by next week for a competitive grant from the U.S. Economic
Development Administration. A decision on the grant is expected this fall, but
no timeline beyond that has been provided.

   Mayor Bob Barrett,"awed" by the "array of talent" in front of him, called the
partnership a boon to Peoria's image.

   "If you're known by the company you keep, you are about to really help Peoria
get on the map," Barrett said to representatives from TGen and others who
presented the plans to council.

   The group included Steven Stralser, clinical professor of entrepreneurship at
the Thunderbird schooland Dr. David Jacofsky, chief executive of The CORE
Institute, a Phoenix-based orthopedic center that plans to partner with the city
to locate a biotech incubator in Peoria.

   Along with a letter from the city to show its commitment to the partnership,
city funds would help TGen come up with $500,000 in cash and in-kind
contributions necessary to receive the maximum federal match of $1 million.
Peoria's commitment would be paid from a half-cent-per-dollar sales-tax fund,
which partly provides for capital and economic development. If successful in
getting the grant, TGen and Thunderbird would launch the International
Bioscience Commercialization Consortium.

   Walbom said although there are groups around the world to help academic
experts develop commercial products, an umbrella group is needed to help foster
ideas and provide a shared global resource network. For Peoria, bioscience is
among the industries it aims to attract. The industry targets practical uses in
medicine such as manufacturing medical devices, pacemakers and gene therapy.

   Economic-development chief Scott Whyte said the partnership could place
well-known organizations within the city, which could attract high-paying jobs
and possibly manufacturers that would want to build products close to the
originating resource.

   Peoria's Deputy City Manager Susan Daluddung said council may be asked to
help with space to house the consortium and incubator.

   Whyte previously said any further city contribution for land or the facility
is in the conceptual stage. A council report mentions the consortium and the
incubator would share 10,000 square feet of office and laboratory space. No
location has been planned. Peoria leaders said they believe the partnership
falls within guidelines recently established by a state Supreme Court ruling on
city subsidies to the private sector. A spokesman for the Goldwater Institute,
which has opposed subsidies, said an attorney would review the proposal.

   Walbom called the plan an innovative idea, "which has both great risk and
great opportunity."

   Jacofsky from CORE gave examples of how their research laboratories have
developed revolutionary technology to heal wounds and partnered with companies
such as golfing giant Ping, to make custom golf clubs based on people's swings
to prevent injuries.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2010


                              77 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             July 8, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1206 words

HEADLINE: Another drug giant bringing jobs to Mass.

BYLINE: By Todd Wallack, Globe Staff

BODY:

   One of the world's largest drug makers, Sanofi-Aventis SA, is planning a $65
million expansion in Cambridge that will create about 300 jobs, making it the
latest foreign pharmaceutical giant to invest in Massachusetts.

   The Paris-based drug maker is in the process of leasing space in
Cambridgeport, where it will establish a joint headquarters for a new cancer
division.

   ``We believe that Cambridge is really the heart of oncology today,''
Hanspeter Spek, president of Sanofi-Aventis's global operations, told financial
analysts and investors in a conference call earlier this year. ``We intend to
benefit from this environment as a neighbor.''

   Sanofi-Aventis is the latest foreign drug maker expanding its operations in
Massachusetts. Industry executives say the companies are drawn to the intense
concentration of medical and life sciences activities in the area, including
top-flight research universities, respected hospitals, and a cluster of
biotechnology companies.

   The company's investment is particularly important because it comes at a time
when many other businesses are reluctant to expand because of the weak economy.
And pharmaceutical research, manufacturing, and management jobs tend to pay well
and pump new money into the economy, benefiting ancillary businesses such as
suppliers, law firms, and nearby hotels and restaurants. Sanofi-Aventis
predicted the new jobs would pay an average of more than $100,000 per year.

   Governor Deval Patrick has also been counting on growth in the industry to
help lift the state's economy. Two years ago, Patrick launched a $1 billion,
10-year initiative that includes tax incentives for life sciences companies to
expand, research grants for scientists, and money to build university labs and
other public infrastructure to support the industry.

   Just last week, 56 life sciences companies, including Sanofi-Aventis, applied
for $25 million in tax credits available this year, according to Angus
McQuilken, a spokesman for the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center, a
quasi-public agency established by the state Legislature in 2006 and charged
with implementing the initiative. The tax credits will be awarded in December.
Last year, 26 firms received $24.5 million.

   Industry officials said the Sanofi-Aventis move reaffirms Massachusetts'
standing as one of the country's leading hubs for drug industry research.

   ``We've done well, posting some significant wins,'' said Robert Coughlin,
president of the Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, an industry group.

   More than a half dozen other major European and Asian pharmaceutical
companies have major operations in the Boston area, including Swiss drug maker
Novartis AG, Merck KGaA of Germany, Japanese drug makers Takeda Pharmaceutical
Co. and Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co., and British pharma giants GlaxoSmithKline
PLC, AstraZeneca PLC, and Shire PLC.

   And despite the downturn, several life science firms are adding employees in
Massachusetts, either through internal expansion or by acquisitions of other
companies.

   Two years ago, Shire launched a $394 million expansion in Lexington,
including building a new manufacturing plant and headquarters for its Human
Genetic Therapies unit, which develops drugs to treat rare medical disorders,
such as Fabry disease. The company, which received $48 million in incentives to
expand in Massachusetts instead of in another state vying for the project, has
1,300 employees and expects to add as many as 300 more by 2015. Shire recently
inked a $165 million deal to buy several of the buildings it was leasing in
Lexington.

   Merck is completing a $65 million research-and-development center in
Billerica for its EMD Serono unit and recently agreed to buy Millipore Corp., a
Billerica company that provides equipment and services to the life sciences
industry, for $6 billion. Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co. acquired Sepracor Inc,.
the Marlborough company behind the Lunesta sleep medicine, for $2.6 billion in
April.

   ``We are continuing to see investment growth here even in places where they
might be shrinking in other parts of the world,'' said Susan Windham-Bannister,
the Life Sciences Center's president.

   Overall, the Massachusetts biotechnology and pharmaceutical industry had more
than 45,900 workers in 2008, the latest estimate available, up 43 percent from
2001, according to the biotechnology council.

   Sanofi-Aventis has nearly 400 workers in Massachusetts, including 160 in
Cambridge, largely through its 2008 acquisition of Acambis, a vaccine maker
based in England. It also owns a small manufacturing facility in Canton.

   The new cancer operation in Cambridgeport will boost those numbers
considerably. Sanofi-Aventis has posted dozens of jobs related to the new
division headquarters on its website, including for laboratory research,
clinical trials, and marketing. It has sublet 30,000 square feet of space
elsewhere in Cambridge, but is now close to leasing 112,000 square feet at 640
Memorial Drive, an MIT-owned building aimed at life sciences companies, for the
new division headquarters. The Cambridge location will share control of the
cancer division with a Sanofi-Aventis office in Vitry, France.

   Company spokesman Jack Cox said the firm hopes to finalize a lease in the
next few weeks.

   To help support the expansion, Sanofi-Aventis also applied this month for
$2.45 million in state tax credits from the Life Sciences Center and plans to
request another $6.5 million in aid over the next four years, according to the
center.

   Like other major pharmaceutical companies, Sanofi-Aventis is making a big bet
on cancer drugs. Last month it announced plans to buy San Diego biotechnology
firm TargeGen Inc., which is developing a treatment for certain types of
leukemia, lymphoma, and other blood disorders, for $75 million, plus up to $485
million in additional incentives. Last year it agreed to pay up to $500 million
for BiPar Sciences, which is developing a new class of ``tumor-selective drugs''
to treat multiple types of cancer. BiPar is based outside San Francisco.

   Sanofi-Aventis, which also has major operations in Pennsylvania, New Jersey,
and elsewhere in the United States, already has two blockbuster cancer drugs.
Taxotere, a chemotherapy drug used to treat breast cancer, prostate cancer, and
other types of cancers, generated $2.8 billion in sales last year. Eloxatin,
used to treat colorectal cancer, reaped more than $1.2 billion for
Sanofi-Aventis last year.

   Last month, the US Food and Drug Administration approved Sanofi-Aventis's
Jevtana to be used in combination with another drug to treat metastatic
hormone-refractory prostate cancer, and the company has an array of additional
cancer drugs in its pipeline.

   It has also been working with Massachusetts biotechnology firms to develop
new drugs, including deals related to cancer research with Dyax Corp. in
Cambridge, ImmunoGen Inc. in Waltham, and Merrimack Pharmaceuticals Inc. in
Cambridge.

   Debasish Roychowdhury, who runs Sanofi-Aventis's new oncology unit, praised
Cambridge yesterday in a statement as a natural choice for the joint
headquarters ``given the city's role as one of the world's most important
centers for biotech research and talented oncology minds.''

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2010


                              78 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                              June 28, 2010 Monday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1121 words

HEADLINE: Children's Hospital on cusp of gene therapy breakthrough

BYLINE: By, Peggy O'Farrell

BODY:

   Local researchers are awaiting the green light to test a cutting-edge cure
for a devastating disease that leaves babies unable to fight off the simplest
infections.

   Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center has gotten permission from the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration to test a gene therapy treatment against
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, or so-called "bubble-boy" disease.
It's the first federal approval the Corryville hospital has received for a gene
therapy treatment conceived and manufactured in its own lab.

   Now, Alexandra Filipovich and her colleagues are waiting for the hospital's
own institutional review board to sign off the trial.

   "We're ready to go," said Filipovich, director of the hospital's
immunodeficiency and histiocytosis program and the primary investigator for the
trial.

   Maverick Steiner was only 4 months old when he was diagnosed with the disease
after a long run of illnesses, including ear infections and diarrhea that
wouldn't go away. Doctors grew worried when he developed a form of pneumonia
normally seen in AIDS patients  - a sign his immune system was seriously
compromised.

   The immune disorder is caused by a defective gene that leaves babies unable
to make two types of cells that attack bacteria, viruses and certain cancers.

   For most babies, including Maverick, a bone marrow transplant cures the
disease. But 20 to 30 percent of babies born with the disorder can't get a
transplant. Either they can't find a donor match or they're too sick to
withstand the procedure.

   For those babies, gene therapy could be the answer. It relies on technology
that lets doctors custom-tailor viruses that, instead of causing sickness, cure
it.

   For Filipovich's experiment, researchers will collect stem cells from babies
with the immune disorder.

   In the lab, those stem cells will be infected with specially designed viruses
that carry a functioning copy of the defective gene that causes the immune
disorder. The viruses have been engineered so that they can't cause illness.

   Doctors then will put the stem cells with the functioning gene back in the
babies through an IV. If the experiment works, the new gene will let the babies'
immune systems function normally, and they'll be able to fight off infections.

   The viruses carrying the new gene were designed and built at Cincinnati
Children's.

   The idea of using viruses to attack disease has great potential for treating
cystic fibrosis, Huntington's disease, sickle cell anemia and some forms of
cancer, including brain tumors, said Han van der Loo, the lab's director. It
also has the potential to attract world-class researchers, coveted federal
research dollars and private pharmaceutical contracts.

   Dr. Punam Malik, a hematology-oncology expert and co-director of the lab,
came to Cincinnati because of the viral vector lab.

   Malik, now the lab's co-director, is heading up a clinical trial testing gene
therapy as a potential cure for sickle-cell anemia. The trial could start in the
spring of 2011.

   Malik is organizing a clinical trial to test gene therapy as a potential cure
for sickle cell anemia. She's still waiting for approval from federal
regulators.

   It's taken Malik and her colleagues 10 years to get to this point  - and the
therapy hasn't been injected into a human being yet. It has been tested in lab
animals, but the altered viruses had to be designed and manufactured, and that
process costs money.

   Without the in-house lab, Malik said, she and her colleagues would have had
to contract with another research-grade lab, which would have required them to
put the science on hold while they found money. "We can't afford to do that,"
she said.

   To produce the altered viruses in both the quantity and quality suitable for
use in humans, Malik and other researchers without access to an in-house lab
would likely need to turn to the pharmaceutical industry. But the industry isn't
likely to be interested in producing an extremely expensive drug that might not
work.

   "They don't want to take a risk. They want a return on investment, and we
have no idea if we will have a return on investment," she said.

   Because Cincinnati Children's has its own viral vector lab and its own lab
for processing pharmaceutical-quality stem cells, the pressure to make a profit
is off. Researchers like Malik just have to find enough money to cover the cost
of labor and materials.

   The viral vector lab, a 10,000-square foot facility with nine "clean rooms"
in which technologists make the altered viruses, has the capacity to make a gene
therapy drug in sufficient quantities for small-scale human testing. Filipovich
hopes to recruit three patients through the hospital for the first phase of her
immune disorder experiment.

   If a gene therapy drug were found to be safe and effective enough to go onto
large-scale trials  - meaning it was likely to win FDA approval and make it to
the market  - the hospital would likely license, or sell, the drug to a
pharmaceutical company.

   Such a sale, which could mean millions of dollars.

   The hospital is already expecting other kinds.

   Because of the XSCID trial, Filipovich and her colleagues are getting
invitations from researchers in Europe to participate in a number of projects.
There's no way to put a price tag on that kind of opportunity, she said.

   For parents, there's no way to put a price tag on their children's health.

   Maverick, now 16 months old, is doing well since the bone marrow transplant,
said his mother, Jessica Steiner. She and her husband, Ryan, live in St.
Bernard.

   But Maverick spent nearly four months in the hospital while he was waiting
for the bone marrow transplant, which he underwent in October.

   "He's doing great now," she said.

   CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story incorrectly spelled the name of
Dr. Punam Malik.

   Gene therapy's risks

   Gene therapy isn't without risks. French researchers in the early 2000s
tested gene therapy on baby boys affected by X-linked severe combined immune
deficiency. Ten boys who received the therapy were cured, but by 2007, four of
those boys had developed leukemia triggered by the therapy, and at least one of
those boys died from the cancer.

   In 2003, because of the French trial, the FDA temporarily halted all gene
therapy trials. In 2005, the agency ruled that only babies who weren't suitable
candidates for bone marrow transplant could undergo gene therapy for XSCID.

   Researchers have learned a lot from the French trial, mostly about the
importance of using the right type of virus to deliver the therapy.

   When viruses invade cells and reproduce, they latch onto the infected cells'
genetic material in different locations.

   In the French trial, the altered viruses landed next to a gene that triggers
the onset of leukemia and switched it on.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 2010


                              79 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 28, 2010 Monday

SECTION: Quest; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: THE LEGACY OF THE SALK;
Institute marks 50 years of biological science research

BYLINE: By Michelle Day and Gary Robbins, CONTRIBUTING WRITER and STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Practically vanquishing polio -- the scourge of the 20th century -- wasn't
enough for Jonas Salk.

   He yearned to battle other diseases, especially those affecting children.

   So the renowned virologist from New York looked west, to a mesa in San Diego
County. Would it be possible, Salk wondered, to create a center on that bluff so
scientists from many fields could explore their interests with few distractions?

   The answer proved to be yes. The Salk Institute in La Jolla is celebrating
its 50th anniversary, and it's doing so as a jewel of biological science
research.

   Five scientists connected with Salk have gone on to win the Nobel Prize. They
include Francis Crick, who shared the 1962 Nobel Prize for discovering the
structure of DNA.

   Sixteen of Salk's faculty members have been elected to the National Academy
of Sciences, the honorific society created during the Lincoln administration to
advise Congress and the president on science and technology.

   Today the institute has 60 lead scientists, and its annual operating budget
exceeds $100 million.

   "The Salk was based on work by Jonas Salk that really changed the world, and
they have continued the tradition of very high-impact, world-class research
since then," said Drew Senyei, managing director of Enterprise Partners Venture
Capital, a firm that focuses on Southern California.

   "They represent world-class science for San Diego and for the world," he
added.

   Here is a look at five Salk researchers who have made important contributions
to science.

   ROGER GUILLEMIN

   The "father of neuroendocrinology'' was the first to isolate somatostatin, a
brain hormone that combats several types of tumors, notably tumors on the
pituitary gland.

   Guillemin shared the 1977 Nobel Prize in physiology or medicine for this
achievement. He also was one of the first scientists to isolate the body's
natural painkillers -- endorphins.

   His discovery of other brain hormones has improved treatments for a variety
of conditions, including thyroid disease, infertility and prostate tumors.

   FRANCIS CRICK

   Crick's career didn't end after he shared the Nobel Prize for revealing the
structure of DNA.

   He joined Salk as a nonresident fellow in 1960 and helped develop theories
about how to better understand the mechanisms behind consciousness and
attention. Crick played a key role in launching studies in neuroscience and
computational neurobiology at the Salk.

   RENATO DULBECCO

   In the early 1970s, Dulbecco unmasked the genetic nature of cancer. His
studies explained how a cancer virus inserts its own DNA into a cell's DNA and
causes tumor growth.

   For that discovery, Dulbecco and his collaborators shared the 1975 Nobel
Prize in physiology or medicine.

   Dulbecco also suggested in a 1986 article in the journal Science that a map
of the human genome was needed to fully understand cancer. Four years later,
researchers started the Human Genome Project.

   At 96, Dulbecco is still working. He is collaborating on studies dealing with
genes involved in breast cancer.

   INDER VERMA

   The geneticist has made significant discoveries about using modified viruses
for gene therapy.

   Verma and his team developed a stripped-down version of HIV, the virus that
causes AIDS, so it could deliver genes into non-dividing cells, which are the
majority of cells in the body. Until then, scientists had found success only
with cells that could divide.

   During clinical trials in 2009, the modified virus was used to stop
adrenoleukodystrophy, a potentially lethal genetic brain disorder, in two boys
in Spain. The rare disease is the topic of the 1992 film "Lorenzo's Oil."

   FRED H. GAGE

   In 1998, the neuroscientist overturned a long-held belief by proving that
human bodies can produce new brain cells throughout life, particularly in the
hippocampus, which distributes memory to appropriate areas of the brain.

   Gage and his team are studying how these new cells might be used in a
positive way, such as for replacing brain or spinal-cord cells damaged by injury
or neurodegenerative disease. The work involves finding ways to turn newborn
cells into mature ones.

GRAPHIC: 6 PICS

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2010


                              80 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 28, 2010 Monday

SECTION: Main News; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 134 words

HEADLINE: A half-century of discoveries

BODY:

   A polio vaccine pioneer established an institute in La Jolla 50 years ago,
envisioning a haven for fundamental research in the life sciences.

   Jonas Salk's dream has flourished over the years, and today the Salk
Institute for Biological Studies is internationally known.

   Among its past and present luminaries are five Nobel Prize laureates
including Francis Crick, who helped unravel the structure of DNA, and Renato
Dulbecco and Roger Guillemin, who made major contributions in the field of
oncology.

   Salk now operates with a yearly budget surpassing $100 million and boasts 60
lead scientists.

   Today's top researchers include Fred H. Gage, who found that people's bodies
can create new brain cells throughout life, and Inder Verma, a leader in
modifying viruses such as HIV for use in gene therapy.

   QUEST, E1

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2010


                              81 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2010 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Effort Uses Dogs' DNA To Track Their Abusers

BYLINE: By MALCOLM GAY

BODY:

   ST. LOUIS -- Scientists and animal rights advocates have enlisted DNA
evidence to do for man's best friend what the judicial system has long done for
human crime victims. They have created the country's first dog-fighting DNA
database, which they say will help criminal investigators piece together an
abused animal's history by establishing ties among breeders, owners, pit
operators and the animals themselves.

     Called the Canine Codis, or Combined DNA Index System, the database is
similar to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's digital archive containing the
DNA profiles of criminal offenders. Scientists say that by swabbing the inner
cheek of a dog, they will be able to determine whether the animal comes from one
of several known dog-fighting bloodlines.

     ''People are not generally going to the pound and buying pit bulls to fight
-- these dogs are from established bloodlines,'' said Tim Rickey, senior
director of field investigations and response for the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. ''And if a suspected dog fighter's animal
matches one of those bloodlines, that would be a key piece of evidence.''

     The database, a joint effort by the A.S.P.C.A., the Louisiana S.P.C.A., the
Humane Society of Missouri and researchers at the Veterinary Genetics Laboratory
at the University of California, Davis, was developed during an investigation
last July that resulted in 26 arrests and the seizure of more than 400 dogs. The
investigation, which stretched across seven states, from Iowa to Texas, resulted
in the largest dog-fighting raid in United States history, the authorities said.

     ''We ran the DNA to see if we could connect the different crime scenes and
400 different dogs, which we were able to do,'' said Dr. Melinda Merck, a
forensic veterinarian for the A.S.P.C.A. ''A lot of times defendants will claim
not only that they are not dog fighting, but also that they're just breeding and
they don't know each other.''

     The DNA showed otherwise, indicating that many of the dogs were related.
The July raids have yielded at least 17 guilty pleas, and while the DNA evidence
did not conclusively prove a relationship among defendants, it certainly
suggested one. Investigators caution, however, that DNA evidence alone will
rarely make a case, though many juries have come to expect it.

     ''There is definitely a C.S.I. effect,'' Dr. Merck said. ''Juries want to
know that if you have evidence you've run every possible test. The DNA is just
one more tool in our kit that can bolster our cases.'' She added, ''I do think
it's something that is going to make the dog-fighting world very nervous.''

     Illegal in all 50 states, dog fighting gained national attention in 2007
when Michael Vick, then the star quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons, pleaded
guilty to federal dog-fighting conspiracy charges and went on to serve 21 months
in prison.

     Investigators say the multimillion-dollar industry is often associated with
other illicit activities like drug trafficking and gambling. But the real money,
they say, comes from breeding the animals, which can fetch up to $50,000 for a
champion fighter.

     ''There's a lot of money that's made on the fight purses and the side
wagering, but the goal for these dog fighters is to breed a champion or a grand
champion,'' Mr. Rickey said. ''It's not uncommon to get $5,000 for a puppy. Over
a dog's lifespan, that can be in the tens of thousands if not hundreds of
thousands of dollars.''

     Researchers say the database, which contains the genetic profiles of nearly
400 of the dogs recovered in the raid, will become more useful as it grows.

     Beth Wictum, who directs the forensic unit at the University of California,
Davis, where the database is stored, hopes to ''identify other lineages that are
in the West.''

     Investigators add that the database may also prove useful in forensic
investigations of blood samples found at a dog-fighting site, allowing them to
establish the presence of a particular dog.

     ''One of the challenges in a lot of these fighting pits is that the losing
dogs are often executed and dumped along the side of the road somewhere,'' Mr.
Rickey said. ''This database may provide a useful tool for tracking down where
the animal was bred, and maybe the owner.''

     Nearly 250 of the animals recovered during the July 2009 raid have been
rehabilitated and are now pets or service and therapy dogs.

     ''These animals were horribly mutilated -- missing ears, missing eyes,
missing parts of their legs,'' said Jeane Jae, a spokeswoman for the Humane
Society of Missouri, which housed the animals that contributed to the database.
''But when given a choice, many will choose not to fight -- that's an animal
that's capable of rehabilitation.''

     One such animal, a brown and white pit bull that now goes by the name
Reggie, still bears a web of fight scars across his face. The dog cowers at the
sound of cheering crowds, which his owner, Gale Frey, believes he associates
with the roar of the fight pit.

     Nevertheless, Ms. Frey says, Reggie has made great strides and is being
trained to work as a therapy dog in St. Louis-area hospitals.

     ''We're moving forward,'' said Ms. Frey, who runs Phoenix Pack, a nonprofit
dog rescue service in St. Louis. ''The pit's in the past.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The country's first dog-fighting DNA database contains samples
from victims like Reggie, a pit bull recovered in a 2009 raid, and helps
establish ties among breeders, owners and pit operators. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK
KATZMAN)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2010


                              82 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              June 27, 2010 Sunday
                                TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: EFFORT USES DOGS' DNA TO TRACK THEIR ABUSERS

BYLINE: Malcom Gay, The New York Times

BODY:

   ST. LOUIS -- Scientists and animal rights advocates have enlisted DNA
evidence to do for man's best friend what the judicial system has long done for
human crime victims. They have created the country's first dog-fighting DNA
database, which they say will help criminal investigators piece together an
abused animal's history by establishing ties among breeders, owners, pit
operators and the animals themselves.

   Called the Canine Codis, or Combined DNA Index System, the database is
similar to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's digital archive containing the
DNA profiles of criminal offenders. Scientists say that by swabbing the inner
cheek of a dog, they will be able to determine whether the animal comes from one
of several known dog-fighting bloodlines.

   "People are not generally going to the pound and buying pit bulls to fight --
these dogs are from established bloodlines," said Tim Rickey, senior director of
field investigations and response for the American Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals. "And if a suspected dog fighter's animal matches one of
those bloodlines that would be a key piece of evidence."

   The database, a joint effort by the ASPCA, Louisiana SPCA, the Humane Society
of Missouri, and researchers at the Veterinary Genetics Laboratory at University
of California, Davis, was developed during an investigation last July that
resulted in 26 arrests and the seizure of more than 400 dogs. The investigation,
which stretched across seven states, from Iowa to Texas, resulted in the largest
dog-fighting raid in U.S. history, the authorities said.

   "We ran the DNA to see if we could connect the different crime scenes and 400
different dogs, which we were able to do," said Melinda Merck, a forensic
veterinarian for the ASPCA. "A lot of times defendants will claim not only that
they are not dog fighting, but also that they're just breeding, and they don't
know each other."

   The DNA showed otherwise, indicating that many of the dogs were related. The
July raids have yielded at least 17 guilty pleas, and while the DNA evidence did
not conclusively prove a relationship among defendants, it certainly suggested
one. Investigators caution that DNA evidence alone will rarely make a case,
though many juries have come to expect it.

   "There is definitely a CSI effect," Dr. Merck said. "Juries want to know that
if you have evidence you've run every possible test. The DNA is just one more
tool in our kit that can bolster our cases." She added, "I do think it's
something that is going to make the dog-fighting world very nervous."

   Illegal in all 50 states, dog fighting rose to prominence in 2007 when
Michael Vick, then the star quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons, pleaded guilty
to federal dog-fighting conspiracy charges and went on to serve 21 months in
prison.

   Investigators say the multimillion-dollar industry is often associated with
other illicit activities like drug trafficking and gambling. But the real money
comes from breeding the animals, which investigators say can fetch up to $50,000
for a champion fighter.

   "There's a lot of money that's made on the fight purses and the side
wagering, but the goal for these dog fighters is to breed a champion or a grand
champion," Mr. Rickey said. "It's not uncommon to get $5,000 for a puppy. Over a
dog's lifespan, that can be in the tens of thousands, if not hundreds of
thousands of dollars."

   Researchers say the database, which contains the genetic profiles of nearly
400 of the dogs recovered in the raid, will become more useful as it grows.

   Beth Wictum, who directs the forensic unit at the University of California,
Davis, where the database is stored, hopes to "identify other lineages that are
in the West."

   Investigators add that the database may also prove useful in forensic
investigations of blood samples found at a dog-fighting venue to establish the
presence of a particular dog.

   "One of the challenges in a lot of these fighting pits is that the losing
dogs are often executed and dumped along the side of the road somewhere," Mr.
Rickey said. "This database may provide a useful tool for tracking down where
the animal was bred and maybe the owner."

   Nearly 250 of the animals recovered during the July 2009 raid have been
rehabilitated, and are now living as pets, service or therapy dogs.

   "These animals were horribly mutilated -- missing ears, missing eyes, missing
parts of their legs," said Jeane Jae, a spokeswoman for the Humane Society of
Missouri, which housed the animals that contributed to the database. "But when
given a choice, many will choose not to fight -- that's an animal that's capable
of rehabilitation."

   One such animal, a brown-and-white pit bull that now goes by the name Reggie,
still bears a trace of fight scars across his face. The animal cowers at the
sound of cheering crowds, which his owner, Gale Frey, believes he associates
with the roar of the fight pit.

   Nevertheless, Ms. Frey says that Reggie has made great strides, and he is now
being trained to work as a therapy dog in St. Louis-area hospitals.

   "We're moving forward," said Ms. Frey, who runs Phoenix Pack, a nonprofit dog
rescue service in St. Louis. "The pit's in the past."

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2010


                              83 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              June 27, 2010 Sunday
                                TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 550 words

HEADLINE: NIH DENIES PLAN TO ALLOW NEW STEM CELL COLONIES

BYLINE: Rob Stein, The Washington Post

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- The National Institutes of Health has rejected a request to
approve 47 colonies of human embryonic stem cells that scientists had been
hoping would become available for use by federally funded researchers under the
Obama administration's new policy.

   NIH Director Francis Collins made the decision, announced last week, based on
the advice of an advisory panel, which concluded the lines had been obtained
from embryos that were donated by couples who signed consent forms that violated
strict new ethical guidelines. The agency posted his decision on its website.

   The availability of the lines, which were created by the private infertility
clinic Reproductive Genetics Institute in Chicago, had been eagerly awaited
because they carry mutations for a wide variety of diseases, including cystic
fibrosis, Huntington's disease and muscular dystrophy. Scientists hope studying
them will yield a wealth of information about those and other diseases, leading
to new treatments.

   But four out of five members of a panel of experts assembled by the NIH on
June 10 to review lines seeking approval for federal funding recommended against
them because the forms consenting couples signed contained unusually broad
language that gave up all rights to sue the clinic for any reason.

   "The NIH guidelines for reviewing stem cell lines for federal funding were
set up to adhere rigorously to the well established norms for informed consent,"
Mr. Collins said Monday. "It was frankly rather painful for my expert advisory
committee to recommend against approval of 42 additional lines from RGI because
of a consent problem, but rigorous guidelines are only meaningful if they are
rigorously applied."

   The lines were created from embryos obtained from couples who were undergoing
treatment for infertility and had decided not to use them because tests showed
the embryos carried genetic defects.

   The decision means that only researchers with private funding will be able to
continue working on the lines.

   "We are the only institution that has established this unique resource for
the world," said Anver Kuliev, the institute's director of research. "Much more
progress might occur -- for finding drugs, for gene therapy, for finding the
primary molecular defect for genetic disorders -- if they were approved by the
NIH."

   Mr. Collins did approve eight other new lines, bringing the total number of
lines now eligible for federal funding to 75.

   Former President George W. Bush had restricted federal funding to 21 lines of
cells that were already in existence in 2001 to prevent taxpayer dollars from
encouraging the destruction of more embryos to create additional lines.

   Critics of human embryonic stem cell research praised Bush's move, saying
that destroying embryos to advance academic study is immoral. But many
scientists condemned the restrictions, saying they were hindering research that
could lead to cures for Alzheimer's disease, diabetes, paralysis and other
ailments.

   Soon after taking office, President Barack Obama announced that he was
lifting his predecessor's restrictions. But some scientists have complained that
the new policy remained too restrictive because of the NIH's strict new ethical
guidelines, which, among other things, were designed to make sure couples were
advised of other options.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2010


                              84 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 27, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: Our Region; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: Let's see, where were we...

BYLINE: Tom Blair

BODY:

   OK, I apologize for not writing sooner. But I've been preoccupied for the
past 15 years. Back in 1995, when I left my Union-Tribune column to edit San
Diego Magazine, I said I was going from the best job in the city to the best job
in the city. I've done it again. There's not enough room here for me to catch
you up on the past decade and a half. But I can tell you where the city was when
last we met here.

   THE BIGGEST NEWS: Coach Bobby Ross and quarterback Stan Humphries were
leading the Chargers to their first (and so far only) Super Bowl. And 17,000 San
Diegans followed them to Miami ... Most of us flew coach. Sid and Jenny Craig
flew there on their private jet. Joan Kroc's 144-foot yacht was tied up at the
Ft. Lauderdale Marina. Juan Vargas, who came out six votes ahead Friday in the
latest tally of June 8 state senate primary votes, was a city councilman then --
and a man of modest means. Vargas and his aide Ralph Inzunza traveled the 2,600
miles across country in 53 hours, in a rented car, eating at Taco Bells and
taking turns sleeping in the reclining passenger seat ... Despite the Chargers'
homecoming in bitter defeat, the San Diego Historical Society put out the call
for fans to donate memorabilia from the Super Bowl. "Anything at all," they
suggested, "from programs to ticket stubs." "Or," I suggested, "a game plan --
if anyone's seen one."

   WHEN HILLARY CLINTON came to San Diego in February of 1995, the U.S. Health
Department contracted with San Diego Video & Film to record the first lady's
visit. And the company's Wayne Brubaker kept a straight face when the assigned
bureaucrat asked if he'd accept a Visa card. "No problem," said Brubaker," as
long as you haven't exceeded your $3 trillion limit." Today, of course, that
would be $13 trillion.

   LANGUAGE BARRIER: News on our blurred border with Mexico was considerably
softer in '95. The legendary director Craig Noel, who died this spring, told me
a tale back then about the Old Globe's winter offering of Shakespeare. The box
office, he said, took a call from a heavily accented woman seeking information
on the planned production. Did the theater, she asked, "still have tickets to
'Machado About Nothing?'"

   ITEMS INFINITUM: San Diego real estate was moving at a snail's pace back in
1995, too. The "For Rent" sign in the window of the Wyer Real Estate office in
La Jolla wasn't for a beach cottage. It was for the Wyer Real Estate office.
Going out of business after more than 50 years ... In Los Angeles, O.J. Simpson
was on trial for murdering his wife. And San Diego's Larry Barnes was on "Court
TV" offering commentary. His expert's credentials: As a deputy DA here, Barnes
won convictions prosecuting Laura Troiani for murdering her Marine husband in
Oceanside, and David Scott Harrison for killing his wife in San Marcos ...
Pennsylvania's Arlen Specter, who lost his U.S. Senate seat this month, was in
San Diego in early 1995, meeting with Mayor Susan Golding and begging for funds
from Republican high-rollers ... Golding was appearing on CNN to boast about our
city snagging the '96 GOP convention. Her backers figured the coup would enhance
her chances of moving up to the governor's office. It didn't.

   SHORT STUFF: On Tom Snyder's national TV talk show, Dennis Hopper was
recalling his early acting jobs on San Diego stages ... A CBS special, "The
Search for a Cure" (for AIDS), was citing great progress on an experimental gene
therapy at San Diego's Viagene ... Planet Hollywood had an all-star grand
opening -- with pre-Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger -- at Horton Plaza ... Ron
Roberts was a county supervisor. See? Not that much has changed in a decade and
a half.

   UNKINDEST CUT: At a social gathering, an investments man recognized me from
my newspaper photograph. "You write that little column down the left side of the
local page," he said. "What else do you do for a living?"

   POSTSCRIPT: So, that's where we were 15 years ago. Time to move on. I'll be
here every Sunday, Wednesday and Friday. E-mail me, call me. Help me tell you
what's going on in your city today.

   Tom Blair: (619) 293-1715; tom.blair@uniontrib.com

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2010


                              85 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2010 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths DARST, DIANE ELIZABETH WASSMAN, PH.D.

BODY:

   DARST--Diane Elizabeth Wassman, Ph.D.,of Greenwich, CT, passed away
gracefully surrounded by her adoring family on June 22, 2010. A true Renaissance
Woman, Dr. Darst was a founder and director of Learning to Look, a
nationally-known art education program for children that has been taught in
numerous schools in the Connecticut and New York metropolitan areas. She
authored two books, Western Civilization to 1648 and Learning to Look, A
Complete Art History and Art Appreciation Program for Grades K-8. An active
leader of numerous civic and cultural organizations, she served as Chairman of
the Boards of the Greenwich Library, the United Way of Greenwich, and the Bruce
Museum and as a member of the Boards of the Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy
(ACGT) and Greenwich Academy. She graduated first in her class, summa cum laude,
and Phi Beta Kappa, from Connecticut College and was awarded a Ph.D. in European
Cultural and Intellectual History from Columbia University under Jacques Barzun.
She also danced professionally with the Zurich Opera Ballet Company.

   Diane was dearly beloved and most admired as daughter, sister, wife, and
mother. She is survived by her husband, David M. Darst; her daughter Elizabeth
M. Darst and son-in-law Charles S. Leykum; her son David M. Darst, Jr.; her
brother E. Robert Wassman, M.D.; her sister Debra Wassman Lanman; and many
loving cousins, nieces, and nephews. Her beautiful spirit, her strength of
character, and her unending love will live on in all of us forever. Services
will be held at 10am on Friday, June 25, 2010, at the First Presbyterian Church
in Greenwich. Donations may be made in her memory to the Bruce Museum, the
Greenwich Library, or The United Way of Greenwich.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2010


                              86 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: What's On Today

BYLINE: By KATHRYN SHATTUCK

BODY:

   8 P.M. (TCM) PRIME TIME FEATURE: 60TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE KOREAN WAR ''Men in
War,'' Anthony Mann's 1957 masterpiece about two rival officers (Robert Ryan,
above left, and Aldo Ray) who join forces to save their troops during a retreat
from the North Koreans, kicks off this 15-film, 24-hour salute, which recalls
the beginning of the Korean War on June 25, 1950. The tribute continues with
John Ford's ''This Is Korea!'' (1951), which uses archival footage to document
the North Korean aggression that started it all, at 10, and Samuel Fuller's
''Steel Helmet'' (1951), about a cynical sergeant (Gene Evans) and a South
Korean orphan (William Chun) who join a ragtag group of American soldiers
trapped behind enemy lines, at 11. Friday's schedule includes ''Time Limit''
(1957), directed by Karl Malden and starring Richard Basehart as an officer
court-martialed under suspicion of collaborating with the North Koreans, at 2:30
p.m., and Arnold Laven's 1956 drama ''The Rack,'' with Paul Newman as a veteran
accused of cracking under torture while a prisoner of war, at 4:30.

     8 P.M. (HGTV) MY FIRST PLACE A newly combined family searches for a home
but is limited by a tight budget and a child's severe allergies. And then they
find the perfect house -- but so do eight other bidders.

     8 P.M. (CNN) IN AMERICA: GARY & TONY HAVE A BABY Gary Spino and Tony Brown,
who say they think that one of the most radical things gay people can do is form
a traditional family, want to have a baby. This report follows the couple as
they hire an egg donor and a surrogate, face an array of court battles and spend
a small fortune in a quest to have a child with a biological and legal
connection to both of them.

     8:30 P.M. (NBC) 100 QUESTIONS  Charlotte (Sophie Winkleman) and Wayne
(David Walton) recall their first encounter. Elsewhere Leslie (Smith Cho)
discovers that her ex is getting married, and Wayne confesses that his father
has cut him off.

     8:30 P.M. (TV5Monde) ZIM AND CO. (2005) In the role that earned him a Cesar
nomination for most promising actor, Adrien Jolivet plays Zim, a 20-year-old
from the impoverished outskirts of Paris, who, after a motor scooter accident,
is forced to get a job to stay out of prison. But the only work he can find
requires a car and a driver's license -- and he has neither. Fortunately he does
have good friends. Mr. Jolivet's father, Pierre, directed this comedy, which
also stars Mhamed Arezki, Yannick Nasso and Naidra Ayadi. In French with English
subtitles.

     9 P.M. (USA) BURN NOTICE Michael (Jeffrey Donovan, right) and Sam (Bruce
Campbell) become ensnared in a hostage situation at a bank. Fiona (Gabrielle
Anwar) helps Jesse (Coby Bell) get information on a weapons runner. In ''Royal
Pains,'' at 10, Boris (Campbell Scott) takes Hank (Mark Feuerstein) abroad to
research gene therapy. Back in the Hamptons, Hank's fill-in irritates Divya
(Reshma Shetty).

     9 P.M. (Bravo) THE REAL HOUSEWIVES OF NEW YORK CITY The season that
wouldn't die: After three weeks of reunion specials the series signs off, until
the next round, with an hour of previously unseen diva tantrums. In ''Bethenny
Getting Married?,'' at 10, Bethenny Frankel heads to Atlantic City for a
combined bachelor-bachelorette party. After which she has a breakdown.

     9 P.M. (Fox) SO YOU THINK YOU CAN DANCE One of the Top 10 competitors is
voted off. Debi Nova and RemoteKontrol perform.

     10 P.M. (Showtime) PENN & TELLER The men confront the fact and fiction of
martial arts. In ''The Green Room With Paul Provenza,'' at 10:30, Mr. Provenza
shoots the breeze about current events with the comedians Andy Dick, Dana Gould,
Andy Kindler and Brendon Burns.

     10 P.M. (WE) RAISING SEXTUPLETS A second season, a second birthday for the
Masche sextuplets. But what happens when you multiply the Terrible 2's by six?
The toddlers' dad, Bryan, finds out when he steps into a bear suit to entertain
party guests. Later he ponders a career change that could take the family to
Florida and attends marriage counseling with his wife, Jenny.

     10 P.M. (TBS) HOW TO BUILD THE PERFECT GROWN UP Just in time for the
premiere of ''Grown Ups,'' which arrives in theaters on Friday, the film's stars
-- Adam Sandler, Chris Rock, Kevin James, David Spade and Rob Schneider --
recount personal stories, including how they met, and trace the development of
their comedic styles. The special is part of the second annual ''TBS Presents a
'Very Funny' Festival: Just for Laughs'' in Chicago. KATHRYN SHATTUCK

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010


                              87 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths DARST, DIANE ELIZABETH WASSMAN, PH.D.

BODY:

   DARST--Diane Elizabeth Wassman, Ph.D.,of Greenwich, CT, passed away
gracefully surrounded by her adoring family on June 22, 2010. A true Renaissance
Woman, Dr. Darst was a founder and director of Learning to Look, a
nationally-known art education program for children that has been taught in
numerous schools in the Connecticut and New York metropolitan areas. She
authored two books, Western Civilization to 1648 and Learning to Look, A
Complete Art History and Art Appreciation Program for Grades K-8. An active
leader of numerous civic and cultural organizations, she served as Chairman of
the Boards of the Greenwich Library, the United Way of Greenwich, and the Bruce
Museum and as a member of the Boards of the Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy
(ACGT) and Greenwich Academy. She graduated first in her class, summa cum laude,
and Phi Beta Kappa, from Connecticut College and was awarded a Ph.D. in European
Cultural and Intellectual History from Columbia University under Jacques Barzun.
She also danced professionally with the Zurich Opera Ballet Company.

   Diane was dearly beloved and most admired as daughter, sister, wife, and
mother. She is survived by her husband, David M. Darst; her daughter Elizabeth
M. Darst and son-in-law Charles S. Leykum; her son David M. Darst, Jr.; her
brother E. Robert Wassman, M.D.; her sister Debra Wassman Lanman; and many
loving cousins, nieces, and nephews. Her beautiful spirit, her strength of
character, and her unending love will live on in all of us forever. Services
will be held at 10am on Friday, June 25, 2010, at the First Presbyterian Church
in Greenwich. Donations may be made in her memory to the Bruce Museum, the
Greenwich Library, or The United Way of Greenwich.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010


                              88 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 59 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths DARST, DIANE WASSMAN

BODY:

   DARST--Diane Wassman. Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy, Inc. (ACGT) mourns
the loss of Diane Wassman Darst, an initial Board member whose participation
will be deeply missed by all of her colleagues who shared her passionate
devotion to the mission of ACGT. Board of Directors and Staff Scientific
Advisory Council Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy, Inc.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010


                              89 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             June 24, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A 02

LENGTH: 472 words

HEADLINE: Successor for Clausen sought ;
Fill-in to be tapped as search conducted

BYLINE: Jan Moller Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- Members of the Board of Regents said Wednesday that they hope
to find a temporary replacement for Commissioner of Higher Education Sally
Clausen within weeks, which will be followed by a national search for a
permanent commissioner that could take six months or longer.

   Regents Chairman Artis Terrell said the search for a new commissioner will be
"transparent and comprehensive" and will be handled by a special search
committee, consisting of at least seven board members, that is expected to be
appointed today.

   The development came as the board met for the first time since Clausen, 64,
announced her resignation June 8 amid mounting criticism over a secret one-day
retirement last August that netted her a $90,000 payout for unused leave time
and a $146,000 annual pension that would have kicked in Aug. 1 had she stayed on
the job.

   Terrell said salary levels for the acting commissioner and permanent
appointee have yet to be decided, but won't be pegged to Clausen's $425,000
annual pay package. Instead, the board is reviewing what similar officials in
other Southern states are being paid before making a decision on compensation.

   Unlike previous commissioners, the next commissioner will be chosen with help
from the state Legislature if Gov. Bobby Jindal signs a bill that was approved
in the waning hours of the legislative session. Under Senate Bill 488 by Sen.
Ben Nevers, D-Bogalusa, commissioners would have to be confirmed by the Senate,
and the salary for the position would have to be approved by the budget
committees in the House and Senate.

   It also comes at a time of rapid change for the higher-education policy and
coordinating agency, which oversees Louisiana's 19 public colleges, universities
and professional schools but does not manage their day-to-day affairs. The
Legislature cut the Regents' state support by $17.7 million for the upcoming
fiscal year, a 53 percent reduction that will lead to employee layoffs and large
cuts to "pass-through" initiatives such as health-care work-force training,
gene-therapy research, distance learning initiatives and computerized planning
tools that help students plan for college.

   Layoffs, retirements and resignations have combined to shrink the agency's
employee head count from 95 to 81 since last month, and spokeswoman Meg Casper
said more layoffs are likely in the weeks ahead.

   In other action Wednesday, the Regents voted 7-3 to adopt a new financing
formula for colleges and universities that ties 25 percent of an institution's
budget to certain performance measures. But the formula won't have any effect in
the 2010-11 budget year, as the Legislature added language to the state budget
bill that allocates money between various campuses based on the old formula.

   . . . . . . .

   Jan Moller can be reached at jmoller@timespicayune.com or 225.342.5207.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2010


                              90 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            June 16, 2010 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: Pfizer adds focus on rare diseases;
Cambridge-based group may compete with Genzyme

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Pfizer Inc. is setting up a rare disease research and development group in
Cambridge, a move that will put the world's largest drug maker in direct
competition with local biotechnology firms such as Genzyme Corp.

   Pfizer signaled its intentions to increase its focus on making drugs to treat
rare diseases Dec. 1, when it said it would spend up to $110 million to license
global rights to a treatment being developed by Israeli start-up Protalix
BioTherapeutics Inc. for the genetic disorder Gaucher disease.

   Genzyme's treatment for Gaucher disease, Cerezyme, is the Cambridge company's
top-selling product. Also, the Lexington-based human genetic therapies division
of British drug maker Shire PLC has asked the Food and Drug Administration for
approval to market a rival treatment for Gaucher.

   Production problems at Genzyme's plant in Allston last summer caused the
temporary rationing of Cerezyme, creating an opening for competing drugs in a
market where treatments can cost as much as $300,000 a year per patient. Pfizer
was quick to seek to capitalize.

   At an appearance in Boston on the day the Protalix alliance was disclosed,
Pfizer chief executive Jeff Kindler said the deal with the Israeli company was
``the first of many we're trying to meet unmet medical needs in a way we haven't
done before.'' Kindler said ``diseases that otherwise might not be well served
are an opportunity for us.''

   Shares of Pfizer edged up 19 cents, or 1.2 percent, to $15.50 on the New York
Stock Exchange yesterday. Genzyme shares climbed 88 cents, or 1.8 percent, to
$50.38 on the Nasdaq exchange.

   Genzyme spokeswoman Lori Gorski declined to comment on Pfizer's foray into
rare disease research.

   The move follows that of another pharmaceutical giant, Britain's
GlaxoSmithKline, which in February unveiled plans for a stand-alone rare
diseases unit.

   Pfizer's research will draw on the ex pertise the company has in marketing a
treatment for hemophilia, said Jose Carlos Gutierrez-Ramos, the company's
Cambridge-based senior vice president for biotherapeutics research and
development.

   ``The whole idea for getting into this space was first of all due to the need
and, second, that we were already there for hemophilia,'' Gutierrez-Ramos said.
``A lot of it is internal expertise, but we will build a small new group.''

   Pfizer's rare diseases research operation will be led by Dr. Edward Masciolo,
most recently the founder and chief executive of Dapis Capital, a private equity
firm investing in health care and life sciences businesses. Gutierrez-Ramos said
it was too early to say how many additional researchers Pfizer would hire for
the new Cambridge unit.

   In addition to hemophilia, the unit will initially concentrate on treatments
for muscular dystrophy and serious diseases caused by genetic mutations.

   Anne E. Wilson, a Pfizer spokeswoman in New York, said the size of the
company's investment ``will be proportional to the medical need'' in the field
of rare diseases. Pfizer will seek to strike partnerships with Boston area
universities and biotechnology firms, she said.

   Pfizer's decision to concentrate on rare disease treatments comes less than a
month after the company disclosed plans to eliminate about 6,000 manufacturing
jobs worldwide over the next five years. That includes about 300 at the Andover
biotechnology plant it acquired when it purchased Wyeth Pharmaceuticals for $68
billion last year.

   The job cuts, which will be done through layoffs and attrition, will leave
Pfizer with just over 2,000 employees in Massachusetts, including 750 at two
research and development sites in Cambridge.

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2010


                              91 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2010 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2380 words

HEADLINE: A Thief of Memory Stalks a Colombian Family

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

BODY:

   YARUMAL, Colombia -- Tucked away on a steep street in this rough-hewn
mountain town, an old woman found herself diapering her middle-age children.

     At frighteningly young ages, in their 40s, four of Laura Cuartas's children
began forgetting and falling apart, assaulted by what people here have long
called La Bobera, the foolishness. It is a condition attributed, in hushed
rumors, to everything from touching a mysterious tree to the revenge of a
wronged priest.

     It is Alzheimer's disease, and at 82, Mrs. Cuartas, her gray raisin of a
face grave, takes care of three of her afflicted children.

     One son, Dario, 55, babbles incoherently, shreds his socks and diapers, and
squirms so vigorously he is sometimes tied to a chair with baggy blue shorts.

     A daughter, Maria Elsy, 61, a nurse who at 48 started forgetting patients'
medications, and whose rages made her attack a sister who bathed her, is a human
shell, mute, fed by nose tube.

     Another son, Oderis, 50, denies that his memory is dying, that he remembers
to buy only one thing at a time: milk, not milk and plantains. If he gets
Alzheimer's, he says, he will poison himself.

     ''To see your children like this ... ,'' Mrs. Cuartas said. ''It's
horrible, horrible. I wouldn't wish this on a rabid dog. It is the most
terrifying illness on the face of the earth.''

     For generations, the illness has tormented these and thousands of others
among a sprawling group of relatives: the world's largest family to experience
Alzheimer's disease. Now, the Colombian clan is center stage in a potentially
groundbreaking assault on Alzheimer's, a plan to see if giving treatment before
dementia starts can lead to preventing Alzheimer's altogether.

     Most family members come from one Andes region, Antioquia. Geography, and
Basque ancestry, have isolated people here, who call themselves paisas,
countrymen. Over three centuries, many in this clan of 5,000 people have
inherited a single genetic mutation guaranteeing that they will develop
Alzheimer's.

     Large families, and intermarriage, have accelerated the spread. Mrs.
Cuartas's fourth debilitated child, in Medellin, Carlos Alberto Villegas, a
former livestock trader and guitar serenader now often fed by baby bottle,
married a distant cousin. His mother-in-law  is an addled ghost; three of his
wife's 11 siblings, so far, are developing dementia.

     With Alzheimer's in both parents' families, Mr. Villegas's three children
could face extraordinary risk. One, Natalia, 22, asks: ''How long have I got,
till I'm 35? There's no way out.''

     Memories begin failing in one's 40s, occasionally as early as 32. By 47, on
average, full-blown Alzheimer's develops.

     Their form of Alzheimer's, early-onset, was once considered too different
to provide clues about far more common late-onset Alzheimer's, which has unknown
causes and primarily affects people over 65.

     But it turns out that both forms produce nearly identical brain changes and
symptoms. Now, scientists will test as-yet-unproven treatments on Colombians
genetically destined for Alzheimer's but not yet showing symptoms. They will
give a to-be-determined drug or vaccine and see if it prevents memory loss or
brain atrophy. If their disease can be halted, that could generate treatments to
protect millions worldwide from common Alzheimer's.

     Devising an Early Attack

     Alzheimer's has repeatedly resisted attempts to treat it. Current drugs,
for people who are already impaired, show little benefit. Now scientists want to
attack earlier. New findings show ''the brain is badly damaged by the time they
have dementia,'' said Dr. John C. Morris, an Alzheimer's researcher at
Washington University in St. Louis. ''Perhaps the reason our therapies have been
ineffective or mostly ineffective is that we're administering them too late.''

     With Alzheimer's afflicting 5.3 million Americans and 30 million people
worldwide, numbers that some predict will double or triple by 2050, ''we can't
wait to try to do prevention until we are absolutely certain what causes'' the
disease, said Neil Buckholtz, chief of dementias of aging at the National
Institute on Aging. ''This public health emergency,'' he said, is ''just going
to get out of control if we don't do something.''

     But preventive research is difficult. Participants should be people
guaranteed, or highly likely, to develop dementia, and with common Alzheimer's
identifying such people is challenging because the disease's cause is unknown.
Also, because people would not be sick when treated, potential negative side
effects of drugs are especially worrisome.

     Colombia appears to be the best option. Mutation carriers always develop
Alzheimer's, and researchers know roughly when. They can give treatment about
five years before expected memory loss, then see if brain changes or symptoms
occur later or not at all.

     Since Colombians with Alzheimer's are young, without many old-age ailments,
they have ''cleaner brains that can give a better picture'' of whether drugs
work, Dr. Buckholtz said.

     And the extended family's single location, large size and similar
lifestyles provide enough comparable participants for solid scientific data.

     ''This is the only place in the world where we can find a family like this,
where it's possible to do prevention therapy more easily,'' said Dr. Francisco
Lopera, a Medellin neurologist who identified the family's illness 28 years ago
and helped discover its cause, an altered protein on the presenilin 1 gene on
chromosome 14: the Paisa mutation.

     Scientists consider Colombians not only valuable subjects but also
deserving ones. ''We'd be giving people at the highest imminent risk of
Alzheimer's access to treatment they wouldn't otherwise have,'' said a project
leader, Dr. Eric M. Reiman, director of Banner Alzheimer's Institute in Phoenix.

     Scientists are recruiting participants, hoping to start testing next year.
Family members without symptoms, roughly 38 to 45 years old, will be
gene-tested, given treatment or placebos, and monitored with memory tests, brain
scans and other measures. A companion American trial will involve 60- to
80-year-olds with another rare trait: two copies of a different gene, which does
not cause, but substantially increases risk of common late-onset Alzheimer's.

     The treatment, likely to be chosen by independent experts, could have
failed with already demented patients or be something new. It will attack a
protein, beta-amyloid, considered a culprit by many scientists because it
creates plaques, deposits between nerve cells. The treatment could be a drug
that destroys or prevents plaques, or a vaccine that contains or encourages
production of anti-amyloid antibodies.

     The project was not always an easy sell. For years, ''I've been sort of
shopping this around,'' said Dr. Kenneth S. Kosik, a University of California,
Santa Barbara, neuroscientist, who has long studied the family. ''People would
get interested, then realize there are huge logistical hurdles. Medellin was a
murder capital of the world. Nobody wanted to even talk about going to
Colombia.''

     Challenges included a relatively uneducated population with misconceptions
about Alzheimer's, that it was transmitted through sex with already mad women,
or from blood of a sufferer's self-inflicted scratches. Relatives, who handle
caregiving here, sometimes take desperate measures, like locking the
''affecteds'' in rooms to prevent wandering.

     Marriage options were often limited, and many did not realize that
intermarriage could increase chances of passing Alzheimer's to children. When
Laura Cuartas's son Carlos Alberto Villegas married a cousin, Blanca Nelly
Betancur, people knew La Bobera was on both sides, and some called the family
''the clan of the bobos.'' But while Mr. Villegas told his bride-to-be that his
father ''had become foolish,'' she said, back then, ''Carlos was healthy.''

     Others talk of drastic reactions if they learn they are mutation-carriers.

     ''I'd kill myself,'' said Mr. Villegas's brother-in-law, Albeiro Betancur,
40, a bus driver with four children. ''I'd throw myself under a train.''

     Such reactions, plus the lack of genetic counseling here, are why people
gene-tested by Dr. Lopera, the Medellin neurologist, are not told if they will
get Alzheimer's. Even he knows carriers only by computer code, not by name.

     American research participants sometimes learn their genetic status, and
questions arose about testing drugs on Colombians who are unaware they are
carriers. The answer was to give all participants something, so
mutation-carriers are not revealed. Placebos will be given to noncarriers;
treatment or placebos to carriers.

     Project leaders said the treatment's safety was the highest priority. Some
past drug trials on already-sick Alzheimer's patients were stopped because
patients developed brain inflammation or risked heart problems. If treatments
tested here were devised for 80-year-old Alzheimer's patients, doses must be
calibrated for 40-year-olds, some of them potentially pregnant women. And
testing drugs on people who are not yet sick can be especially risky.

     ''We're going to be treating people who are completely healthy,'' Dr. Kosik
said. ''The nightmare scenario is obviously that there's a serious side
effect.''

     There were other challenges: upgrading brain-scanning and other equipment,
and persuading drug companies to accept the financial and safety risks of
sponsoring such research.

     ''Two years ago,'' said Dr. Pierre N. Tariot, a project leader who directs
the Banner Alzheimer's Institute's memory disorders center, ''most scientists
would have said this is not feasible,'' considering it ''science fiction.''

     Now, scientists are recruiting drug-industry sponsors for the $50 million
trial They currently have $8 million from donors. Some companies envision
testing new treatments; others envision recovering investment in therapies that
failed with already-demented people. ''Prevent even one early-onset patient from
getting the disease, that's a major victory,'' said Dale Schenk, chief
scientific officer for the Elan Corporation. ''It's not even debatable whether
this should be done. It has to be done.''

     The Search for Markers

     Researchers will also explore when Alzheimer's begins, and why, examining
which brain changes, or biomarkers, precede symptoms, Dr. Reiman said. If brain
shrinkage, brain activity or beta-amyloid levels are identified as definitive
biomarkers, doctors may be able to treat those, the way they treat cholesterol
to prevent heart disease.

     Scientists will also intensively study 40 18- to 25-year-olds to see if
brain changes appear in people that young. If they do, children 8 to 17 will be
studied.

     A new memory test catches an early symptom: remembering only one
characteristic of something. By age 35, Paisa-mutation carriers ''may remember
seeing an apple, but not remember it's in the fridge,'' said a psychologist, Dr.
Mario Parra, who created the test, in which people shown colored shapes must
recall both the shapes and colors.

     Scientists recently rode into Angostura, ancestral home of many family
members. ''First time I've seen gringos come to town,'' a villager remarked.

     Villages like Angostura had often been too dangerous. Once, a nurse
assisting Dr. Lopera, Lucia Madrigal, was kidnapped by guerrillas while
collecting blood for gene testing. ''I do not care how long you retain me,'' she
said, but ''take care of the samples.''

     She was released eight days later (guerrillas chilled the blood in a
river), but Dr. Lopera's team stopped visiting some villages for years. During
that time, Ms. Madrigal visited Angostura only when asked by a guerrilla boss.
His mother had Alzheimer's.

     With Angostura still risky, Dr. Lopera scheduled a brief visit, sending
advance staff members instructed not to disclose that Americans were coming.

     As a strong sun sliced the sky and rifle-bearing army soldiers watched,
family members squeezed into a squat building, Catholic maxims on walls.

     ''You may think you live in a very small town in a remote corner of the
world,'' Dr. Kosik said. ''But Alzheimer's is of concern to people all over the
world, and this town is very special.''

     Questions flew.

     ''Give us this medicine and then will we ever hear from you again?''
Scientists reassured them.

     What about economic assistance? Dr. Tariot said trial sponsors would be
asked to provide needs like antibiotics, food and adult diapers.

     For years, Dr. Lopera has been frustrated that he could provide only
support, and medication for ancillary Alzheimer's symptoms like seizures and
sleeplessness. Albeiro Betancur, Mr. Villegas's brother-in-law, said he had
stopped participating in Dr. Lopera's previous research, because there was ''no
prospect of any cure.''

     With this project, some, like Laura Cuartas's daughter, Gloria, who helps
care for her demented siblings, worried about ''damage that can be done'' by
side effects, but many, including Mr. Betancur, welcomed the possibility of
''taking something that might help.''

     Potential results are years away.

     Recently, Dr. Lopera examined Laura Cuartas's son, Oderis Villegas, whose
fading memory makes him carry calendars, writing each night, ''do not cross out
tomorrow.''

     But for Dr. Lopera, Mr. Villegas, studiously groomed in yellow shirt and
polished shoes, puffed with bravado, giddily agreeing to hop, whistle, touch his
nose. ''I'm the big help in the house; that's why I don't work,'' he said. ''I
feel fine every day. In every sense.''

     ''When were you born?'' Dr. Lopera asked.

     ''April 1960.''

     ''How old are you?''

     ''Close to 70, right?''

     ''You have a good memory?''

     ''Yes, sir.''

     Dr. Lopera listed three sentences: ''The boy walks down the street,'' ''The
man drinks coffee,'' ''Oranges grow on trees.''

     ''What was the first?''

     ''The boy drinks coffee.''

     ''The second?''

     ''The children walk on trees.''

     Asked about his Alzheimer's risk, Mr. Villegas said, ''I don't have it,''
laughing.

     ''Just by chance and when I am distracted by people or something,'' he
said, ''I may forget, but that is very rare. For anyone to say that I have the
beginning of Alzheimer's, no.''

     The Vanishing Mind: Articles in this series are examining  the worldwide
struggle to find answers  about Alzheimer's disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gloria Villegas cares for her sister Maria Elsy, 61, who showed
signs of Alzheimer's in her 40s. Video: nytimes.com/health. (A1)
Though he denies it, Oderis Villegas, center, shows signs of Alzheimer's disease
at 50. A sister, Maria Elsy, left, has a more advanced case. With them in
Yarumal, Colombia, were Dr. Francisco Lopera, second from right, and Dr. Kenneth
Kosik.
Carlos Alberto, 53. Onset of memory problems at 41.
Maria Elsy, 61 (his sister) 48 at onset.
Dario, 55 (his brother) 47 at onset.
Oderis, 50 (his brother) 46 at onset.
Blanca Nelly, 41 (his wife) Currently no symptoms.
William, 48 (her brother) 45 at onset.
Gladys, 36 (her sister) Too afraid to have childen.
Liliana, 29 (her sister) Terrified of any memory lapse.
Two sisters show early symptoms but deny it. (A12)
In Yarumal, Maria Elsy Villegas, 61, top, who once worked as a nurse, now must
be fed by nose tube. In Medellin, Carlos Alberto Villegas, center, has
Alzheimer's
 his wife, Blanca Nelly, shows no symptoms. Their daughter Natalia, 22, above
with her father, fears for her future.   (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD HEISLER)(A13)
CHART: A Clouded Inheritance: A group of 25 families in Colombia has inherited a
genetic mutation from common ancestors, making members prone to early-onset
Alzheimer's. At right, Alzheimer's cases among the founding members of the clan
and some of their early descendants, who number in the thousands today. (Source:
University of Antioquia) (A12)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2010


                              92 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             June 2, 2010 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2380 words

HEADLINE: A Thief of Memory Stalks a Colombian Family

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

BODY:

   YARUMAL, Colombia -- Tucked away on a steep street in this rough-hewn
mountain town, an old woman found herself diapering her middle-age children.

     At frighteningly young ages, in their 40s, four of Laura Cuartas's children
began forgetting and falling apart, assaulted by what people here have long
called La Bobera, the foolishness. It is a condition attributed, in hushed
rumors, to everything from touching a mysterious tree to the revenge of a
wronged priest.

     It is Alzheimer's disease, and at 82, Mrs. Cuartas, her gray raisin of a
face grave, takes care of three of her afflicted children.

     One son, Dario, 55, babbles incoherently, shreds his socks and diapers, and
squirms so vigorously he is sometimes tied to a chair with baggy blue shorts.

     A daughter, Maria Elsy, 61, a nurse who at 48 started forgetting patients'
medications, and whose rages made her attack a sister who bathed her, is a human
shell, mute, fed by nose tube.

     Another son, Oderis, 50, denies that his memory is dying, that he remembers
to buy only one thing at a time: milk, not milk and plantains. If he gets
Alzheimer's, he says, he will poison himself.

     ''To see your children like this ... ,'' Mrs. Cuartas said. ''It's
horrible, horrible. I wouldn't wish this on a rabid dog. It is the most
terrifying illness on the face of the earth.''

     For generations, the illness has tormented these and thousands of others
among a sprawling group of relatives: the world's largest family to experience
Alzheimer's disease. Now, the Colombian clan is center stage in a potentially
groundbreaking assault on Alzheimer's, a plan to see if giving treatment before
dementia starts can lead to preventing Alzheimer's altogether.

     Most family members come from one Andes region, Antioquia. Geography, and
Basque ancestry, have isolated people here, who call themselves paisas,
countrymen. Over three centuries, many in this clan of 5,000 people have
inherited a single genetic mutation guaranteeing that they will develop
Alzheimer's.

     Large families, and intermarriage, have accelerated the spread. Mrs.
Cuartas's fourth debilitated child, in Medellin, Carlos Alberto Villegas, a
former livestock trader and guitar serenader now often fed by baby bottle,
married a distant cousin. His mother-in-law  is an addled ghost; three of his
wife's 11 siblings, so far, are developing dementia.

     With Alzheimer's in both parents' families, Mr. Villegas's three children
could face extraordinary risk. One, Natalia, 22, asks: ''How long have I got,
till I'm 35? There's no way out.''

     Memories begin failing in one's 40s, occasionally as early as 32. By 47, on
average, full-blown Alzheimer's develops.

     Their form of Alzheimer's, early-onset, was once considered too different
to provide clues about far more common late-onset Alzheimer's, which has unknown
causes and primarily affects people over 65.

     But it turns out that both forms produce nearly identical brain changes and
symptoms. Now, scientists will test as-yet-unproven treatments on Colombians
genetically destined for Alzheimer's but not yet showing symptoms. They will
give a to-be-determined drug or vaccine and see if it prevents memory loss or
brain atrophy. If their disease can be halted, that could generate treatments to
protect millions worldwide from common Alzheimer's.

     Devising an Early Attack

     Alzheimer's has repeatedly resisted attempts to treat it. Current drugs,
for people who are already impaired, show little benefit. Now scientists want to
attack earlier. New findings show ''the brain is badly damaged by the time they
have dementia,'' said Dr. John C. Morris, an Alzheimer's researcher at
Washington University in St. Louis. ''Perhaps the reason our therapies have been
ineffective or mostly ineffective is that we're administering them too late.''

     With Alzheimer's afflicting 5.3 million Americans and 30 million people
worldwide, numbers that some predict will double or triple by 2050, ''we can't
wait to try to do prevention until we are absolutely certain what causes'' the
disease, said Neil Buckholtz, chief of dementias of aging at the National
Institute on Aging. ''This public health emergency,'' he said, is ''just going
to get out of control if we don't do something.''

     But preventive research is difficult. Participants should be people
guaranteed, or highly likely, to develop dementia, and with common Alzheimer's
identifying such people is challenging because the disease's cause is unknown.
Also, because people would not be sick when treated, potential negative side
effects of drugs are especially worrisome.

     Colombia appears to be the best option. Mutation carriers always develop
Alzheimer's, and researchers know roughly when. They can give treatment about
five years before expected memory loss, then see if brain changes or symptoms
occur later or not at all.

     Since Colombians with Alzheimer's are young, without many old-age ailments,
they have ''cleaner brains that can give a better picture'' of whether drugs
work, Dr. Buckholtz said.

     And the extended family's single location, large size and similar
lifestyles provide enough comparable participants for solid scientific data.

     ''This is the only place in the world where we can find a family like this,
where it's possible to do prevention therapy more easily,'' said Dr. Francisco
Lopera, a Medellin neurologist who identified the family's illness 28 years ago
and helped discover its cause, an altered protein on the presenilin 1 gene on
chromosome 14: the Paisa mutation.

     Scientists consider Colombians not only valuable subjects but also
deserving ones. ''We'd be giving people at the highest imminent risk of
Alzheimer's access to treatment they wouldn't otherwise have,'' said a project
leader, Dr. Eric M. Reiman, director of Banner Alzheimer's Institute in Phoenix.

     Scientists are recruiting participants, hoping to start testing next year.
Family members without symptoms, roughly 38 to 45 years old, will be
gene-tested, given treatment or placebos, and monitored with memory tests, brain
scans and other measures. A companion American trial will involve 60- to
80-year-olds with another rare trait: two copies of a different gene, which does
not cause, but substantially increases risk of common late-onset Alzheimer's.

     The treatment, likely to be chosen by independent experts, could have
failed with already demented patients or be something new. It will attack a
protein, beta-amyloid, considered a culprit by many scientists because it
creates plaques, deposits between nerve cells. The treatment could be a drug
that destroys or prevents plaques, or a vaccine that contains or encourages
production of anti-amyloid antibodies.

     The project was not always an easy sell. For years, ''I've been sort of
shopping this around,'' said Dr. Kenneth S. Kosik, a University of California,
Santa Barbara, neuroscientist, who has long studied the family. ''People would
get interested, then realize there are huge logistical hurdles. Medellin was a
murder capital of the world. Nobody wanted to even talk about going to
Colombia.''

     Challenges included a relatively uneducated population with misconceptions
about Alzheimer's, that it was transmitted through sex with already mad women,
or from blood of a sufferer's self-inflicted scratches. Relatives, who handle
caregiving here, sometimes take desperate measures, like locking the
''affecteds'' in rooms to prevent wandering.

     Marriage options were often limited, and many did not realize that
intermarriage could increase chances of passing Alzheimer's to children. When
Laura Cuartas's son Carlos Alberto Villegas married a cousin, Blanca Nelly
Betancur, people knew La Bobera was on both sides, and some called the family
''the clan of the bobos.'' But while Mr. Villegas told his bride-to-be that his
father ''had become foolish,'' she said, back then, ''Carlos was healthy.''

     Others talk of drastic reactions if they learn they are mutation-carriers.

     ''I'd kill myself,'' said Mr. Villegas's brother-in-law, Albeiro Betancur,
40, a bus driver with four children. ''I'd throw myself under a train.''

     Such reactions, plus the lack of genetic counseling here, are why people
gene-tested by Dr. Lopera, the Medellin neurologist, are not told if they will
get Alzheimer's. Even he knows carriers only by computer code, not by name.

     American research participants sometimes learn their genetic status, and
questions arose about testing drugs on Colombians who are unaware they are
carriers. The answer was to give all participants something, so
mutation-carriers are not revealed. Placebos will be given to noncarriers;
treatment or placebos to carriers.

     Project leaders said the treatment's safety was the highest priority. Some
past drug trials on already-sick Alzheimer's patients were stopped because
patients developed brain inflammation or risked heart problems. If treatments
tested here were devised for 80-year-old Alzheimer's patients, doses must be
calibrated for 40-year-olds, some of them potentially pregnant women. And
testing drugs on people who are not yet sick can be especially risky.

     ''We're going to be treating people who are completely healthy,'' Dr. Kosik
said. ''The nightmare scenario is obviously that there's a serious side
effect.''

     There were other challenges: upgrading brain-scanning and other equipment,
and persuading drug companies to accept the financial and safety risks of
sponsoring such research.

     ''Two years ago,'' said Dr. Pierre N. Tariot, a project leader who directs
the Banner Alzheimer's Institute's memory disorders center, ''most scientists
would have said this is not feasible,'' considering it ''science fiction.''

     Now, scientists are recruiting drug-industry sponsors for the $50 million
trial They currently have $8 million from donors. Some companies envision
testing new treatments; others envision recovering investment in therapies that
failed with already-demented people. ''Prevent even one early-onset patient from
getting the disease, that's a major victory,'' said Dale Schenk, chief
scientific officer for the Elan Corporation. ''It's not even debatable whether
this should be done. It has to be done.''

     The Search for Markers

     Researchers will also explore when Alzheimer's begins, and why, examining
which brain changes, or biomarkers, precede symptoms, Dr. Reiman said. If brain
shrinkage, brain activity or beta-amyloid levels are identified as definitive
biomarkers, doctors may be able to treat those, the way they treat cholesterol
to prevent heart disease.

     Scientists will also intensively study 40 18- to 25-year-olds to see if
brain changes appear in people that young. If they do, children 8 to 17 will be
studied.

     A new memory test catches an early symptom: remembering only one
characteristic of something. By age 35, Paisa-mutation carriers ''may remember
seeing an apple, but not remember it's in the fridge,'' said a psychologist, Dr.
Mario Parra, who created the test, in which people shown colored shapes must
recall both the shapes and colors.

     Scientists recently rode into Angostura, ancestral home of many family
members. ''First time I've seen gringos come to town,'' a villager remarked.

     Villages like Angostura had often been too dangerous. Once, a nurse
assisting Dr. Lopera, Lucia Madrigal, was kidnapped by guerrillas while
collecting blood for gene testing. ''I do not care how long you retain me,'' she
said, but ''take care of the samples.''

     She was released eight days later (guerrillas chilled the blood in a
river), but Dr. Lopera's team stopped visiting some villages for years. During
that time, Ms. Madrigal visited Angostura only when asked by a guerrilla boss.
His mother had Alzheimer's.

     With Angostura still risky, Dr. Lopera scheduled a brief visit, sending
advance staff members instructed not to disclose that Americans were coming.

     As a strong sun sliced the sky and rifle-bearing army soldiers watched,
family members squeezed into a squat building, Catholic maxims on walls.

     ''You may think you live in a very small town in a remote corner of the
world,'' Dr. Kosik said. ''But Alzheimer's is of concern to people all over the
world, and this town is very special.''

     Questions flew.

     ''Give us this medicine and then will we ever hear from you again?''
Scientists reassured them.

     What about economic assistance? Dr. Tariot said trial sponsors would be
asked to provide needs like antibiotics, food and adult diapers.

     For years, Dr. Lopera has been frustrated that he could provide only
support, and medication for ancillary Alzheimer's symptoms like seizures and
sleeplessness. Albeiro Betancur, Mr. Villegas's brother-in-law, said he had
stopped participating in Dr. Lopera's previous research, because there was ''no
prospect of any cure.''

     With this project, some, like Laura Cuartas's daughter, Gloria, who helps
care for her demented siblings, worried about ''damage that can be done'' by
side effects, but many, including Mr. Betancur, welcomed the possibility of
''taking something that might help.''

     Potential results are years away.

     Recently, Dr. Lopera examined Laura Cuartas's son, Oderis Villegas, whose
fading memory makes him carry calendars, writing each night, ''do not cross out
tomorrow.''

     But for Dr. Lopera, Mr. Villegas, studiously groomed in yellow shirt and
polished shoes, puffed with bravado, giddily agreeing to hop, whistle, touch his
nose. ''I'm the big help in the house; that's why I don't work,'' he said. ''I
feel fine every day. In every sense.''

     ''When were you born?'' Dr. Lopera asked.

     ''April 1960.''

     ''How old are you?''

     ''Close to 70, right?''

     ''You have a good memory?''

     ''Yes, sir.''

     Dr. Lopera listed three sentences: ''The boy walks down the street,'' ''The
man drinks coffee,'' ''Oranges grow on trees.''

     ''What was the first?''

     ''The boy drinks coffee.''

     ''The second?''

     ''The children walk on trees.''

     Asked about his Alzheimer's risk, Mr. Villegas said, ''I don't have it,''
laughing.

     ''Just by chance and when I am distracted by people or something,'' he
said, ''I may forget, but that is very rare. For anyone to say that I have the
beginning of Alzheimer's, no.''

     The Vanishing Mind: Articles in this series are examining  the worldwide
struggle to find answers  about Alzheimer's disease.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Gloria Villegas cares for her sister Maria Elsy, 61, who showed
signs of Alzheimer's in her 40s. Video: nytimes.com/health. (A1)
Though he denies it, Oderis Villegas, center, shows signs of Alzheimer's disease
at 50. A sister, Maria Elsy, left, has a more advanced case. With them in
Yarumal, Colombia, were Dr. Francisco Lopera, second from right, and Dr. Kenneth
Kosik.
Carlos Alberto, 53. Onset of memory problems at 41.
Maria Elsy, 61 (his sister) 48 at onset.
Dario, 55 (his brother) 47 at onset.
Oderis, 50 (his brother) 46 at onset.
Blanca Nelly, 41 (his wife) Currently no symptoms.
William, 48 (her brother) 45 at onset.
Gladys, 36 (her sister) Too afraid to have childen.
Liliana, 29 (her sister) Terrified of any memory lapse.
 Two sisters show early symptoms but deny it. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TODD HEISLER)(A12)
CHART: A Clouded Inheritance: A group of 25 families in Colombia has inherited a
genetic mutation from common ancestors, making members prone to early-onset
Alzheimer's. At right, Alzheimer's cases among the founding members of the clan
and some of their early descendants, who number in the thousands today. (A12)

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2010


                              93 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Plain Dealer (Cleveland, OH)

                              June 1, 2010 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 902 words

HEADLINE: Scientists pool ideas to fight Huntington's  Cleveland gathering
brings together people from several fields

BYLINE: Brie Zeltner, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A rare meeting of some of the brightest investigators involved in local
brain, genetics and cancer research took place over a 48-hour period recently in
Cleveland, a collaboration that Case Western Reserve University pathologist Alan
Tartakoff hopes will make the city a hub for research into Huntington's disease.

   Huntington's, a hereditary neurological disease that affects 1 in 10,000
people worldwide and about 30,000 Americans, causes certain nerve cells in the
brain to waste away, leading to behavior changes, movement problems, dementia
and eventual death.

   The workshop, a kind of brainstorming session for 16 researchers from Case,
the Lerner Research Institute at the Cleveland Clinic, and biopharmaceutical
company Athersys Inc., was the result of Tartakoff's dogged pursuit of funding
for local research into the disease.

   New York-based Cure Huntington's Disease Initiative, an influential private
foundation that funds innovative Huntington's research, sent its Early Discovery
Initiative team to the workshop to listen in on the ideas that Tartakoff's group
generated. CHDI, through the Early Discovery Initiative, offers one-year,
$100,000 grants for early-stage scientific research into the disease.

   Ramee Lee, scientific director of the Early Discovery team, said that while
the foundation hosts a dozen workshops a year, this was only the second time the
team had attended one focused on researchers new to the field.

   "We're always looking for targets that haven't been identified and haven't
been thought of before for Huntington's," she said. "That's what was great about
having people working in [other diseases] and getting their input as to what
might be applicable to HD."

   Since the gene responsible for Huntington's was discovered in 1993, there has
been an explosion of research into potential drug treatments and therapies, but
progress has been frustratingly slow.

   Tartakoff, who has been studying the rare disease for five years, is
developing drug treatments that mimic the effects of promising laboratory
gene-therapy experiments.

   Only two of the other researchers who attended the workshop currently study
Huntington's. The rest are involved in a variety of related fields including
cancer, genetics, neurology and neuro-

   science. Most accepted Tartakoff's invitation to attend the workshop because
of a combination of intellectual curiosity and the hope of funding for new
studies that apply their area of research expertise to Huntington's.

   Their interaction at the workshop sparked questions about the direction of
current research and ideas for new projects, said Paul Tesar, an assistant
professor in the department of genetics at Case.

   "I think there were a lot of times [at the workshop] that we thought, 'Hey,
why hasn't someone researching Huntington's disease done this? We do this in our
field all the time, why hasn't someone studied this yet?'" he said. Tesar's
research uses different stem cell models to understand how the nervous system
develops.

   Kaushik Ghosal, a neuroscientist who studies inflammation in Alzheimer's
disease at the Clinic's Lerner Research Institute, is interested to see if his
work will apply to Huntington's.

   "We have evidence that inflammation plays a role in more and more of these
[neurodegenerative] diseases, like ALS [Lou Gehrig's disease] and Parkinson's,"
he said. It's natural to look for the same process in Huntington's.

   Tartakoff and his new group of converts believe that Cleveland can become a
center for Huntington's research because of the strength of Case's program, the
enthusiasm of the local Huntington's Disease Society chapter, and the city's
status as a leader in adult stem cell research and therapies.

   The Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, headquartered at Case,
was founded in 2003 and brings together researchers from Case, University
Hospitals Case Medical Center, the Clinic and Ohio State University, as well as
Athersys and other area stem cell companies.

   "We're uniquely set up to do some of the assessments on how stem cell therapy
would affect the onset, the progression and the reversal in the Huntington's
model," said Tesar.

   The workshop collaboration effort, while a new experience for most of those
attending, may be part of an emerging trend in scientific research, said Angela
Ting, staff research scientist in the Genomic Medicine Institute at the Clinic's
Lerner Research Institute.

   "Scientists already in the field get tunnel vision, so you need an injection
of new perspectives and new ideas to revitalize a line of research," she said.
Ting studies the epigenetics of cancer, which looks at how nongenetic factors
influence the behavior or "expression" of genes. She, too, believes her research
may have an impact on Huntington's.

   A smaller group of workshop participants met last week to put together grant
proposals for the studies they hope to begin.

   Lee of CHDI said the foundation liked what it saw in Cleveland.

   "There's such an abundance of great quality research going on [in the city],
and we were really impressed with the openness and willingness to collaborate."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: bzeltner@plaind.com, 216-999-4283

   "Scientists already in the field get tunnel vision, so you need an injection
of new perspectives and new ideas to revitalize a line of research." Angela
Ting,

   staff research scientist in the Genomic Medicine Institute at the Clinic's
Lerner Research Institute

CORRECTION-DATE: June 1, 2010

CORRECTION:

   Fighting Huntington's disease brings together Cleveland researchers from
several fields

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2010


                              94 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                              May 30, 2010 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: UB researchers may have found new way to treat flu

BYLINE: By Henry L. Davis - NEWS MEDICAL REPORTER

BODY:

   Researchers at the University at Buffalo and the federal Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention say they have potentially found an alternative way to
defeat the flu and other viruses without using vaccines.

   Their proposed method centers around preventing the secondary bacterial
infections, such as pneumonia, that cause most of the serious sickness and death
after individuals have been infected by a flu virus.

   The researchers, who described their initial laboratory work in the current
issue of the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, say this can be
accomplished by targeting cells with a piece of genetic material that boosts the
body's efforts to thwart viruses from growing in numbers and to prevent the
secondary bacterial infections. The genetic material is delivered to the cells
by attaching it to gold nanoparticles.

   The gold nanoparticles offer a surface to which the genetic material can be
attached. They keep the unstable genetic material from degrading once inside a
cell, prevent the body's immune system from attacking the material, and allow
for targeting of selected cells in the body.

   "This is new thinking about flu therapy," said Krishnan Chakravarthy, a
medical and doctoral candidate at UB and the paper's first author. "We could
have a new form of gene therapy for any virus that mitigates the effect of virus
mutations."

   The research, which is now moving into studies in animals, has the potential
to create antiviral medicines to treat a broad range of infectious diseases that
are becoming increasingly resistant to current medications, according to UB team
leader Paras Prasad, executive director of the UB Institute for Lasers,
Photonics and Biophotonics.

   "We've demonstrated that the concept works. Now, we have to translate it to
the bedside," he said.

   Nanotechnology offers the potential for using tiny materials and devices to
treat and diagnose illnesses, such as delivering a drug at specific places in
the body. In this case, the researchers are searching for a method to attack how
the body reacts to the presence of a virus instead of the virus itself, said
Chakravarthy.

   Funding for the UB portion of the research was provided by the John R. Oishei
Foundation, as well as the National Institutes of Health, the Air Force Office
of Scientific Research and the National Vaccine Program Office of the Department
of Health and Human Services.

   The goal is to work toward an investigational new drug filing with the Food
and Drug Administration, although the researchers said technical challenges
remain. For starters, more studies will be needed on the long-term health
effects of gold nanoparticles or the development of biodegradeable nanoparticles
that are more compatible with the body.

   e-mail: hdavis@buffnews.com

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2010


                              95 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             May 27, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Pg. H 01

LENGTH: 223 words

HEADLINE: ST. TAMMANY STANDOUTS

BYLINE: schonberg

BODY:

   Ragan Cantrelle, left, and Kris Muntan are on the Race for a Miracle
committee. The event, which benefits Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation, will be
held on June 6 at the Abita Springs Trace. On-site registration begins at 7
a.m., with a one-mile fun run starting at 8 a.m., followed by a 5K race. The
event is held in recognition of National Batten Disease Day. The foundation was
founded in honor of Mary Payton Vigil, the 7-year-old daughter of Joe and Nikki
Vigil of Madisonville. To register, call Nikki Voelkel at 807.5064, or e-mail
nikkiv@marypaytonsmiracle.com For information or sponsorships, call Michelle
Boudreaux at 504.382.2621, or e-mail michelle@marypaytonsmiracle.com

   What is Batten disease?

   What is Batten disease?

   Cantrelle: "Batten disease is a neurological disorder that affects children
and is fatal, usually before the age of 12. There is a newly discovered
treatment called gene therapy that can be used to stop the effects in their
tracks and save children's lives. To find out more, visit www.bdsra.org."

   Why is Race for a Miracle important?

   Muntan: "The purpose of the race is two-fold. There is always the fundraising
aspect of an event and the other is to create awareness that this disease is out
there. We do a race because it is symbolic of the race against time. Mary Payton
can be treated, but time is limited."

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2010


                              96 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2010 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                              May 23, 2010 Sunday
                                 METRO EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1674 words

HEADLINE: CHANGE OF PACE;
Medtronic pioneered the pacemaker and developed many other widely used devices.
Now it is looking to innovation for its next generation of products.

BYLINE: JANET MOORE; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)

BODY:

   STAR TRIBUNE EXCLUSIVE - ONLY IN YOUR SUNDAY PAPER

   First there was an idea nurtured in a garage. Then the idea grew into a
high-flying global empire. And then, as key products matured, everyone wondered,
what's next? It sounds like a textbook study of any large technology company --
and it has certainly been the script for Medtronic Inc. After pioneering
pacemaker technology, the Fridley-based company diversified into a $15 billion
behemoth marketing medical devices for conditions well beyond failing hearts,
from bad backs to diabetes and other chronic diseases of our time.

   The question facing Medtronic now is whether a very large, market-leading
tech company is wily enough to harness new ideas and innovate -- a question of
consuming interest to the company's 8,000 employees in Minnesota.

   "A lot of companies get to a certain critical mass, and innovation starts to
slow," said William Hawkins III, Medtronic's chairman and chief executive.

   But, says the bespectacled bioengineer, not Medtronic. He's put in place a
framework to foster new inventions, and he's vowed to commit the "necessary
resources to make that future a reality."

   Formidable distractions loom. Sales of Medtronic's traditional money-makers
-- heart defibrillators and spine surgery devices -- have slowed considerably.
No clear blockbuster product has emerged in their wake, and Medtronic faces
tough competitors.

   Health care reform and potentially cumbersome changes in the way medical
devices are approved and reimbursed linger, as well.

   "It's hard for any large organization to be nimble,'' said Stephen Parente, a
finance professor at the University of Minnesota's Carlson School of Management.
"You have so many people, so many products spread across so many geographies."

   Hawkins articulated a strategy last year that he calls "One Medtronic" that
integrates the disparate parts of his company -- from diabetes to brain
stimulators to the tried-and-true pacemaker -- into a functional core that he
says is bent on relentless "execution and innovation."

   "When I first came onboard, I challenged the organization: Are we going to
continue to be a portfolio company or are we going to really reconnect as One
Medtronic?" Hawkins said in a recent interview with the Star Tribune. "How do we
make the whole greater than the sum of the parts?"

   Easier said than done, says Leerink Swann analyst Rick Wise. "He's saying,
'We're a huge global company and here's a reminder that we need to think
entrepreneurially across all businesses.' It makes sense to me, but it's not
easy to do."

   The 56-year-old Hawkins has faced challenges before. Within months of
assuming the chief executive's position, he launched a painful recall of a
popular defibrillator wire, and his tenure has been dogged with controversy over
the company's consulting relationships with doctors.

   But beyond those challenges, macro factors play in Medtronic's favor. Markets
in emerging countries are growing in the double digits. The nation's aging baby
boomers increasingly need its devices. And experts say the promise of
regenerative medicine -- stem and gene therapies to repair or replace failing
organs in the body -- may prove a lucrative new frontier for the company.

   Innovative? Sure. But will Medtronic capitalize on its own aspirations?

   "That's the defining question of its time," said Tim Nelson, an analyst at
FAF Advisors. "It's hard to grow when [Medtronic] is as big as it is. Either
they can turn around their core businesses and get them on the pathway back to
former glory or find new growth engines."

   But don't look for a blockbuster product, Wise warns. "We're not in an era of
grand slam home runs for large med-tech companies."

   The Next Big Thing

   Innovation is where Dr. Stephen Oesterle comes into the picture. A
cardiologist who was on the faculty at Harvard Medical School, Medtronic's
senior vice president of medicine and technology logs about 250,000 airline
miles a year in search of promising new medical technologies.

   Innovation is often incremental. In March, for example, Medtronic won Food
and Drug Administration panel approval for a new pacemaker compatible with MRI
scans. Most pacemaker patients are warned against getting the common diagnostic
scan because it may interfere with the device's pacing therapy.

   Medtronic's 53-year-old pacemaker technology is also being used to
electrically stimulate other parts of the body to treat diseases and conditions.
The company pioneered deep-brain stimulation -- electrically stimulating parts
of the brain to treat Parkinson's disease, as well as the spinal cord to treat
chronic pain. The company is testing similar devices to treat depression, heart
failure, epilepsy and incontinence.

   "Everything in the body is electrically active," Oesterle said. "We can pace
anything."

   Still, experts say the clinical science in this area needs to be further
developed. "In the next 25 to 50 years, it could be neuro dominating headlines,
like cardiology has in the past 50 years," Wise said. "It's fascinating, but
it's all early."

   In addition, promising technologies to treat diabetes have evolved in recent
years, advances that will likely lead to the long-awaited development of an
"artificial pancreas" that performs like the organ.

   Medtronic has taken a step in that direction with its Paradigm Real-Time
System, the only integrated insulin pump and continuous glucose monitoring
system on the market for the 6 million Americans who are insulin-dependent.

   The system receives glucose readings every five minutes from a sensor worn on
the body, and the information is conveyed wirelessly to the pump, allowing
patients to make an adjustment.

   The company is testing products to proactively recommend insulin dosages,
edging closer to a system that mimics the function of the pancreas. "This is
very, very hard to do," Nelson said. "If they can get there in incremental
steps, it could mean huge growth."

   Longer-term, Medtronic will likely play a definitive role in combining
med-tech with the emerging field of biotechnology. In recent years, the company
has quietly invested in several biotech companies, including Massachusetts-based
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, which is exploring new ways of treating disease by
manipulating RNA.

   "I think a lot of people would be surprised to hear Medtronic is involved in
such a thing," Oesterle said. "But that's the beauty of the scale of our
company."

   As Oesterle points out, most of biotechnology involves proteins, protein
suppression, genes or cells. "Most of them require an infusion technology or
some form of targeted control local delivery," he said. "That's usually a
combination of pumps and catheters and navigational tools, all the things we
think we're as good at as anyone."

   In the meantime, one of the more rudimentary avenues of growth can simply be
found beyond domestic borders. About 40 percent of the company's annual revenue
now comes from outside the United States, a number expected to grow.

   Hawkins is particularly bullish on emerging med-tech markets such as China,
which is growing 25 percent annually.

   "You're seeing an emerging middle class in countries like Brazil, China and
India that can pay market rate for products," said Parente, from the Carlson
School, who has served as an adviser to the company.

   External forces

   One pressing issue that may affect innovation for Medtronic is the
possibility the FDA will tinker with its 510(k) program, a common regulatory
pathway to commercialize medical devices. Companies need only prove to the FDA
that a device be "substantially equivalent" to another currently on the market.

   Critics contend the process is too lenient, leaving industry insiders fearful
the FDA may require more clinical studies in the future.

   While large companies like Medtronic can financially weather new regulatory
demands, it's tougher for the fledgling start-ups that are frequently the
seedbed of innovative devices. Often, these companies prove attractive
acquisition targets for bigger fish like Medtronic.

   "I fear this will impact the smaller companies' and venture community's
willingness to take on risk and their ability to invest in new technologies,"
Hawkins said.

   In addition, with health care reform, reimbursement of medical devices by
Medicare and private insurers will increasingly be tied to evidence proving a
product is cost-effective. Medtronic will also face an annual excise tax of
roughly $150 million to $200 million beginning in 2013 to help pay for reform.

   Med-tech companies have argued that innovation will suffer as their money is
siphoned off by the government and not plowed back into development of new
products.

   "For us to really continue market leadership we have to make sure we have the
right balance of innovation across all businesses," Hawkins said. "Look, I'm a
bioengineer, one of the few in the industry leading a company who is not a
lawyer or a financial person. I've maintained throughout my career that
innovation has gotten us to where we are now, and will get us where we need to
go in the future."

   Janet Moore - 612-673-7752

   Pacemakers plus

   Medtronic got its start with the pacemaker, but its current lineup of medical
technology stretches well beyond the heart. Here's a look at Medtronic's revenue
by business:

   CARDIAC RHYTHM DISEASE MANAGEMENT

   $5 billion 34%

   SPINAL

   $3.4 billion 23%

   CARDIOVASCULAR

   $2.4 billion 17%

   NEUROMODULATION

   $1.4 billion 10%

   DIABETES

   $1.1 billion 8%

   SURGICAL TECHNOLOGIES

   $857 million 6%

   PHYSIOCONTROL

   $343 million 2%

   MEDTRONIC STOCK PRICES, 1999 TO NOW

   Once called a"rock star" stock by one analyst in the early 2000s,

   Medtronic shares have stalled in recent years.Monthly stock prices

   for Medtronic from Dec. 31, 1999, to market close on Friday.

   12/31/99 -$36.44

   12/29/00 - $60.38

   Friday - $40.33

   (See microfilm or PDF for chart.)

   Source: Bloomberg

   REVENUE AND PROFIT

   While Medtronic's annual revenue has

   grown steadily since 2005, net income

   has wavered in part because the

   company's core businesses - cardiac

   rhythm and spine - have slowed.

   2009

   REVENUE - $14,599

   NET INCOME - $2,169

   (See microfilm or PDF for chart.)

   Source: Bloomberg

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2010


                              97 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                              May 21, 2010 Friday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Main News; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: Scientists make leap with synthetic genes;
DNA RESEARCH

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

   Scientists announced Thursday that for the first time they have created a
complete set of synthetic genes and implanted them into living bacteria that
thrive - an achievement that could ultimately lead to the creation of new
synthetic biofuels and many other practical advances.

    The bacteria in the experiments reproduce naturally but behave exactly the
way their newly constructed genes direct, said noted human genome biologist J.
Craig Venter, who has led a team of 23 scientists on the project for more than a
decade.

    Their success was reported Thursday in the online journal Science Express,
and heralded by the scientists as a major step toward the creation of artificial
organisms that might serve as biofuels, speed up vaccine production or clean up
toxic spills.

    Although the advance is far from creating "life in a test tube," it was a
singular achievement in making and assembling the chemical components of genes
that functioned inside living cells exactly the way natural genes do.

   Reaction to the report was a mixture of praise and alarm.

Serious risks

   David Magnus, director of the Center for Bioethics and professor of
pediatrics at Stanford Medical Center, acknowledged that in the "very distant
future," the work could yield substantial practical benefits and even now opens
up "dramatic new vistas in genetic engineering."

   But there are also grave risks for the distant future, he said.

   "This kind of biology makes it possible, in the wrong hands, to create deadly
pathogens, and in the future it will call for strong regulations," said Magnus,
who was a member of a panel that Venter created more than 10 years ago to
oversee his artificial gene work and advise him on any ethical issues that might
arise.

   The Venter team's achievement recalls the days when scientists first began
recombining the genes of natural organisms and foresaw the possibility that
genetic engineering might unintentionally yield dangerously infectious microbes.

   Under the leadership of Stanford geneticist Paul Berg, the scientists
involved in those experiments met at the Asilomar conference center near
Monterey in 1975 and called for regulating the work. The National Institutes of
Health promptly created a regulatory agency to supervise the early genetic
engineering efforts. The agency still oversees gene therapy research.

Common practice

   Genetic engineering is now commonplace, and a huge drug industry based on the
science has resulted.

   Venter became famous in 2003 when, in a race with the government-sponsored
Human Genome Project, he and his colleagues independently sequenced the entire
human genome - consisting of 3 billion units of DNA called "base pairs."

   Venter's team worked out of the J. Craig Venter Institute in Rockville, Md.
In the report, which appears in the print journal Science today, the scientists
detailed how their artificial genome containing 1.8 million DNA units - the
basis of about 1,000 genes - was created and then inserted into parasitic
bacteria called Mycoplasma mycoides.

   Those organisms with their new artificial genes reproduced normally and
produced only the proteins that their new genes instructed them to make, the
Venter team said.

'Important step'

   "This is an important step, we think, both scientifically and
philosophically," Venter said in an interview with Science. "It's certainly
changed my views of the definitions of life and how life works."

   He also called the successful creation of an artificial genome "a very
powerful tool for trying to design what we want biology to do" - a goal that
many scientists in the field known as "synthetic biology" are also seeking.

   In addition to his research institute, Venter has founded a company called
Synthetic Genomics, which declares in a corporate statement: "At Synthetic
Genomics Inc. we are creating genomic-driven commercial solutions to
revolutionize many industries. We have started by focusing on energy."

   The company has announced it is working with Exxon on a $600 million venture
to produce biofuels from algae modified with artificial genes, and expects to
enter other commercial ventures.

GRAPHIC: Scientists at the J. Craig Venter Institute created an artificial
genome and inserted it into parasitic bacteria called Mycoplasma mycoides, shown
in an electron micrograph. J. Craig Venter Institute

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2010


                              98 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Plain Dealer (Cleveland, OH)

                              May 11, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B2

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Pediatric chair chosen at Rainbow and CWRU

BYLINE: Kaye Specto, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A physician with strong links to the research bench as well as the patient
exam room is the new pediatric department chairman for University Hospitals Case
Medical Center's Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital and Case Western Reserve
University's medical school.

   The hospital and the medical school announced the appointment Monday of Dr.
Michael W. Konstan to the post, which is the top medical position at Rainbow and
the bridge between the hospital and CWRU's medical school.

   Konstan is a founding member of the Therapeutics Development Network
sponsored by the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, a collaborative network of U.S.
centers that deploys and tests new therapeutics, which gets drugs more quickly
to CF patients.

   "He's helped to organize national networks to study this disease and has come
up with the new ideas that are absolutely essential to push the therapeutics
forward," said CWRU medical school dean/vice president for medical affairs
Pamela Davis. "What we have here is someone who really knows how to move the
needle."

   For the last 18 months, Konstan has been interim co-chair, a position he
shared with two others.

   "This will give me the opportunity now to expand on that and help children
with other medical conditions," Konstan said.

   "Mike really demonstrated the kind of leader he would be and his true passion
for Rainbow," UH President Fred Rothstein said. "It takes a great amount of
focus to do that as well as an ability to collaborate."

   Konstan has been with UH for 25 years. His work included developing
ground-breaking new therapies and early detection through newborn screening.

   Among his other contributions has been treating CF by controlling lung
inflammation. Konstan also conducted the first in-human gene therapy trials for
CF that have shown some promise.

   The position exists through the affiliation agreement between the two
institutions and is aimed in part at building strong research capability.

   Konstan will oversee quality and safety, development of new patient care
programs, treatment and therapies. He will report to Rothstein and Davis.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: kspector@plaind.com, 216-999-3904

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2010


                              99 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                               May 3, 2010 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; bad desk code; Science Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1424 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
Science with a son in mind;
A pair of medical researchers know a cure isn't in the cards for Dylan. But
working toward one is enough for now.

BYLINE: Shari Roan

BODY:

   Rarely in life do the personal and professional become the bittersweet blend
that Stan Nelson and Carrie Miceli experience every day.

   At work, the medical researchers at UCLA painstakingly delve into the genetic
underpinnings of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common of childhood's
lethal DNA-linked diseases.

   At home, they treasure their family time with sons Calvin, 16, and Dylan, 9.
Such time is precious. Dylan was diagnosed with Duchenne as a toddler.

   Miceli and Nelson don't dream of a cure for their youngest son. Heavily
schooled in objectivity and neutrality, they are able to tolerate the
often-creeping pace of science and yet savor its progress.

   "We have a sweet, wonderful boy who is delighted with life," said Nelson, a
former pediatric oncologist, now a genomics researcher. "One could spend one's
life racing against the clock -- and making that the focus of family life and of
research life. I don't spend a lot of time dwelling on that."

   The couple's goals are much more immediate. This year, Nelson and Miceli will
open the doors of a Duchenne muscular dystrophy clinic at UCLA. It will serve
approximately 350 boys -- many of whom now travel out of state for treatment --
offering specialized cardiac and neurological care as well as physical therapy
and access to clinical trials.

   The disease, which mainly affects boys, usually leads to death from lung
disorders. But specialized care can add several years of life expectancy to the
25 years or so that is typical, doctors say.

   "We're creating an infrastructure at UCLA that will live on in the future,"
Nelson said. "That's rewarding."

   "It's all coming together in the last five years," said Miceli, an
immunologist who studies the function of T cells, white cells that are crucial
to immune system function. "I have no doubt that the course of the disease will
be different for this generation of boys. We don't know how different. But we
just have to go forward."

   In the family room of their Los Angeles home on a weekday afternoon, Dylan is
watching cartoons and eating a slice of cantaloupe. Both he and Calvin are
creative, and their paintings, sketches and poems fill the home. Dylan's
repertoire includes a poem on a wall near the kitchen titled "In My Heart."

   In my heart, I feel I can fly.

   A whirlwind of boy energy, he soon abandons the cartoons to take on his mom
in a backyard game of handball, his favorite sport. Stocky, with blue eyes and a
mop of dark hair, he smacks the ball against an ever-expanding smudge on the
stucco exterior. Already, he moves with a hint of the gait problems that boys
with the disease develop as they approach their teen years.

   A power scooter on which Calvin has painted Star Wars characters sits just
inside the front door, available should Dylan need to conserve his strength. But
Dylan ignores the scooter today. He bounces the ball to his mother.

   "Whoa, Mom! How are you getting so good?" Dylan says, keeping up a steady
monologue.

   "I may have a sleepover this weekend. OK?"

   Smack.

   "Mom, why can't I take a handball class?"

   Smack.

   "Mom, can you find a comic camp?"

   Nelson and Miceli recently installed a chair lift at home, to gently
introduce Dylan to the concept that he will one day need it. But for now their
home life is a bubble. Dylan knows he has a muscle disorder but does not
understand the severity of the disease.

   "He's coming to realize he is a little different," Miceli said. Still, she
said, "he is the happiest boy ever."

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is perhaps best known as the disease targeted by
comedian Jerry Lewis on an annual Labor Day telethon. It's caused by any of a
number of mutations that occur in the Duchenne gene, located on the X
chromosome. That gene is essential to muscle cell structure and function, and
the mutations disrupt production of a protein called dystrophin, causing the
muscles, plus the heart and respiratory systems, to deteriorate.

   The disease affects boys because males have only one X chromosome, meaning
those with the mutation have no healthy version of the gene. About 1 in every
3,500 males is born with the mutation.

   The couple gradually began working together on research to understand the
disease. Nelson and Miceli knew Duchenne wasn't curable. But they were dismayed
by the lack of research momentum.

   The gene had been discovered in 1986, but no treatments were in clinical
trials. Only a few comprehensive Duchenne clinics existed, and a mere handful of
scientists were aggressively working on the disease.

   "We felt like we came upon an area that was not being sufficiently pursued,"
Nelson said. "Kids were diagnosed and parents were told, 'This is the course of
the disease, and you can't change it that much.' "

   Few parents willingly accept that prognosis. Nelson, 49, and Miceli, 48, were
in a position to challenge it.

   "They are both very prominent scientists in their respective fields," said
Melissa J. Spencer, an associate professor of neurology at UCLA who was
researching Duchenne when Dylan was diagnosed. "It's not that they weren't
shocked and emotional. But their attitude was still, 'Let's do something
positive here.' "

   With their far-reaching connections in the science world, Nelson and Miceli
were able to reach out to top scientists, asking for information and input.
They've persuaded researchers to look at Duchenne in a different way, even
urging colleagues in other fields to propose novel ways to treat it.

   Scientists hope to shepherd a handful of therapies to the market that might
improve quality of life for boys and young men with the condition, maybe even
extend life.

   One of the more promising avenues has developed around a class of drugs,
still in development, that uses artificial molecules to find one of the Duchenne
mutations and begin mimicking ungarbled DNA. The DNA patch allows the gene to
produce some dystrophin, just not perfectly -- similar to a car that is out of
alignment but still runs.

   Human trials of the treatment, called exon skipping, will begin soon.

   Exon skipping also is expected to be tested in other genetic disorders as a
prototype for personalized, molecular medicine. The idea is to change the
therapeutic patch to fit whatever gene mutation is targeted.

   The therapy could dramatically improve a patient's quality of life, Spencer
said.

   Further, Miceli has helped identify a protein that appears to cause some of
the muscle inflammation that is a hallmark of Duchenne.

   Other advances include gene therapy -- inserting a healthy copy of the
mutated gene into the body to treat disease -- that will begin human trials this
year or early next year at the University of Washington.

   But, as always with Duchenne, new obstacles surface. This spring, in one of
the first human trials targeting the production of dystrophin, an oral drug
called ataluren failed to produce measurable improvement in boys with a specific
type of mutation.

   "Duchenne's is a really tough nut to crack," said Dr. Edward Kaye, vice
president of clinical research at Genzyme Inc., which is co-developing ataluren.
"The people who succeed in this field are not necessarily the most intelligent.
They're the people who will hang in there."

   Nelson and Miceli spend about half of their work hours on Duchenne while
still pursuing their original areas of research. Along with Spencer, they're
co-directors of the Center for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy at UCLA, in which the
clinic will be based. The last major step before the clinic opens is the hiring
of a director.

   Nelson said anything that would help even a subset of boys with Duchenne
would be an achievement. "People are focused on a cure," he said. "The
likelihood is that we won't have cures but we will have effective treatments."

   And if something comes along to help their son?

   "We'd love it if that occurs," he said.

   "It's not only about my kid," Miceli said. "Helping him and helping others
are parallel goals. There is some comfort in paying it forward. If that's the
best I can do -- OK."

   They spend a few minutes each morning and evening sitting with Dylan and
gently stretching the muscles in his legs, arms and torso. He wriggles
constantly and enjoys yelling "ouch," even though the manipulation doesn't hurt.
In truth, Dylan is just aching to be free, on to the next ballgame or episode of
"SpongeBob SquarePants."

   "He's always energetic and running around, and has so much to say," said his
brother, Calvin.

   The family has a "self-expression" poem by Dylan framed just inside the door
where he bangs the handball against the wall.

   Dylan is a yellow happy. Dylan is a sunny day.

   --

   shari.roan@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: THE GIGGLES: Stan Nelson performs daily stretches with Dylan, 9,
to keep his muscles flexible. Dylan was diagnosed as a toddler with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy. He can still walk, but sometimes uses a scooter.
PHOTOGRAPHER:Allen J. Schaben Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2010


                              100 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            April 29, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Disease fails to bring down curtain on theater major

BYLINE: By, John Johnston

BODY:

   Because Caitlin Brown has severe physical disabilities, people often assume
her mind doesn't work so well, either.

   So to be clear at the outset: Spinal muscular atrophy, or SMA, the genetic
disease Brown was born with 21 years ago, does not affect intellect.

   "One of the most annoying parts about SMA is that people don't understand it,
so they're scared of it, or they put you in a category with everyone else in a
wheelchair," the Delhi Township resident says. "Even people with SMA are so
different, you can't put them all in a clump."

   If people want to put Brown in a category, make it a high-achieving one. She
graduated with honors from Oak Hills High School in 2006. She's a theater major
at Northern Kentucky University, where last semester she joined a co-ed honors
fraternity, Phi Sigma Pi.

   She's also an ardent advocate for SMA causes. On Saturday, she and her
family, friends and fraternity members will gather at Xavier University's Cintas
Center for the seventh annual Walk-n-Roll to Cure SMA, organized by the support
group Families with SMA.

   An estimated 25,000 Americans have the disease. About one in 6,000 babies are
born with it.

   Brown has Type 1 SMA, the most severe form. It progressively weakens the
muscles used for such basic functions as walking, head and neck control, and
swallowing. She needs a ventilator to breathe and a power wheelchair to get
around. She controls the chair with a mini-joystick that doubles as a computer
mouse.

   "I can move my toes a little. I can move my fingers a little. That's pretty
much it," she says.

   Most children with Type 1 SMA die by age 2.

   "When she was 4 years old," says her mother, Eileen Brown, "a doctor took me
aside at the hospital and said (for her to live to age) 12 would be more than
you could even hope for."

   Now, as Caitlin approaches her 22nd birthday, Eileen Brown says she and her
husband, Russ, "tried as she was growing up to get her involved as much as we
could."

   She has always enjoyed singing and acting. She joined a school choir in
seventh grade and performed in her first musical a year later. Since then,
either as an actor, director or production assistant, "I've been involved in so
many (productions) they won't all fit on my resume," Brown says.

   She acknowledges, though, that the disease is hard on her, emotionally more
than physically. In high school, she couldn't do things and go places with other
teens; a few months ago, a semi-formal fraternity event turned into a disaster
because of lack of wheelchair access.

   "People who don't live with this disease every day don't get it," Brown says.
"No matter how hard they try, they don't understand it. If you just walk up
steps, you don't count how many there are. You don't measure how big they are."

   She focuses on fund raising, knowing that's a key to finding a cure.

   Among the recent developments: Two months ago researchers at Ohio State
University and Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus said they had
discovered a genetic therapy that can reverse the effects of SMA in mice. The
Columbus Dispatch reported that the researchers hope to get approval for human
clinical trials in two years.

   "In 1988 when I was born, there was no hope for a cure, no hope for
advancement, there was nothing," Brown says. "(Almost) 22 years later, there's a
real possibility that we could find a cure, and soon."

   And then, those steps won't matter.

   What: Walk-n-Roll to Cure Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

   When: 9:30 a.m.-noon Saturday.

   Activities: A 5K walk, carnival, kids' activities, music. At noon, three
researchers from Ohio State University and Nationwide Children's Hospital in
Columbus will discuss their work.

   Where: Xavier University's Cintas Center, 1624 Herald Ave., Evanston.

   Information: www.fsma.org/OKIWalknRoll

   Caitlin Brown's fund-raising page: www.fsma.org/LWC/CaitieBrown.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2010


                              101 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            April 28, 2010 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; DAILY CHECKUP; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1308 words

HEADLINE: A DISEASE ON THE MOVE. As America ages, Parkinson's - already common -
could become much more widespread

BYLINE: BY KATIE CHARLES

BODY:

   The specialist: Dr. Warren Olanow on Parkinson's disease

   Olanow, a professor and past chairman of the Department of Neurology at the
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, has dedicated the past 30 years to specializing
in Parkinson's disease and related movement disorders.

   Who's at risk

   Many people first learned of Parkinson's disease when the actor Michael J.
Fox announced he had the illness, but Parkinson's affects more than a million
Americans.

   "It's an age-related neurodegenerative disease," says Olanow. "It's
characterized clinically by a tremor at rest, slowness and stiffness of movement
and problems with walking and balance." For 75% to 80% of patients, Parkinson's
eventually leads to dementia.

   Everyone is at risk of developing Parkinson's disease, and the risk increases
with age. "It affects men and women of all races and all occupations, with the
mean age of onset of about 60 years," says Olanow. "The older you get, the
greater the chances that you will have it."

   As the American population ages, the frequency of Parkinson's disease will
likely rise, and some doctors predict as much as a fourfold increase within the
next few decades. "Parkinson's disease is a major public-health risk, as well as
a serious threat to the well-being of individuals and families," says Olanow.

   The cause is generally unknown. "Genetic causes are thought to underlie about
10% to 15% of cases, and typically occur in younger individuals," says Olanow.
"In older individuals, Parkinson's is mostly sporadic." And though everyone is
at risk, some groups have an elevated risk, including people who live in rural
areas, drink well water and are exposed to pesticides.

   Though Parkinson's can be extremely debilitating, improved treatments can
help maintain a good quality of life. "For many patients, we can provide them
with satisfactory control so they can live and work in a relatively normal way
for years," says Olanow. "The average Parkinson's patient lives about as long as
the average individual of the same age who does not have Parkinson's disease."

   Signs and symptoms

   The classic symptoms of Parkinson's disease are a tremor that is most
prominent when the limb is at rest, slow and stiff movements, gait problems and
difficulty maintaining balance. These result mainly from a loss of the
dopamine-producing cells in a region of the brain called the substantia nigra.
There are also many additional signs that are due to degeneration of other cells
in the brain, the spinal cord and the autonomic nervous system (which controls
the automatic functions of many organs).

   "It's now appreciated that Parkinson's has a far broader range of
disturbances than was originally [believed], and can include features like
depression, sleep disorders, impaired smell, urinary problems, constipation,
sexual dysfunction, cognitive impairment and dementia," says Olanow.

   Doctors now know that some symptoms can show up before the onset of the
classic movement-related features of the disease. Individuals who only have
impaired smell, a sleep problem called REM behavior disorder, and constipation
likely have an early form of the disease," says Olanow. "We are close to having
therapies that can slow the rate of disease progression, and if we could start
them early enough, we could theoretically slow the disease down so that the
classic motor features never develop."

   Traditional treatment

   Because Parkinson's disease is associated with a deficiency of the chemical
dopamine in the brain, the standard treatments focus on dopamine replacement.

   "Levodopa is the most effective drug we have. It gets into the brain where it
is converted to dopamine, and improves the classic motor features of the
illness," says Olanow. "This treatment reduces disability, enhances independence
and prolongs life span. It has revolutionized the care for patients with
Parkinson's disease and brought help to millions of people around the world."

   Even so, levodopa has some major limitations and side effects. "About 90% of
patients with long-term treatment will eventually develop flinging movements
called dyskinesia," says Olanow. The drug's effectiveness also decreases over
time. "Patients cycle between on periods where the drug works and off periods
where the symptoms recur," according to Olanow. Other drugs like dopamine
agonists, COMT inhibitors and MAO-B inhibitors are valuable because they help to
prevent, delay or treat the side effects of levodopa.

   For those patients with motor complications that can't be controlled with
medication, doctors have developed a form of surgery called deep brain
stimulation. "When you have dopamine depletion, it upsets the brain's circuitry
so that it fires in an abnormal pattern," says Olanow. "Deep brain stimulation
involves placing electrodes into specific sites in the circuitry of the brain
and stimulating at a high frequency, thus interfering with the abnormal firing
patterns and providing dramatic benefit."

   This surgery is especially effective for treating motor complications and
tremors, but patients continue to develop problems like depression, falling,
inability to move and dementia, which are not controlled by levodopa.

   "Nothing we have is especially good for those," says Olanow. "But we're
making progress investigating many treatments that could be available in the
near future."

   Research breakthroughs

   In the past 50 years, Parkinson's research has achieved several
breakthroughs, including the discovery of genetic mutations that can cause the
disease. "Recent studies suggest that the accumulation and aggregation of
misfolded and unwanted proteins is central to the development of Parkinson's
disease," says Olanow. "Finding treatments that prevent these proteins from
accumulating might allow us to prevent the disease from forming in the first
place." There has also been great interest in the potential value of cell
transplantation, stem cells and gene therapy as treatments for Parkinson's, but
these remain experimental.

   Questions for your doctor

   Olanow advises patients to write down their comments and questions in advance
and take them to the doctor's office. A good first question for people who are
newly diagnosed is, "Can we go over my treatment options together?" Olanow
recommends seeing a specialist early on, because "how you treat the disease
initially matters." If you want to share your experience and learn from other
Parkinson's patients, be sure to ask, "Can you point to me to a support group
with patients at a similar stage?"

   Caregivers can benefit greatly from support groups, too.

   BY THE NUMBERS

   More than 1 million Americans have Parkinson's.

   75%-80% of patients with Parkinson's disease will eventually have dementia.

   The cost to society of Parkinson's is more than $27 billion a year.

   60 is the average age of onset for Parkinson's.

   Source: Dr. Warren Olanow

   What you can do

   See a Parkinson's specialist.

   Many people see general physicians or neurologists for day-to-day care, but
Dr. Olanow encourages patients to see an expert in PD at the time of diagnosis
and periodically after that.

   Stay active.

   Staying mentally and physically active helps preserve the function you have.
"Exercise helps to prevent stiffness," says Olanow, "and there are theories
suggesting that it may also have protective effects."

   Get informed.

   Your doctor, support groups and various Web sites, can help. There's plenty
of misinformation on the Web, though, so be sure to go to trusted sources like
the Movement Disorder Society (MovementDisorders.org), the World Parkinson
Congress (WorldPDCongress.org) or the Michael J. Fox Foundation
(MichaelJFox.org).

   Don't forget the caregiver.

   "Parkinson's is a two-person disease," says ­Olanow. "The more disabled
someone gets, the more work there is for the spouse, who is also getting older.
They have an increased risk of depression, and require attention as well as the
PD patient."

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC;STAND ALONE GRAPHIC;STATISTIC, Parkinson's research is
exploring cell transplantation and gene therapy, among other ideas, says Dr.
Warren Olanow. MARIELLA LOMBARD.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2010


                              102 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2010 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland Oregon)

                            April 24, 2010 Saturday
                                SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: HUMAN HEALTH AND ANIMAL RIGHTS  Why I do animal research

BYLINE: Nancy Haigwood

BODY:

   HUMAN HEALTH AND ANIMAL RIGHTS Why I do animal research

   By Nancy Haigwood

   I 'm a health researcher who studies animals in order to develop new
treatments and cures. When you hear protesters claiming that research animals
are mistreated, they're yelling about me.

   So what drives animal researchers like me?

   Simply put, our view is that because animal studies lead to improved human
health, they should be considered acceptable --provided the studies are highly
regulated, the animals are well cared for and suffering is not allowed. This is
not a unique view. It's also shared by the National Institutes of Health, the
American Medical Association and the American Veterinary Medical Association.

   What have these guiding principles resulted in? Here are advancements from
various labs in the past three weeks alone:

   * Mouse research has revealed how a genetic mutation may cause Parkinson's
disease.

   * Research with ducks has revealed a gene that might potentially shield
humans from the flu.

   * Researchers studying mice have learned that insulin-producing cells can be
reborn in the body --a significant finding for those with Type 1 diabetes.

   * A blood-flow study in zebrafish has highlighted a possible method for
suppressing cancer tumor growth.

   * A mouse study has suggested a new theory for the cause of Down syndrome:
missing proteins in the brain.

   * A rodent study has revealed that the anti-nausea drug Dramamine could be
used during a heart attack to prevent heart damage.

   * And finally, as The Oregonian reported on April 2, monkey studies at Oregon
Health & Science University have solved one of the key mysteries about
infections resulting from the virus cytomegalovirus, a disease that causes brain
damage to 8,000 newborns each year.

   Animal activists often reject these kinds of discoveries, claiming that
animal studies are outdated and that all of these breakthroughs could be made in
test tubes or with computer models. But in reality, no test tube can simulate
the complex immune response of an animal, and no computer can mimic a real,
breathing lung. Before we can try therapies in real human patients, we must
study a similar living system first.

   In response to our studies, local organizers of World Week for Animals in
Laboratories promised us a wide range of activities. They announced plans for
legal protests but also some more menacing-sounding acts.

   According to a Web posting by the anonymous Portland Animal Defense League,
the week will include "daytime demos" (we've learned that's usually code for
harassing a researcher's family at home), "office demos" (code for invading a
lab or office) and a "surprise action." The activists also plan to protest the
March of Dimes' annual March for Babies, which raises funds to prevent premature
births and their devastating impacts to a child who comes too early.

   I fully understand and support each person's right to legally protest when he
or she has concerns. But illegal actions are different. OHSU researchers have
had homes and cars vandalized. Our children have been terrorized by masked
individuals who show up on our doorsteps. We've received threats from the Animal
Liberation Front that our houses will be firebombed.

   As Portlanders, we take pride in the city's activist culture. However, surely
we all agree that harassment, stalking and death threats have no place in our
city. Especially when the core issue --health research --benefits so many.

   Nancy L. Haigwood is senior scientist and director of the Oregon National
Primate Research Center and the Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute and is a
professor of molecular microbiology and immunology at Oregon Health & Science
University.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2010


                              103 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            April 24, 2010 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 2027 words

HEADLINE: Letters to the editor

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   Mo. Legislature should not increase costs to businesses

   Missouri Auditor Susan Montee and the Post-Dispatch missed a few important
details in proposing that the state discontinue compensating Missouri retailers
for collecting and remitting sales taxes collected from customers.

   The editorial "A good time to close the 'timely' loophole" (April 19) called
the discount a "loophole." Let's call this effort what it really is: an attempt
to raise tax revenue on the backs of Missouri employers.

   Missouri's small retailers, who would be hit hardest by this proposal, know
that there is a real cost in collecting and remitting sales tax for the state.
Ms. Montee characterized that process as "a simple push of a button,"
misrepresenting the effort and expense that goes into the tax collection. To
comply with tax collection requirements, businesses must assume the cost of
training personnel, purchasing equipment and software, programming register
systems, documenting tax-exempt sales, handling audits and appeals, preparing
forms and collecting and remitting the tax. The cost to collect is even more
burdensome when interchange fees are considered. Every time a debit or credit
card is used, at least 2 percent is taken off the total price of the sale,
including sales tax.

   In reality, the 2 percent deduction allowed by Missouri doesn't cover the
actual costs to businesses, no matter how large. A nonpartisan study by
PriceWaterhouseCoopers showed substantial costs to businesses collecting the
tax. The average cost was more than 3 percent of the tax collected, and in the
case of some smaller retailers (between $150,000 and $1 million in sales), the
costs exceeded 13 percent. Compliance costs alone for Missouri's largest
retailers (more than $10 million in sales) averaged more than 2 percent in most
retail sectors.

   It is ironic that Ms. Montee does not believe business should be compensated
for part of their costs to collect taxes when the state collects up to 3 percent
of local taxes they collect and distribute back to political subdivisions -
after the businesses collect the tax for them. The state's systems should be
more sophisticated than a small Missouri retailer that has one or two employees.

   This issue was debated at length in the 2003 and 2004 legislative sessions
and defeated. When Missouri retailers are doing everything they can to keep
their doors open, lawmakers should avoid increasing their costs.

   Daniel P. Mehan - Jefferson City President and CEO, Missouri Chamber of
Commerce and Industry

   In climate change discussion, money talks

   It is not surprising that Peabody Energy CEO Gregory Boyce wants "more
scientific study" before action is taken on climate change ("Coal chiefs accept
warming, but ..." April 15). More review means more time before his industry
will have to start reducing its harmful pollution. The tobacco industry used the
same tactic decades ago to fight the clear scientific evidence that smoking
causes cancer.

   Years of study by thousands of independent researchers around the world, as
synthesized by the United Nations-sponsored Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, paint a clear picture of the stark reality: Climate change is happening
now, and human activity is causing it. According to a study by Naomi Oreskes of
the University of California at San Diego, of all the peer-reviewed research on
climate change, not a single scientific article concluded otherwise. Dissenting
voices exist at the margins, but they simply are not supported by the scientific
evidence and are not given credence by the scientific community. Most
disturbingly, these voices often can be linked to financial interests in
industries that will lose money if action is taken to reduce climate change,
presenting a clear conflict of interest.

   We still can head off the worst effects of climate change by using energy
more efficiently and deploying clean-energy technologies. Delay is not an
option. We need to start now.

   Sonya Bahar - St. Louis Associate Professor of Biophysics and Director,
Center for Neurodynamics, University of Missouri-St Louis

   Carl M. Bender - St. Louis Professor of Physics, Washington University

   Robert Elgin - University City Retired energy analyst

   Consequences of cutting benefits

   Regarding "Budget cutters target pensions" (April 19): Senate Bill 714 and
others that cut into the heart of benefits for state workers will have an impact
on all state workers - not just for new hires after January 2011.

   Sen. Jason Crowell, R-Cape Girardeau, who sponsored the bill, and those who
vote the bill through have not thought about what this does to state services.

   The bill modifies provisions relating to retirement for state worker who are
hired after Jan. 1, 2011. New state employees would be required to put 4 percent
of their earning into a retirement fund. The age of retirement went up. And to
be vested, employees will have to work for 10 years instead of five years.

   Missouri's employees are the lowest-paid state worker in the nation. We work
for the state because of the benefits.

   Consider a nurse's aide who makes $930 every two weeks. Take out $140 in
taxes, $130.00 out for health insurance for the employee and a spouse, and then
take out 4 percent for the retirement. The aide went from making $10 an hour to
about $7 an hour.

   We have been told there would be no raises this year. Because of the budget
they are taking two of our holidays away. We face retaliation for using sick
time. The work load has increased and we get treated as if we have no rights at
all. And the state wants to take more away from us.

   The consequence is that we will be in line with private-sector, which will
include high turnover. With few people willing to work for the state, positions
will go unfilled, increasing the work load on others.

   What does this mean to the public? We take care of the veterans, our solders,
your loved ones. We take care of the mentally handicapped, your loved ones. We
take care of the mentally incompetent and keep them off the streets, to keep you
safe. The list of state services goes on.

   The state needs us and we need our benefits to keep staffing levels
appropriate. Why work for the state when we can work for minimum wage anywhere
and get treated with respect and as a person with rights.

   Kay Wofford - Rolla, Mo.

   Seeing is believing in venture philanthropy

   More than 10 million Americans are affected by diseases that cause blindness.
Alarmingly, that number is expected to increase 50 percent by 2020. In
neighborhoods across St. Louis, people of all ages are meeting the challenges of
life with blinding diseases.

   Now, for the first time, there is hope for restored vision for people
affected by retinal diseases. Recently published results from a breakthrough
study, funded in part by the Foundation Fighting Blindness, show that gene
therapy restored significant vision in five children and seven adults who were
blind because of retinitis pigmentosa, a blinding genetic disease that affects
people from birth. By injecting a missing gene directly into the back of the
eye, patients experienced dramatic improvements in visual acuity, peripheral
vision and light sensitivity.

   One of the trial's youngest participants, a 9-year-old boy, has witnessed
some of the most striking results, regaining the ability to ride his bike, play
baseball and read the chalkboard in class. When asked what was best about his
restored vision, his response was "colors." With a variety of clinical trials
ongoing, this breakthrough sets the stage for the use of gene therapy in many
more retinal diseases moving forward, with hope for further success.

   This trial would not have been possible without the essential financial
support provided by the Foundation Fighting Blindness and other funding
organizations. Non-profit organizations often provide the start-up venture
philanthropy capital necessary to begin new research not funded by the
government. With federal funding for medical research limited to supporting
studies with proven results, unexplored research receives little or no funding.

   The potential for new breakthrough research can be limited by a lack of
initial funding. However, money provided through venture philanthropy allows
scientists to investigate uncharted territory. In essence, venture philanthropy
funding can drive research until it gets funding from federal sources, such as
the National Institutes of Health.

   Each of us has the opportunity to play a pivotal role in such venture
philanthropy, whether by investing our time as volunteers or our dollars as
funders. Our involvement and dedication to non-profit organizations that offer
support for medical research is critical. Now more than ever, supporting early
research can significantly improve the lives of our neighbors, friends and
families today and for generations to come.

   Jack Wiedmer - St. Louis President, Foundation Fighting Blindness St. Louis
Chapter

   Same result - drunk or distracted

   The April 17 edition was quite the paper. An Illinois state trooper drives
126 miles per hour while on his cell phone and kills two people, and he gets a
sentence of 30 months of probation, whatever that means ("No prison for
trooper").

   A truck driver kills three people because he was distracted, and he serves
one year in jail ("Trucker in wreck that killed 3 is freed").

   Why do the innocent die and the guilty walk away with a slap on the wrist?

   I suppose if the trooper or the truck driver had been drunk, the penalties
would have been more severe. But does it matter if the drivers are drunk or
sober when the results are the same?

   Ken Durbin - Florissant

   Work safe

   I share in the grief for the West Virginia miners killed in an explosion
earlier this month. I couldn't help but notice the deafening silence where the
strong voice of the United Mine Workers once was heard.

   The facts were undeniable: The Upper Big Branch Mine was cited for more than
500 violations in 2009, but it received nothing more than a monetary slap on the
wrist. The fine, about $160,000, represented mere minutes of company profits.

   I can't help but think that if it were a union mine, the union would have had
it shut down because of unsafe conditions. There is no question in my mind that
29 families would not be mourning loved ones and those communities would not
have endured trauma and tragedy if it had been a union mine.

   Everyone who works for wages owes a debt of gratitude to unions for their
hard-fought gains, including eight-hour work days, 40-hour work weeks, overtime
pay, health care benefits, child labor laws and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration standards.

   Unions set standards for equitable, safe work environments and establishing a
standard of living that created the middle class. The erosion of the middle
class is a direct result of the assault on unions.

   Without unions, more people may lose their lives - and more will lose their
ability to safely earn a fair living wage. Supporting unions is in everyone's
best interest.

   Catherine Mikolay - Fults, Ill.

   Make it a home run

   For several years now, our family has been participating in the Catholic
Charities program "Go to Bat for the Kids." The public donates to Catholic
Charities specifically to buy a Cardinals game ticket for an underprivileged
child to see what might be his or her only live Cardinals game.

   The first few years we donated, the letter said each child would get a hot
dog and soda. For a child, that is part of the fun. But, in recent years, the
letter did not mention the hot dog and soda. I called to inquire and was told
that the Cardinals had to cut back, so there would be no more free food and
drink for the kids.

   After reading "Legislators sit pretty at ballpark" (April 11), it is apparent
why the disadvantaged children no longer get a hot dog and soda at Cardinals
games. It seems that the underprivileged kids are losing out to public officials
who get free tickets and a buffet in one of the team's party rooms. The public
officials could afford the tickets and food.

   The Cardinals should make it a real home run for these kids and provide the
free hot dog and soda on Catholic Charities night (which is June 4 this year).

   R.J. Selzak - High Ridge

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2010


                              104 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            April 24, 2010 Saturday
                                 FIRST EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 2574 words

BODY:

   A L E E E N T E R P R I S E S N E W S PA P E R o F O U N D E D B Y J O S E P
H P U L I T Z E R D E C . 1 2 , 1 8 7 8 PLATFORM o I know that my retirement
will make no difference in its cardinal principles, that it will always fi ght
for progress and reform, never tolerate injustice or corruption, always fi ght
demagogues of all parties, never belong to any party, always oppose privileged
classes and public plunderers, never lack sympathy with the poor, always remain
devoted to the public welfare, never be satisfied with merely printing news,
always be drastically independent, never be afraid to attack wrong, whether by
predatory plutocracy or predatory poverty o JOSEPH PULITZER o APRIL 10, 1907
SATURDAY o 04.24.2010 o A13 POSTCARD FROM MOUND CITY o By Dan Martin Pork butts
in KC Short take o Yo, Kansas City. Put on a few pounds, have you? We usually
don't pay much attention to various rankings of America's cit- ies. Whatever
category it is - healthi- est, most dangerous, most livable, etc., etc. - the
data usually are bogus and St. Louis doesn't fare well. But the May edition of
Men's Health magazine, which ranks America's "Fat- test Cities" according to a
half-dozen statistical methods, ranks St.

   Louis right in the middle. At No. 49, St. Louis is given a "C" grade. This is
pretty good, considering our basic diet of Budweiser, frozen cus- tard, toasted
ravioli and pork steaks. We're a little worried about our friends in Kansas
City, though. They live in the sixth-fattest city in America, according to Men's
Health. They got an "F." Maybe lay of the barbecue and Winstead cheeseburgers
for a while and try a salad with a little light vinaigrette, OK? America's
least-fat cities? San Fran- cisco and Burlington, Vt. Five of the fattest cities
in America were in Texas, with Corpus Christi ranked as the fat- test. People in
Corpus apparently have special religious dietary laws. We once saw a sign
outside a restaurant there advertising "Christian-owned chicken- fried steak."
YOUR VIEWS o LETTERS FROM OUR READERS Mo. Legislature should not increase costs
to businesses Missouri Auditor Susan Montee and the Post-Dispatch missed a few
important details in propos- ing that the state discontinue compensating
Missouri retailers for collecting and remitting sales taxes collected from
customers. The editorial "A good time to close the 'timely' loophole" (April 19)
called the discount a "loop- hole." Let's call this efort what it really is: an
attempt to raise tax revenue on the backs of Missouri employers. Missouri's
small retailers, who would be hit hardest by this pro- posal, know that there is
a real cost in collecting and remitting sales tax for the state. Ms. Montee
char- acterized that process as "a simple push of a button," misrepresenting the
efort and expense that goes into the tax collection. To comply with tax
collection requirements, businesses must assume the cost of training personnel,
purchasing equipment and software, pro- gramming register systems, docu- menting
tax-exempt sales, han- dling audits and appeals, preparing forms and collecting
and remitting the tax. The cost to collect is even more burdensome when inter-
change fees are considered. Every time a debit or credit card is used, at least
2 percent is taken of the total price of the sale, including sales tax. In
reality, the 2 percent deduc- tion allowed by Missouri doesn't cover the actual
costs to busi- nesses, no matter how large. A nonpartisan study by Pric ater-
houseCoopers showed substantial costs to businesses collecting the tax. The
average cost was more than 3 percent of the tax collected, and in the case of
some smaller retailers (between $150,000 and $1 million in sales), the costs ex-
ceeded 13 percent. Compliance costs alone for Missouri's largest retailers (more
than $10 million in sales) averaged more than 2 per- cent in most retail
sectors. It is ironic that Ms. Montee does not believe business should be
compensated for part of their costs to collect taxes when the state col- lects
up to 3 percent of local taxes they collect and distribute back to political
subdivisions - after the businesses collect the tax for them. The state's
systems should be more sophisticated than a small Missouri retailer that has one
or two employees. This issue was debated at length in the 2003 and 2004
legislative sessions and defeated. When Mis- souri retailers are doing
everything they can to keep their doors open, lawmakers should avoid increasing
their costs. Daniel P. Mehan o Jefferson City President and CEO, Missouri
Chamber of Commerce and Industry In climate change discussion, money talks It is
not surprising that Peabody Energy CEO Gregory Boyce wants "more scientific
study" before action is taken on climate change ("Coal chiefs accept warming,
but ..." April 15). More review means more time before his industry will have to
start reducing its harmful pollution. The tobacco industry used the same tactic
decades ago to fi ght the clear scientific evi- dence that smoking causes
cancer. Years of study by thousands of independent researchers around the world,
as synthesized by the United Nations-sponsored Inter- governmental Panel on
Climate Change, paint a clear picture of the stark reality: Climate change is
happening now, and human activity is causing it. According to a study by Naomi
Oreskes of the University of California at San Diego, of all the peer-reviewed
research on climate change, not a single scientific article concluded otherwise.
Dissenting voices exist at the margins, but they simply are not supported by the
scientific ev- idence and are not given credence by the scientific community.
Most disturbingly, these voices often can be linked to fi nancial interests in
industries that will lose money if action is taken to reduce climate change,
presenting a clear conflict of interest. We still can head of the worst efects
of climate change by us- ing energy more eiciently and deploying clean-energy
technolo- gies. Delay is not an option. We need to start now. Sonya Bahar o St.
Louis Associate Professor of Biophysics and Director, Center for Neurodynamics,
University of Missouri-St Louis Carl M. Bender o St. Louis Professor of Physics,
Washington University Robert Elgin o University City Retired energy analyst
Consequences of cutting benefits Regarding "Budget cutters target pensions"
(April 19): Senate Bill 714 and others that cut into the heart of benefits for
state work- ers will have an impact on all state workers - not just for new
hires after January 2011. Sen. Jason Crowell, R-Cape Girardeau, who sponsored
the bill, and those who vote the bill through have not thought about what this
does to state services. The bill modifies provisions relating to retirement for
state worker who are hired after Jan. 1, 2011. New state employees would be
required to put 4 percent of their earning into a retirement fund. The age of
retirement went up. And to be vested, employees will have to work for 10 years
in- stead of fi ve years. Missouri's employees are the lowest-paid state worker
in the nation. We work for the state be- cause of the benefits. Consider a
nurse's aide who makes $930 every two weeks. Take out $140 in taxes, $130.00 out
for health insurance for the employee and a spouse, and then take out 4 percent
for the retirement. The aide went from making $10 an hour to about $7 an hour.
We have been told there would be no raises this year. Because of the budget they
are taking two of our holidays away. We face re- taliation for using sick time.
The work load has increased and we get treated as if we have no rights at all.
And the state wants to take more away from us. The consequence is that we will
be in line with private-sector, which will include high turnover. With few
people willing to work for the state, positions will go un- fi lled, increasing
the work load on others. What does this mean to the public? We take care of the
vet- erans, our solders, your loved ones. We take care of the mentally
handicapped, your loved ones. We take care of the mentally incompe- tent and
keep them of the streets, to keep you safe. The list of state services goes on.
The state needs us and we need our benefits to keep staing lev- els appropriate.
Why work for the state when we can work for minimum wage anywhere and get
treated with respect and as a per- son with rights. Kay Wofford o Rolla, Mo.
Seeing is believing in venture philanthropy More than 10 million Americans are
afected by diseases that cause blindness. Alarmingly, that num- ber is expected
to increase 50 per- cent by 2020. In neighborhoods across St. Louis, people of
all ages are meeting the challenges of life with blinding diseases. Now, for the
fi rst time, there is hope for restored vision for people afected by retinal
diseases. Recently published results from a breakthrough study, funded in part
by the Foundation Fighting Blindness, show that gene therapy restored
significant vision in fi ve children and seven adults who were blind because of
retinitis pig- mentosa, a blinding genetic dis- ease that afects people from
birth. By injecting a missing gene directly into the back of the eye, patients
experienced dramatic improve- ments in visual acuity, peripheral vision and
light sensitivity. One of the trial's youngest par- ticipants, a 9-year-old boy,
has witnessed some of the most strik- ing results, regaining the ability to ride
his bike, play baseball and read the chalkboard in class. When asked what was
best about his restored vision, his response was "colors." With a variety of
clinical trials ongoing, this breakthrough sets the stage for the use of gene
therapy in many more retinal dis- eases moving forward, with hope for further
success. This trial would not have been possible without the essential fi
nancial support provided by the Foundation Fighting Blindness and other funding
organizations. Non-profit organizations often provide the start-up venture phi-
lanthropy capital necessary to be- gin new research not funded by the
government. With federal funding for medical research limited to supporting
studies with proven results, unexplored research re- ceives little or no
funding. The potential for new break- through research can be limited by a lack
of initial funding. However, money provided through venture philanthropy allows
scientists to investigate uncharted territory. In essence, venture philanthropy
funding can drive research until it gets funding from federal sources, such as
the National Institutes of Health. Each of us has the opportunity to play a
pivotal role in such ven- ture philanthropy, whether by investing our time as
volunteers or our dollars as funders. Our involvement and dedication to
non-profit organizations that of- fer support for medical research is critical.
Now more than ever, supporting early research can sig- nificantly improve the
lives of our neighbors, friends and families to- day and for generations to
come. Jack Wiedmer o St. Louis President, Foundation Fighting Blindness St.
Louis Chapter Same result - drunk or distracted The April 17 edition was quite
the paper. An Illinois state trooper drives 126 miles per hour while on his cell
phone and kills two people, and he gets a sentence of 30 months of probation,
what- ever that means ("No prison for trooper"). A truck driver kills three
people because he was distracted, and he serves one year in jail ("Trucker in
wreck that killed 3 is freed"). Why do the innocent die and the guilty walk away
with a slap on the wrist? I suppose if the trooper or the truck driver had been
drunk, the penalties would have been more severe. But does it matter if the
drivers are drunk or sober when the results are the same? Ken Durbin o
Florissant Work safe I share in the grief for the West Virginia miners killed in
an explo- sion earlier this month. I couldn't help but notice the deafening
silence where the strong voice of the United Mine Workers once was heard. The
facts were undeniable: The Upper Big Branch Mine was cited for more than 500
violations in 2009, but it received nothing more than a monetary slap on the
wrist. The fi ne, about $160,000, repre- sented mere minutes of company profits.
I can't help but think that if it were a union mine, the union would have had it
shut down be- cause of unsafe conditions. There is no question in my mind that
29 families would not be mourning loved ones and those communities would not
have endured trauma and tragedy if it had been a union mine. Everyone who works
for wages owes a debt of gratitude to unions for their hard-fought gains, in-
cluding eight-hour work days, 40- hour work weeks, overtime pay, health care
benefits, child labor laws and Occupational Safety and Health Administration
standards. Unions set standards for equi- table, safe work environments and
establishing a standard of living that created the middle class. The erosion of
the middle class is a di- rect result of the assault on unions. Without unions,
more people may lose their lives - and more will lose their ability to safely
earn a fair living wage. Supporting unions is in everyone's best inter- est.
Catherine Mikolay o Fults, Ill. Make it a home run For several years now, our
fam- ily has been participating in the Catholic Charities program "Go to Bat for
the Kids. " The public donates to Catholic Charities spe- cifically to buy a
Cardinals game ticket for an underprivileged child to see what might be his or
her only live Cardinals game. The fi rst few years we donated, the letter said
each child would get a hot dog and soda. For a child, that is part of the fun.
But, in re- cent years, the letter did not men- tion the hot dog and soda. I
called to inquire and was told that the Cardinals had to cut back, so there
would be no more free food and drink for the kids. After reading "Legislators
sit pretty at ballpark" (April 11), it is apparent why the disadvantaged
children no longer get a hot dog and soda at Cardinals games. It seems that the
underprivileged kids are losing out to public of- fi cials who get free tickets
and a bufet in one of the team's party rooms. The public oicials could aford the
tickets and food. The Cardinals should make it a real home run for these kids
and provide the free hot dog and soda on Catholic Charities night (which is June
4 this year). R.J. Selzak o High Ridge dmartin@post-dispatch.com o Archives o
www.STLtoday.com/moundcity WE WELCOME YOUR LETTERS AND E-MAIL Letters should be
250 words or fewer. Please include your name, address and phone number. The
phone number is for verification purposes only. All letters are subject to
editing. Anonymous letters or letters signed with a pseudonym will not be
published. Writers usually will not be published more than once every 60 days.
Additional letters are posted online at STLtoday.com/letters. MAIL Letters to
the editor St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 900 N. Tucker Blvd. St. Louis, MO 63101 THE
PLATFORM Visit STLtoday.com/ ThePlatform for more editorial, opinion and reader
reaction. TM HO TO CONTACT US GILBERT BAILON o gbailon@post-dispatch.com
Editorial Page Editor o 314-340-8387 KEVIN HORRIGAN o
khorrigan@post-dispatch.com Deputy Editorial Page Editor o 314-340-8135 JAMIE
RILEY o jamieriley@post-dispatch.com Letters Editor o 314-340-8392 E-MAIL
letters@post-dispatch.com FAX 314-340-3139 KEVIN D. MOWBRAY PRESIDENT &
PUBLISHER ARNIE ROBBINS EDITOR GILBERT BAILON EDITORIAL PAGE EDITOR

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2010


                              105 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2010 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                             April 13, 2010 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 1136 words

HEADLINE: Stem-cell therapy feels FDA's pinch Reinjecting an adult's own cells
requires study, agency says

BYLINE: Jason Blevins The Denver Post

BODY:

   To 62-year-old Hal Kaye, the injection of his own stem cells into his
battered ankle was a miracle cure that saved him from debilitating surgery.

   To the Food and Drug Administration, the treatment pioneered by a Broomfield
doctor appears to be a misuse of a drug that requires licensing and federal
scrutiny before it's used on patients.

   And that puts Dr. Chris Centeno on the front line of a simmering dispute over
the use and regulation of adult stem cells, which can be cast as either a rogue
therapy or breakthrough panacea.

   Centeno says his procedure - Regenexx - is one of the first in the U.S. to
bridge the gap between stem-

   cell research and actual treatment. Regenexx involves harvesting a patient's
cells from bone marrow, growing more in a lab and then injecting the
tissue-repairing cells into damaged joints or even lumbar discs.

   Kaye is one of 500 patients who, since 2006, have paid several thousand
dollars for a chance to regain their youthful bounce with Centeno's stem-cell
therapy.

   In Kaye's case, the treatment ended years of pain that five orthopedists said
could be fixed only by fusing his ankle.

   Today, three years after his stem-

   cell treatment, Kaye says he plays golf "whenever it's sunny."

   "I can walk anywhere now," said Kaye, who hasn't used a cane since his
Regenexx treatment. "It's been an incredible recovery."

   But the FDA says stem cells are really a type of drug that requires intensive
study and licensing.

   The agency sent Centeno a letter in 2008 warning him that lack of FDA
licensing for Regenexx appeared to be in violation of the Public Health Service
Act. The FDA asked Centeno to write a letter detailing "steps you have taken or
will take to address the violations."

   Centeno, 46, sent a response to the FDA but said he has yet to receive a
formal reply.

   Centeno asserts that a person's own stem cells, which he magnifies in a
culture of the patient's own blood in a controlled lab, are not a drug.

   Dealing with the FDA

   While Centeno circumvents the FDA, at least one other company is working with
the agency to treat adults with their own stem cells.

   In Louisiana, the 4-year-old TCA Cellular Therapy company has several ongoing
FDA-approved clinical trials on humans, using patients' own stem cells to treat
heart and vascular diseases. The company is waiting for FDA review of its plan
for clinical trials using stem cells to treat spinal cord injuries and
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, or ALS, known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Centeno insists that the FDA exceeded its authority when, in an effort to
prevent the spread of disease, it decided in 2005 that a patient's own stem
cells should be regulated as if they were being used on another human.

   But the medical community largely has supported the change.

   An October 2006 report in the New England Journal of Medicine analyzed the
FDA's updated regulation of stem-

   cell-based therapies. The report said researchers should be able to prove
stem cells used won't transmit disease and will be pure, effective and safe. The
authors concluded existing regulations governing stem cells "provide an
appropriate structure for ensuring the safety and efficacy of the next
generation of stem-cell-based products."

   The International Cellular Medicine Society, which Centeno helped establish
to set professional guidelines for adult stem-cell therapies and now counts 300
physicians in its ranks, is meeting this month with the FDA to discuss the issue
of whether a patient's own cells classify as a regulated drug.

   A hard-line stance by the FDA could force Centeno to go abroad with his
Regenexx procedure, which he licenses to other doctors. Already he is helping to
open a Regenexx clinic in an orthopedic hospital in China that specializes in
medical tourism and caters to patients seeking unconventional medical treatment.

   Harvesting, cultivating and three injections of stem cells at Centeno's
clinic costs $8,000 and is not covered by most insurance policies.

   Centeno's treatment, three 10-

   minute injections, can flood an area with as many as 40 million stem cells -
roughly the size of a pea. By comparison, microfracture, a surgical technique
that involves creating tiny breaks in a bone, bathes an injured joint in a few
hundred thousand stem cells.

   "The body sometimes has a hard time getting enough stem cells to an area, and
what we do is simply amplify the number of cells," Centeno said.

   Paul Pendleton is certain that adult stem-cell therapy could someday end
joint-replacement surgery. He says it already saved him from replacing his knee.

   He was about to give up decades of weightlifting and regular workouts when he
found Centeno a year ago.

   "It feels like my knee did 20 years ago. I'm back doing lunges, teaching my
spinning classes," said the 53-year-

   old petroleum engineer. "The knee seems kind of bulletproof to me. It was a
solution that conventional medicine could not offer."

   Soon, regenerative stem-cell therapies like Centeno's may not be so cutting
edge. A study published last month in the peer-reviewed journal Current Stem
Cell Research and Therapy detailed the recovery of 227 Centeno patients. Using
high-resolution MRIs, the study showed no patients developed tumors or other
serious complications from the treatment.

   "The safety has been quite good," Centeno said. "Especially when compared to
other things like knee replacement or a big orthopedic surgery or microfracture
or a laminectomy, the risk profile of this is far less than all of them."

   Addressing safety issues

   As doctors and researchers present more stem-cell therapies to the FDA, the
regulatory process may move more quickly, said Dennis Roop, director of the new
Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Biology at the University of
Colorado Denver's Anschutz Medical Campus.

   "But it will not ever evolve to the point where you don't have to address the
safety issues," said Roop, noting that the FDA strictly regulates labs where
tissues are grown. "If any physician thinks he can take cells out, expand them
and grow them in his own clinic, the risk is something very similar to gene
therapy, where there was so much hype and an adverse event can stymie the field
for years."

   In 2007, a 36-year-old Chicago woman died three weeks after her knee was
injected with genetically engineered viruses as part of an investigational
treatment researching gene therapy's potential in easing the pain of rheumatoid
arthritis.

   While the culture and climate for stem-cell therapies is improving, Roop
said, more research, like Colorado State University's stem-cell work on dogs and
horses, is needed to ensure safety and learn long-term effects of stem-cell
therapies.

   "I think as more data accumulates documenting safety, that will potentially
accelerate getting more of these stem-cell therapies approved," he said.

   Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374

   or jblevins@denverpost.com

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2010


                              106 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              April 4, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: Opinion; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: Debating the need for another La Jolla hospital

BODY:

   The article April 1 on the new University of California San Diego Jacobs
Medical Center perhaps got it right: San Diego may not need another community
hospital.

   But the writer completely missed the point. Focusing on the mistaken idea
that this new facility will provide care already available in excellent
community hospital facilities in San Diego, and therefore might raise health
care costs loses sight of the real benefits that an expanded academic health
center at UCSD will bring to San Diego.

   The reality is that this new UCSD medical facility is much needed to attract
and retain the most outstanding physician investigators who develop new cutting
edge treatments unavailable in community hospitals. Patients will be able to
access the most advanced treatments from stem cell therapy, organ
transplantation, gene therapy and advanced surgical procedures.

   Additionally, rather than focusing narrowly on health care costs, we in San
Diego need to understand the bigger economic return from this new hospital.
First, the direct economic impact from medical tourism alone can be substantial.
The Mayo Clinic and Johns Hopkins Hospitals each fill literally hundreds of
hotel rooms every night in their respective locales with patients who can afford
to travel to the very best hospitals for advanced health care. With this
facility, we can attract more patients and their families, not only from the
United States, but especially from Mexico, South America and Asia who will
travel to UCSD for top-tier care, filling hotels and restaurants in the process.

   Second, the National Institutes of Health and the California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine are providing more funding for translation of scientific
discoveries into clinical treatments. This translation obligatorily takes place
within the top academic teaching hospitals that work synergistically with
research labs, biotech and pharmaceutical companies to move new ideas and
products from the laboratory bench to the bedside. More new companies will
settle in San Diego when we have an expanded academic medical center that has
the large patient volumes needed to conduct advanced clinical trials across a
broad spectrum of disease categories.

   As was pointed out, San Diego has excellent community hospitals. Our only
academic medical center, UCSD, has many outstanding physicians, but lacks the
scale to move into the very top tier. The Jacobs Medical Center will provide the
facility to enable UCSD to do just that.

   WILLIAM R. BRODY

   President, Salk Institute for Biological Studies La Jolla

   I read the front-page article describing UCSD's plan to construct a new
hospital. I have also read that other local hospital operators, in particular
Scripps and Sharp, are opposed, citing the lack of need.

   However, county growth projections would support the addition of beds. How
unfair it would be to Mercy Hospital, placing the burden of indigent health care
on Mercy rather than the current scenario in which Mercy and UCSD share this
burden.

   I wonder if the executives at Scripps and Sharp have forgotten that President
Barack Obama is providing health care for everyone. Scripps and Sharp may see
indigent patients, but they will have the president's health insurance. What's
the beef? Isn't it good enough?

   STEVE KITCHEN

   La Mesa

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; CAPTIONS: Conceptual drawing of Jacobs Medical Center
planned in La Jolla.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2010


                              107 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                             April 3, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: Sports+Late City Final; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 79 words

HEADLINE: 'SLANDERED' DOC IS SUING

BYLINE: Bruce Golding

BODY:

   A former gene-therapy researcher at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine filed
suit yesterday over claims that he was unfairly canned for using phony data when
it was actually a lab assistant who did it.

   Hemophilia expert Dr. Hengjun Chao alleges the prestigious Upper East Side
grad school took his subordinate's word over his because Chao was born and
educated in China.

   His suit seeks $171,500 in lost wages, along with unspecified damages for
defamation and "trade libel."

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2010


                              108 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                            March 20, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 65

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY - 'FAMILY JEWELS' SHINES AS IT NEARS REALITY MILESTONE

BYLINE: Michael Starr

BODY:

   "Gene Simmons Family Jewels"

   Tomorrow at 9 p.m. on A&E

   [***] (Three stars)

   IT'S unrealistic - if not downright impossible - to watch everything   that
premieres on TV.

   So I've only seen bits and pieces of "Gene Simmons Family Jewels" over the
years and didn't have any preconceived opinions of the A&E series - which
premiered in 2006 and celebrates its 100th episode this season as TV's
longest-running family reality show (overtaking MTV's "The Osbournes" for that
niche honor).

   What I did see, in watching tomorrow night's fifth-season premiere, is a show
meshing the requisite reality elements - including facing-the-camera
"confessionals," underscored here with weirdly "Leave It to Beaver"-type music -
with some genuine emotion.

   It's obvious that KISS frontman Gene Simmons, despite all his public bravado
and bluster (overbearing at times), loves his longtime partner, former Playboy
centerfold/actress Shannon Tweed, and their kids - Nick, 21 and Sophie, 17. And
it's obvious those feelings are mutual.

   I think that explains some of this show's appeal, and why it's had such a
long shelf life ("Family Jewels" has averaged roughly 2 million viewers each
season).

   Since I'm not a regular viewer, perhaps I was influenced by what transpires
in tomorrow's season opener, as Shannnon discovers a lump in her breast (while
out shopping for clothes in LA with her sister, Tracy Tweed) and undergoes a
biopsy - keeping all but the most basic information from Gene, who's just
embarked on yet another long KISS tour.

   There is absolutely nothing contrived as cameras record Shannon's journey
when she's given the news about the lump, has the biopsy (on camera), then
nervously awaits the results - preferring to keep her emotions to herself rather
than "burden" her family.

   I'm not sold on the idea of having had cameras there to record Shannon's
biopsy, not because it's graphic (it isn't), but because you'd think such a
private moment should remain, well, private.

   But in this information overload age of Twitter and Facebook, it's not
all-that-surprising this was included in the show - and kudos to Shannon for
being honest enough with herself, and with the show's viewers, to share her
experience in this fashion. And she and Gene have since become advocates in the
fight against breast cancer - so no argument from me.

   Check it out.

GRAPHIC: All in the "Family": The Simmons crew relaxes at home (from left):
Shannon, Nick, Gene and Sophie. The show celebrates its 100th episode this
season, its fifth on A&E.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2010


                              109 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             March 15, 2010 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: Genetix gets $35m infusion for gene therapy work

BYLINE: RYAN MCBRIDE,

BODY:

   Venture capitalists are giving the risky field of gene therapy a new dose of
confidence - and cash. Genetix Pharmaceuticals, a 17-year-old developer of gene
therapies, has replenished its coffers with a $35 million Series B round of
venture capital.

   The Cambridge-based company attracted the fresh capital after a study in
France showed that one of the firm's gene therapies blocked the progression of a
debilitating brain disorder called adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD, in two
children. This is the disease that was featured in the acclaimed 1992 film
``Lorenzo's Oil,'' the true story of a husband and wife who searched for a cure
for their son with the crippling illness. While much testing will be required to
bring the gene therapy to market, Boston's Third Rock Ventures and
Cambridge-based biotech giant Genzyme were convinced that there was enough
promise in the data to make big bets on the company.

   Third Rock and Genzyme Ventures, the venture unit of Genzyme, are the new
investors in Genetix's second-round financing, according to the company. The
round includes investments from the firm's previous VC backers Easton Capital,
Forbion Capital Partners, and TVM Capital. The new funding came with major
management changes at Genetix: Third Rock partner Nick Leschly is leading the
firm as interim president; Phil Reilly, a venture partner at Third Rock, has
become chief medical officer; and Mitchell Finer, a veteran biotech executive,
is the new chief scientist. Genetix's chief executive, Alfred Slanetz, is
leaving the firm.

   Gene therapies, which typically use viruses to deliver healthy genes into
cells to treat diseases, have never been approved for the market nor lived up to
the hype they initially generated about two decades ago. Genetix is one example
of renewed faith in the science in some scientific and investor circles. The
company, one of hundreds like it that formed in the 1990s to develop gene
therapies, was recapitalized in 2004 and licensed technology from the French
National Institute for Health and Medical Research. The French scientists who
developed that technology have generated headlines around the world for its use
to cure ALD in two high-profile cases.

   ``We're at that same point that we were with monoclonal antibodies 12 to 15
years ago,'' Finer, Genetix's new chief scientific officer, says. ``You look and
see the resurgence of gene therapy data. We are poised to capitalize on those
advancements.''

   Genetix, which has now closed $75 million in funding since its inception,
adds its own twist to gene therapy. Rather than injecting its therapies directly
into patients, the company treats patients' own bone marrow after it has been
extracted from them. Once the firm's treatments have corrected the genes in
patients' bone marrow stem cells, the cells are infused back into the patients
to cure their illness. To deliver healthy genes to cells, the company uses
viruses derived from deactivated HIV that are designed to die off after their
job is done.

   Swiss pharmaceutical behemoth Novartis signed up to back an online community
for organ transplant recipients hosted by Cambridge-based social networking site
PatientsLikeMe. Novartis, which has a large R&D organization in Cambridge,
previously tapped PatientsLikeMe for information about patients with multiple
sclerosis.

   Cambridge-based Biogen Idec and its Swiss partner, Roche, reportedly halted
development of ocrelizumab, an experimental drug for rheumatoid arthritis,
because of safety concerns. Bloomberg News reported that the drug is still being
tested for multiple sclerosis.

   Vertex's chief medical officer, Bob Kauffman, recently spoke about the
biotech's effort to develop a drug cocktail to fight hepatitis C virus while
avoiding the flu-like symptoms of standard treatments for the infection. Vertex
is poised to begin clinical testing of one such cocktail, which includes its
experimental drug telaprevir, even as it pursues approval for telaprevir for use
with standard hepatitis drugs -a milestone the company hopes to reach sometime
in 2011.

   Bob Weiler, chairman and CEO of Waltham-based health IT pioneer Phase
Forward, spoke about his company's strategy for maintaining its decadelong
growth spurt. Having started out by convincing drug companies to switch from
paper records to software for collecting and managing data in clinical trials,
Phase Forward is making acquisitions to build up a suite of software products
that automate everything from the early clinical development to post-marketing
safety studies.

   This report was compiled by the editors of Xconomy, an online news website
focused on the business of technology and innovation. For more New England
coverage, visit www.Xconomy.com/boston.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2010


                              110 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             March 14, 2010 Sunday
                                 HOWARD EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. 1G

LENGTH: 1149 words

HEADLINE: PROPOSED CELL TOWER DRAWS PROTEST;
BIG BRANCH DRIVE RESIDENTS OPPOSE 135-FOOT POLE ON FARMER'S WOODED KNOLL

BYLINE: Larry Carson, larry.carson@baltsun.com

BODY:

   The families who live in the million-dollar homes along Big Branch Drive in
Dayton want their cell phones, but they don't want to see a cell phone tower on
Ricky and Leslie Bauer's 122-acre farm 612 feet away.

   "I prefer not to look out my front door and see a porcupine of antennas," Big
Branch resident Paul Robertson said at a standing-room-only community meeting
Tuesday night at the Clarksville fire station. The meeting was packed with more
than 70 opponents of the proposed 135-foot high T-Mobile pole.

   The clash is reminiscent of many that took place in the 1990s, when cell
towers began to proliferate in the Baltimore region. The friction also
highlights the cultural divisions between suburban homeowners and farmers.

   Residents said the pole, located in a stand of older trees on a small knoll,
would be an eyesore. They worry that their large homes' values would decline,
and they were concerned over radiation's effects on health. They also said that
cell service is good enough in the rural area west of Route 32 without a new
pole sticking up over the Bauers' trees.

   Ricky Bauer, 49, who did not attend the meeting, said Wednesday that he's
just a grain farmer trying to survive on land preserved from the sort of
development that led to the big houses on Big Branch Drive.

   "I'm amazed" at the fuss, he said, recalling that when the houses were being
built a decade ago, he erected a big hand-lettered sign warning buyers that his
50 sows and their manure sometimes produced disagreeable odors. He later gave up
on the pigs.

   But the neighbors were angry, and fearful of the unseen energy the pole might
produce.

   "You're cooking them. It's a microwave oven," said resident Om Gupta, 58, who
said he is a nuclear physicist.

   "This is not an acceptable solution," said John Tegeris, 46, a Big Branch
resident.

   Gregory E. Rapisarda, a lawyer representing T-Mobile at the required
community information meeting, said the company needs the tower to provide
better wireless in-home service for voice, data and streaming visual content to
customers.

   Over 18 months, the firm has found no better place to put it, he said. The
next step would be a County Council vote on a resolution approving removal of
the 875-square-foot parcel from the county's Agricultural Preservation program,
and later a conditional-use zoning hearing on the pole. The Agricultural
Preservation Board approved the move Feb. 16; Bauer, a board member, recused
himself.

   Rapisarda exhibited photos of a red weather balloon floated at 135 feet Feb.
16 to show it could hardly be seen above the Bauers' trees. He also said that
federal law prohibits local governments from denying permission for a cell tower
because of health concerns. He added that the tower will have no lights and that
studies have found towers don't harm property values.

   If they could have found an existing farm silo or other high structure to put
antennas on, they would have done that, he said, because it's a lot quicker and
cheaper.

   "The No. 1 goal is speed to market," he said, explaining that T-Mobile has
antennas on the nearest towers, which are about two miles away. "We need to go
in there to provide wireless coverage," he said.

   Rick Lober, a Big Branch Drive resident, is collecting signatures for a
petition drive to oppose the pole.

   Standing the next day where the pole would go up if approved, Bauer said he
has lived for 20 years on the 122-acre farm. Bauer would repay the county
$296.84 for removing the small parcel from the preservation program. County law
allows up to 1 acre of preserved land to be removed for things such as cell
towers.

   "In our eyes, the pole is better than a 30-foot-round, 150-foot-tall concrete
silo," he said, though neighboring farmer Phil Muth said that after negotiating
with T-Mobile for months to have the antennae on his preserved farm next to
Bauer's, he rejected having either a silo or the pole on his game and grain farm
because of their appearance. Muth has owned the farm for two years, he said.

   "We're in the business of agriculture," Bauer said. "This ground is not
pleasure ground. We have to make money to stay here." Bauer said he farms 800
acres around the county, but the profit margins on grain are so small, he can't
afford to turn down a chance to make a little more guaranteed money each month.
Muth said the cell firms typically pay $800 to $1,000 a month per antenna. One
pole can hold multiple antennae.

   Bauer said the dispute has grown so heated that his 12-year-old daughter
Jackie has been verbally harassed about the tower on the school bus, and there
are spurious e-mails floating around about his motives. He gave up pig farming,
he said, partly because of complaints about odors, though his three children,
who include Andy, 14, and Danielle, 18, care for three sows and their offspring
as 4-H projects.

   "They're proud to be farm kids," Leslie Bauer said, despite the teasing they
get from suburban children.

   "I didn't like the change when they built those houses, but I never objected,
even though our water level dropped 50 feet and I had to drill a new well,"
Ricky Bauer said. The Bauers said they doubt the pole would be very visible
anyway, though some of the development homes can be seen from the pole site
through bare tree limbs.

   People at the meeting were adamant, however.

   Health concerns might not be a legal subject for debate, but Dr. Victor
Velculescu, director of Cancer Genetics at the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics
and Therapeutics at Johns Hopkins Medicine, weighed in.

   "There are studies that do show effects," he said. "I see a very clear
potential for danger," he added. "We have more kids than adults here. I don't
want to be a guinea pig," he said, reminding the group that no laws prohibited
asbestos or smoking years ago either.

   Rapisarda said people receive more radiation from the phones on their hips
than they would from the tower.

   Muth and Robert Burgio, 44, said they moved to the area because of its quiet,
rural nature.

   "I want to preserve the scenic beauty of farmland," Burgio said. His wife,
Deborah, put it differently.

   "I understand that T-Mobile is in business to make money and provide
services, but the benefit to the area - there isn't one," she said. "The benefit
is to T-Mobile."

   Others complained that Verizon and AT&T don't seem to need a new tower, so
why should T-Mobile? The area has very few residents, and the major traffic
corridor is on Route 32 farther east, where 300-foot utility towers hold lots of
antennae, they said. Insisting on erecting the new pole will not gain T-Mobile
any customers, only enemies in the area, they said.

   Others did not believe Rapisarda's reassurances about property values.

   Sherry Stull said she's a mother of three going through a divorce and trying
to sell her house on Big Branch.

   "I'm going to lose the money I need to take care of these children because of
your pole," she said. "I'm as good as the Bauers."

GRAPHIC: MAP(S)
 DAYTON
 BALTIMORE SUN GRAPHIC

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2010


                              111 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2010 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                             March 14, 2010 Sunday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: STAR; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 285 words

HEADLINE: INVITATION ONLY Baylor gala wows the crowd

BYLINE: DOUGLAS BRITT, Houston Chronicle

BODY:

   Expertly chaired by Sydney and Don Faust and Cora Sue and Harry Mach, the
Partnership for Baylor College of Medicine's 2010 gala had an ambitious theme:
"Let Us Entertain you ... Shades of the 21 Club, the Copa, the Stork Club."

   And it delivered. Boy, did it ever.

   Celeb impersonators Sharon Owens and Sebastian Anzaldo wowed the crowd with
their Las Vegas act, Barbra and Frank: The Concert That Never Was. Honoree
Margaret Alkek Williams wowed with the depth of her commitment to BCM.

   And Lester and Sue Smith wowed everyone by matching dollar-for-dollar the
money raised in table sales and contributions for BCM's DeBakey Heart Center.
That doubled the take to well over $500,000 in support of research to identify
and fight heart disease at a genetic level through the collaborative efforts of
BCM's Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention and the Human Genome
Sequencing Center.

   BCM backers still had Streisand and Sinatra tunes playing in their heads from
the March 4 gala when they got down to business at Tuesday's installment of the
Part-nership's educational luncheon series.

   Channel 2 anchor Bill Balleza moderated "Stem Cells ... Fountains of Youth?"
- a panel discussion with Malcolm K. Brenner, director of the Center for Cell
and Gene Therapy at BCM, Texas Children's Hospital and the Methodist Hospital;
Margaret Goodell, director of BCM's Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine Center;
and Amy L. McGuire, associate director for research in BCM's Center for Medical
Ethics.

   Audience questions about stem cells' potential to treat heart disease and
cancer as well as the ethics of embryonic stem cell research left no doubt that
Partnership members think as hard as they play.

   douglas.britt@chron.com

GRAPHIC: BILL OLIVE PHOTOS (SEE CORRECTION) A. Lester and Sue Smith B. Cora Sue
and Harry Mach C. Don and Sydney Faust D. Margaret Alkek Williams and Jim Daniel

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2010


                              112 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2010 Sunday
                                National Edition

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Bay Area ; Pg. 29A

LENGTH: 1265 words

HEADLINE: Rays of Hope in Battling an Agonizing Disease

BYLINE: By SABIN RUSSELL

BODY:

   It wasn't until Ileana Peralta was in junior high school that she summoned
the courage to Google her own disease.

     The teenager from Livermore knew almost everything about her inherited
condition, Epidermolysis bullosa, a tongue twister even doctors call just EB.
The disease is caused by the lack of the collagen gene that makes the glue that
tethers layers of skin together. It makes her skin seem as fragile as a
butterfly's wing.

   Ileana and other children with EB go through life with much of their bodies
wrapped in gauze, like a burn patient. Their skin, at the slightest trauma, is
prone to form blisters, which are vulnerable to infection. Scarring eventually
curls fingers and toes, fusing them. To varying degrees, these children are
condemned to a life of pain and disfigurement.

     EB is rare. Ileana's severe form of it, called recessive dystrophic,
affects between one and four per one million in the United States, said Dr.
Alfred T. Lane, a pediatric dermatologist. Dr. Lane was recruited to Stanford
University Medical School 19 years ago to search for treatments for EB, and has
been working on it ever since.

     ''It's the worst skin disease that I know of,'' he said. ''This disease
just cries out for help.''

     The handful of doctors in the United States who deal with EB are
experimenting with some of the most advanced technologies in medicine -- gene
therapy, stem cell therapy and bone marrow transplantation -- as a means of
eventual treatment.

     Last fall, the California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, the state
agency that runs the voter-approved $3 billion stem cell research program,
allotted $11.7 million to Stanford to find a way to harness the newest stem cell
technologies against EB. The goal is a clinical trial by 2014.

     Under Dr. Lane's direction, the California stem cell money will pay for an
approach using new techniques that transform ordinary skin cells into
all-purpose stem cells. In theory, these stem cells can be engineered to carry
the missing collagen gene, and can then be coaxed to grow large amounts of
healthy skin grafts, immunologically compatible with each patient, like Ileana.

     When Ileana trolled the Web for information about her disease, she
discovered that children who have it may not survive to adulthood. ''The part
that scares me is that some kids died from it,'' she said. ''I'm glad I'm still
here.''

     For most of Ileana's life, Dr. Lane's team has focused on developing gene
therapy. The idea is to implant the missing gene -- for a protein called
collagen VII -- in skin grafts. The chainlike collagen proteins, absent or
damaged in people with EB, anchor the top layer of skin to the underlying
dermis.

     Engineered viruses would ferry the missing gene to laboratory cultures of
the patient's skin, to be grown in sheets and later grafted. A clinical trial
among adult patients is pending.

     The latest technique, sometimes called reprogramming, holds the promise of
sidestepping the troublesome issues surrounding the use of embryonic stem cells
-- controversial because they are derived from human embryos that are destroyed
a few days after fertilization.

     Reprogramming seemed like science fiction until 2006, when Dr. Shinya
Yamanaka proved it could be done in mice. In 2007, Dr. Yamanaka and other
researchers showed it could be done with human cells.

     Reprogrammed cells are currently too dangerous for use in human studies,
and a variety of hurdles must be cleared before such studies can happen. One
study recently found, for example, that reprogrammed cells have a more limited
lifespan than stem cells derived from embryos.

     On the other hand, researchers are rapidly fine-tuning the mechanisms of
cellular reprogramming, making it simpler, more efficient and better understood.
The field is now among the hottest in molecular biology.

     More controversial is an entirely different approach using bone marrow
transplants, which swap a patient's own marrow with those of a healthy donor.
The idea is to treat EB as a disease of the whole body, rather than one that can
be repaired with skin grafts. EB affects not only the skin, but also weakens
mucosal tissues in the mouth and gut, which cannot be grafted.

     Dr. John E. Wagner Jr., a pediatric cancer researcher at the University of
Minnesota Medical School, has done bone marrow transplants on seven EB children
after studies on mice that showed that a select group of bone marrow cells could
migrate to the skin and, for reasons not fully understood, replace missing
collagen.

     Four of those patients ''are having improved quality of life,'' said Dr.
Wagner, who has yet to publish his pediatric results. But two of the children
died -- one from infections five months after an initial transplant, and the
other during chemotherapy, before healthy bone marrow from a donor could be
transplanted.

     Dr. Wagner agonizes over those deaths, but is convinced that the disease
was so severe that it warranted the risk.

     ''I normally take care of patients with leukemia,'' he said, ''but then I
think there are some things worse than leukemia.''

     Dr. Wagner's work is backed by DebRA, the Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa
Research Association of America, as well as the Epidermolysis Bullosa Medical
Research Foundation, two charitable organizations founded by parents.

     Dr. Lane of Stanford has reservations about the bone marrow procedure.
''For a child with large wounds,'' he said, ''you are really setting them up for
infection.''

     Dr. Arthur Caplan, a bioethicist at the University of Pennsylvania, is also
uneasy about conducting risky procedures on children.

     ''The sicker the children become, the harder it is to secure good, informed
consent,'' Dr. Caplan said. ''In my experience, parents become desperate. They
want to have hope, and often researchers want to offer hope.''

     For her part, Ileana said she was in no hurry to be a guinea pig. ''I
probably want to wait until they know what they are doing,'' she said.

     Now 15 and a freshman at Grenada High in Livermore, Ileana confronts her
disease with a combination of pluck and a straightforward attitude befitting
someone considerably older. She is as matter-of-fact about everyday life as she
is about her disease. She confesses to struggling in math at school and far
prefers drawing. Her sketchbook is full of cartoon bats and characters like Jack
Skellington from ''The Nightmare Before Christmas'' and SpongeBob SquarePants.

     Ileana knows the sting of EB every day when her mother, Stephanie Peralta,
bathes her and wraps her in gauze. It can take 45 minutes to whirl the yards of
white cotton bandage around her arms, her legs and her stomach. Some days the
sores hurt more than others. Some days they hardly bother her at all.

     Bandaging Ileana is a labor of love for Ms. Peralta, a 31-year-old single
mother, who lost her job at a freight forwarding company when the recession hit.
She was 16 when she became pregnant with Ileana. Doctors knew when Ileana was
born that something was wrong: on her right leg, there was no skin from the knee
down.

     ''I was a teenage mom with a sick child,'' Ms. Peralta said. ''I grew up in
a hurry, and just dealt with it.''

     Ileana appears to have inherited her mother's strength. ''I just try to get
through it, the best you can, no matter how much it hurts,'' she said.

     When she goes outside, she knows people sometimes stare. ''If they're
curious, they'll ask,'' she said. ''It's O.K. to ask.''

     Recently she attended a party, and met a girl whose mother has cancer. ''I
asked her about it,'' she said. ''Pretty soon we were swapping stories.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: For Stephanie Peralta, bandaging her daughter, Ileana, is a
labor of love. Ileana has a rare inherited skin disease that is often fatal.
 Ileana, 15, must keep most of her body wrapped in gauze, like a burn patient.
Her skin is prone to blisters and infection. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY HEIDI SCHUMANN FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2010


                              113 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             March 14, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Pg. H 01

LENGTH: 892 words

HEADLINE: Mandeville senior's resume is as big as her heart

BYLINE: Kenneth Mathews -- Mandeville West

BODY:

   When Mandeville High senior Marjorie "Betsy" Bateman was named the 2009-10
St. Tammany Parish Student of the Year, the selection committee probably
marveled at her impressive resume.

   In just the past year, Bateman has been named a National Merit Finalist
(awarded to less than 1 percent of graduating seniors), a Coca-Cola Scholars
Program Finalist (one of two from Louisiana), a candidate in the prestigious
Presidential Scholars Program, an AP Scholar with Honor, the MHS Senior with a
first-place Senior Project/Presentation and Mandeville High Student of the Year.

   The complete list of high school leadership roles and honors in categories
such as general academics, science activities, English and literary pursuits,
social studies activities, math competitions, musical achievements, community
service and work experience literally covers a lot of ground.

   Bateman gives a great deal of credit to the teachers and administration of
Mandeville High for the variety of opportunities and challenges that shaped her
experience.

   "MHS has made me the student that I am by offering an outstanding and
challenging curriculum," she said, noting that she took the whole gamut of
courses offered. Bateman has acquired 5.0s in advanced placement courses and has
racked up a 4.586 grade-point average. A nearly perfect ACT of 35 and SAT of
2370, with a perfect 1600 in math and critical reading, both taken two years
ago, highlight her impressive resume.

   The staff of MHS may be equally grateful to Bateman, who is leaving a legacy
of initiatives that began when she was a ninth-grader.

   "The MHS faculty and administration encourage us to innovate whenever we see
an opportunity," she said.

   As a freshman Writing Club member, she realized that it would be "cool" for
the school to have its own literary magazine. Thus was born "The Hesperid," with
Volumes I and II published the past two years. Bateman served as co-editor her
sophomore year and editor-in-chief as a junior and senior.

   While volunteering at the National World War II Museum in New Orleans last
year, she discovered its quiz bowl program. She formed a quiz bowl team at MHS,
which finished third in last year's regional competition and first among 19
teams in their division in this year's competition. The team of Bateman and
fellow students Lane Lore and Breard Snellings will compete in a championship
round against Brother Martin on March 25 at 6:30 p.m. The competition will be
telecast live by COX in New Orleans, Baton Rouge and Acadiana and streamed live
online.

   Bateman, who will attend Tulane University in the fall, has led and
participated in a variety of high school clubs and activities. She has served as
a statewide officer and "Paper Press Editor" for the YMCA Hi-Y Youth Legislature
Program for the past two years, served as president of the MHS Science Club for
the past two years while she and the team placed in State Science Olympiad
competitions, and competed in Mu Alpha Theta math tournaments throughout high
school. At the state Literary Rally last year, Bateman was the first-place and
overall winner in Biology II.

   This year, she leads the school's Best Buddies Program, which brings together
all students, especially those with intellectual disabilities, to share lunches
and celebrate special events. This year's club grew to include more than 50
members, the largest in the chapter's history.

   Outside of school, Bateman has enjoyed volunteering at the World War II
Museum, both as a general volunteer and in the Kid's Corner, playing clarinet
with the Symphony of the Greater New Orleans Youth Orchestra (with which she
played at Carnegie Hall last summer) and volunteering with the LSU Health
Sciences Center/Bogalusa Medical Center, where she created a "Tiger Treats"
program that provides age-appropriate treat bags for pediatric patients.

   One of her extracurricular pursuits, which she describes as "an incredible
learning experience," has inspired her to pursue a career in research and
medicine. For the past two summers, she served as a research intern at Tulane
School of Medicine and LSU Health Sciences Center, respectively, through the
Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium/Louisiana Cancer Research
Consortium/Louisiana Vaccine Center Internship Program of Dr. Paula Gregory,
associate professor at the LSU Health Sciences Center.

   "These summer internships gave me the most valuable experience, as a high
school student, of participating in genetics research, which fueled my passion
for science," Bateman said.

   In the genetics department of the LSU Heath Sciences Center, under the
mentorship of Dr. Fern Tsien, Bateman learned how to grow cells and harvest
their chromosomes to identify abnormalities such as unusual numbers of
chromosomes and structural anomalies. Her poster presentation, "Chromosome
Instability in Mouse Cell Lines and Primary Cells," won second place in the high
school division of the summer internship program.

   Principal Bruce Bundy said Bateman's outstanding scholarship is just the
beginning of her strengths.

   "Betsy is one of the most well-rounded students I have ever met," he said.
"She is blessed with a keen mind and an outstanding work ethic. But more
importantly, she has a big heart, a servant's heart. I think she finds her
fulfillment in serving others. She has a strong desire to be an agent of
positive change," Bundy said.

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2010


                              114 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            March 13, 2010 Saturday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 016

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   ** Genzyme invests: Genzyme Corp.'s investment arm, Third Rock Ventures of
Boston and three other VC firms poured $35 million into Genetix Pharmaceuticals,
a Cambridge-based gene therapy developer whose technology saved the lives of two
French boys with the rare brain disease adrenoleukodystrophy.

   ** Syms' Basement: Discounters Filene's Basement and Syms will open a
co-branded store next week in Norwood, where Syms currently operates a store on
Route 1.

   ** Waltham lease: InnoCentive Inc. is more than doubling its corporate
headquarters through a relocation within Waltham, according to broker FHO
Partners. Its new, 22,000-square-foot space is at 610 Lincoln St.

   ** L.L. Bean sales: Outdoors clothing retailer L.L. Bean said sales dipped
6.6 percent to $1.4 billion in 2009, but the Freeport, Maine, company managed to
beat its own projections and allow it to give employees a 3 percent cash bonus.

   ** Toyota suit: Toyota was sued by the top prosecutor of Orange County,
Calif., who said he's seeking a court order to stop the sale of vehicles with
dangerous defects.

   ** Court on cable: A federal court upheld FCC regulations that require cable
TV companies to make sports programming and other channels they own available on
equal terms to rival TV providers such as satellite companies. The decision was
a setback for Cablevision and Comcast.

   - STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2010


                              115 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            March 13, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: Aveo no hit on its opening day;
Shares close down a penny; debut suggests a biotech IPO revival won't be
imminent

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of Aveo Pharmaceuticals Inc. finished flat in their first day of
trading yesterday after the Cambridge biotechnology company raised $81 million,
about 23 percent less than it initially sought, in a highly anticipated initial
public offering.

   The disappointing market debut of Aveo, which develops cancer treatments, is
the latest sign that hopes for a biotechnology IPO revival might be premature.
Last month, another Cambridge biotech, Ironwood Pharmaceuticals Inc., similarly
was forced to price its IPO at a discount from its original target range.

   IPOs of all kinds have been lackluster despite the stock market run-up of the
past year. Still, an increasing number of venture-backed technology and life
sciences start-ups are choosing to go public after waiting through the economic
downturn. So far this year, 11 offerings have priced below their target range
nationally while seven have priced within the range established by their
underwriters.

   Valuations for new biotech offerings - still considered risky investments -
are being dictated by a relatively small group of mostly institutional
shareholders, such as mutual funds, in the early stages of the IPO recovery,
said Linda Killian, portfolio manager for Greenwich, Conn., research and
financial firm Renaissance Capital LLC. She cited the long-term horizons
required for investments in companies with promising technology that may pay off
years in the future.

   ``In this type of market, buyers hold the upper hand,'' Killian said, ``and
the buyers won't pay what companies want them to pay. But there's a subset of
IPO investors who look at the biotechs as a way of getting some alpha into their
portfolios. These are growth stocks.''

   Aveo shares closed down one penny, or 0.1 percent, at $8.99 on the Nasdaq
exchange after trading lower for most of the day. The company said it sold 9
million shares at $9 apiece on Thursday. It had earlier filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission to offer 7 million shares at $13 to $15 each,
which would have raised as much as $105 million.

   Company executives declined to discuss the IPO, citing a quiet period imposed
by regulators. The eight-year-old Aveo has about 130 employees in the University
Park neighborhood behind the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Although it
has no drugs on the market, Aveo is conducting a late-stage clinical trial for a
kidney cancer treatment. It also has developed a method for inducing cancer in
mice to help gauge how humans might respond to experimental drugs, a platform
that has drawn interest from pharmaceutical companies.

   Among the financial backers of Aveo are Biogen Idec Inc., an established
Cambridge biotech, and venture capital firms Highland Capital Partners of
Lexington and MPM Capital of Boston.

   Despite the tepid response to Aveo's offering, there are some indications
that investor interest in biotechnology may be picking up. Shares in Ironwood,
which has developed a drug to treat chronic constipation, have advanced on the
Nasdaq since being priced at $11.25 on Feb. 2. They closed yesterday at $12.91,
down 6 cents. Meanwhile, venture capital continues to pour into biotech
start-ups. Yesterday, gene therapy company Genetix Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge
said it raised $35 million in a funding round led by Boston venture firm Third
Rock Ventures and an investment affiliate of Cambridge biotech Genzyme Corp.
Genetix is seeking to develop breakthrough treatments for severe genetic
disorders.

   But analysts said it was unlikely the IPO market will recapture the frenzy of
the 1990s technology boom soon. Even with the stock market recovery of the past
year, many established public companies remain as much as 50 percent off their
peak values and thus are competing with new offerings for investor attention.

   ``The IPO market still isn't that compelling,'' said David Sowerby, portfolio
manager and chief market analyst for Loomis Sayles & Co., a Boston investment
firm. ``In a stock market where existing names are discounted, there's less
excitement about IPOs.''

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2010


                              116 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 6, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: Zones; Pg. CZ-1; EZ-5; SZ-1

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: Faith helps family cope with devastating diagnosis;
Boy, 4, has Tay-Sachs, a rare genetic disease

BYLINE: By Celia Taghdiri, SPECIAL TO THE UNION-TRIBUNE

BODY:

   Jan and Ferd ?Marquez of 4S Ranch were the typical elated parents who were
overjoyed at the birth of their son. After all, Gavin was a perfectly happy and
healthy boy for the first six months of his life.

   But as time passed, he missed the developmental milestones. He began walking
at 16 months but was floppy with little muscle tone. He also had a small
appetite and was usually quiet.

   "Everyone just kept telling us that all kids develop differently, and that
boys usually are delayed, especially with speech," Jan said. "But we knew
something was wrong."

   After several medical evaluations, Jan and Ferd were given possible diagnoses
-- autism, ataxia, cerebral palsy and mental retardation. Physicians were unable
to make an exact diagnosis and reiterated that Gavin, now 4, "is a very delayed
child."

   Finally, a specialist informed the couple last March of the finding:
Tay-Sachs disease.

   Statistically, most individuals affected by the disease are of Jewish, French
Canadian or Cajun descent. The Marquezes are Filipino. Kim Kubilus, director of
family services for the Boston-based National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases
Association Inc., said Gavin is the only known Filipino in the United States
ever diagnosed with Tay-Sachs and is one of four known children with the
juvenile form of the disease in California.

   According to the National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases Association Inc.,
Tay-Sachs is a rare hereditary disease caused by a gene mutation that leaves the
body unable to produce an enzyme called Hexosaminidase A (Hex-A). Without the
enzyme, a fatty substance accumulates abnormally in cells, especially those in
brain nerves, progressively damaging them. The disease is incurable. It slowly
leads to blindness, deafness, retardation, paralysis and death. Children with
the disease usually die by age 5.

   The couple's 14-month-old daughter does not have the disease, but she does
carry the Tay-Sachs gene.

   Gavin's mental development is equivalent to a 3- to 6-month-old. He cannot
walk unassisted because of weak muscles in his legs and arms. He wears diapers
and is fed through a tube because he can no longer swallow. He attends
special-education school and is taken by bus to day care. At home, he has a
special seat and a bath chair. Although Gavin undergoes physical therapy once a
week, his parents are his arms and legs.

   "When I got the call from the neurologist on March 2, 2009, the first thing
he said was 'unfortunately,' and from just hearing that first word, I had to
pause because I could not breathe for a moment," Jan said. It was so unbearable.
It was as if you wanted to be a robot so you would feel no pain whatsoever."

   Said Ferd: "There is always hope for everyone, but the biggest hope we
believe is God. God will cure Gavin. Scientifically, we are confident that
Gavin's condition can be cured through gene therapy, but currently, human
clinical trials will not be available until 2012 unless more allocated money,
resources and political pressure can be achieved to speed up the process."

   In September, The National Institutes of Health awarded a $3.5 million grant
to the Tay-Sachs Gene Therapy Consortium to continue research into the genetic
disorder. The award was eagerly awaited by Tay-Sachs families and their
supporters, who raised nearly $600,000 to assemble the international consortium
of experts and help maintain its research agenda while scientists worked to
secure federal funding.

   The NIH grant will help advance an experimental gene therapy for Tay-Sachs
and Sandhoff diseases from animal tests to human clinical trials. Several drugs
are now being investigated, such as Ataluren PTC124. Drug companies are not
permitting "compassionate use" for children with rare genetic diseases.

   "It's very sad and difficult since we are desperate, but the pharmaceutical
companies need to limit their resources to see if the drugs are effective on the
common diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and Alzheimer's," Ferd said.

   "Tay-Sachs can happen to any couple, even to those who are not part of the
high-risk groups for the disease," said Kubilus, the Tay-Sachs association
director. "We advise couples to seek genetic counseling, prior to conception, to
fully educate themselves and make educated choices."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2010


                              117 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 4, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: Zones; Pg. NC-1;NI-1

LENGTH: 791 words

HEADLINE: Devastating diagnosis;
Commitment to faith, science help couple whose son has rare Tay-Sachs disease

BYLINE: By Celia Taghdiri, SPECIAL TO THE UNION-TRIBUNE

DATELINE: 4S Ranch

BODY:

   Jan and Ferd ?Marquez of 4S Ranch were the typical, elated parents who were
overjoyed at the birth of their son. After all, Gavin was a perfectly happy and
healthy boy for the first six months of his life.

   But as time passed, he missed the developmental milestones. He began walking
at 16 months but was floppy with little muscle tone. He also had a small
appetite and was usually quiet.

   "Everyone just kept telling us that all kids develop differently, and that
boys usually are delayed, especially with speech," Jan said. "But we knew
something was wrong."

   After several medical evaluations, Jan and Ferd were given possible diagnoses
-- autism, ataxia, cerebral palsy and mental retardation. Physicians were unable
to make an exact diagnosis and reiterated that Gavin, now 4, "is a very delayed
child."

   Finally, a specialist informed the couple last March of the finding:
Tay-Sachs disease.

   Statistically, most individuals affected by the disease are of Jewish, French
Canadian or Cajun descent. The Marquezes are of Filipino descent. Kim Kubilus,
director of family services for the Boston-based National Tay-Sachs and Allied
Diseases Association Inc., said Gavin is the only known Filipino in the United
States ever diagnosed with Tay-Sachs and is one of four known children with the
juvenile form of the disease in California.

   According to the National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases Association, Inc.,
Tay-Sachs is a rare hereditary disease caused by a gene mutation that leaves the
body unable to produce an enzyme called Hexosaminidase A (Hex-A). Without the
enzyme, a fatty substance accumulates abnormally in cells, especially those in
brain nerves, progressively damaging them. The disease is incurable. It slowly
leads to blindness, deafness, retardation, paralysis and eventually death.
Children with the disease usually die by age 5.

   The couple's 14-month-old daughter does not have the disease, but she does
carry the Tay-Sachs gene.

   Gavin's mental development is equivalent to a 3- to 6-month-old infant. He
cannot walk unassisted because of muscle weakness in his legs and arms. He wears
diapers and is fed through a gastrostomy tube because he can no longer swallow.
He attends special-education school and is taken by bus to day care. At home, he
has a special seat and a bath chair. Although Gavin undergoes physical therapy
once a week, his parents are his arms and legs.

   "When I got the call from the neurologist on March 2, 2009, the first thing
he said was 'unfortunately,' and from just hearing that first word, I had to
pause because I could not breathe for a moment," Jan said. It was so unbearable.
It was as if you wanted to be a robot so you would feel no pain whatsoever."

   Said Ferd: "There is always hope for everyone, but the biggest hope we
believe is God. God will cure Gavin. Scientifically, we are confident that
Gavin's condition can be cured through gene therapy, but currently human
clinical trials will not be available until 2012 unless more allocated money,
resources, and political pressure can be achieved to speed up the process."

   In September, The National Institutes of Health awarded a $3.5 million grant
to the Tay-Sachs Gene Therapy Consortium to continue research into the genetic
disorder. The award was eagerly awaited by Tay-Sachs families and their
supporters, who raised nearly $600,000 to assemble the international consortium
of experts and help maintain its research agenda while scientists worked to
secure federal funding.

   The NIH grant will help advance an experimental gene therapy for Tay-Sachs
and Sandhoff diseases from animal tests to human clinical trials. Several drugs
are now being investigated, such as Ataluren PTC124. Drug companies are not
permitting "compassionate use" for children with rare genetic diseases.

   "It's very sad and difficult since we are desperate, but the pharmaceutical
companies need to limit their resources to see if the drugs are effective on the
common diseases, such as cystic fibrosis and Alzheimer's," Ferd said.

   "Tay-Sachs can happen to any couple, even to those who are not part of the
high-risk groups for the disease," said Kubilus, the Tay-Sachs association
director. "We advise couples to seek genetic counseling, prior to conception, to
fully educate themselves and make educated choices."

   On the web

   To raise awareness for the disease and to solicit funds for Gavin Marquez's
care and Tay-Sachs research, his parents have launched a Web site,
hopeforgavin.com. To learn more about the disease, go to ntsad.org.

   Online: To raise awareness for the disease and to solicit funds for Gavin
Marquez's care and Tay-Sachs research, his parents have launched a Web site,
hopeforgavin.com. To learn more about the disease, go to ntsad.org. or to
cdc.gov/HealthyLiving/.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; CAPTIONS: Audrey Bella Marquez, 14 months, spent a moment with
her brother, Gavin. Audrey Bella does not have Tay-Sachs. | Ferd Marquez (right)
put a brace on his 4-year-old son, Gavin, as sister Audrey Bella watched. Gavin,
who gets physical therapy once a week, cannot walk unassisted and is fed through
a tube. | Ferd Marquez (left) strapped his son Gavin, 4, into a walker at their
home in 4S Ranch. In the background is Gavin's mother, Jan Marquez, who is
holding daughter Audrey Bella, 14 months. Gavin has been diagnosed with
Tay-Sachs disease. Eduardo Contreras / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2010


                              118 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2010 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 2, 2010 Tuesday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy fixes muscles in lab mice;
OSU, Children's Hospital teamed up for research

BYLINE: Suzanne Hoholik, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Local researchers have found that genetic therapy can reverse the effects of
a fatal childhood muscular disorder.

   Their study, in mice, focused on spinal muscular atrophy, a muscle-wasting
disease that attacks nerve cells in the spinal cord. It can affect walking,
crawling, breathing, swallowing and head and neck control.

   It's caused by an abnormal or missing gene that is supposed to produce a
single protein needed by nerve cells or motor neurons. Without this protein, the
spinal cord can deteriorate.

   About one in every 6,000 babies is born with this disorder, which is the
leading genetic killer of infants and toddlers younger than 2. More than 25,000
Americans have the disease. Babies born with the most severe form of the
disorder usually die within two years.

   Standard treatment includes drugs that can prolong life but don't treat the
disease.

   Researchers at Nationwide Children's Hospital and Ohio State University used
a harmless virus to deliver the gene into about 20 newborn mice with the
disease.

   Why a virus? The team had to get the genetic material past the blood-brain
barrier - a filter that doesn't allow all of your blood to travel through your
brain.

   The virus, similar to the common cold, made it through the barrier and
delivered the gene to the motor neurons in the spinal cord.

   Within 13 days, the mice had increased levels of the needed protein and
muscle coordination returned. By 90 days, there was no difference in nerve
pulses between the mice with or without the disorder.

   "We rescued the animals' motor functions, the ability for the motor neurons
to fire correctly," said Brian Kaspar, lead author and investigator at
Nationwide Children's Hospital Research Institute.

   Mice that received the injection in the first two days of life had better
nerve improvements compared with those that were older.

   This is important in trying to determine the best age for children to benefit
from this therapy.

   "At five days, (the mice) did actually show some response, but not as much,"
said Arthur Burghes, co-author and professor of molecular and cellular
biochemistry at Ohio State. "In humans, we don't know what that window exactly
is.

   "It would be closer to what it is in primates."

   The researchers, who are now testing the therapy in monkeys, said they hope
to get approval for human clinical trials in two years.

   Their findings were published online Sunday in the journal of Nature
Biotechnology.

   Annette Reed's daughter, Madison, was born with the most severe form of the
disorder and wasn't expected to live two years. Last month, she celebrated her
13th birthday.

   Reed and her family started Miracle for Madison & Friends to raise money for
OSU researchers to find a cure for the disease.

   The group has raised $1.1million, which all has gone to research, she said.

   "We've been waiting on pins and needles to actually get (the study) out to
the public and let our donors know what they've been contributing to for the
last 12 years has paid off," said Reed, who lives in Dublin.

   "I'm just so proud of these guys. They've been leaders for so long."

   To read the study, go to www.Dispatch.com/web. To learn about Madison, go to
www.miracleformadison.org.

   shoholik@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2010


                              119 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              March 1, 2010 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 815 words

BYLINE: Life Sciences Roundup,

BODY:

   Avila to start trials

   of drug for hepatitis C

   Avila Therapeutics can't be accused of thinking small. The Waltham start-up
is on a quest to show it has the scientific chops to build a better drug than
one of Boston's anchor biotechnology companies, Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc., can
produce.

   This year, the company plans to start clinical trials of its hepatitis C
drug, along with tests of another drug designed to treat certain cancers and
autoimmune diseases. It raised $30 million in July and recruited an experienced
biotech deal maker as chief executive.

   Avila's drugs form covalent bonds with their targets on cells. That means the
bonds are supposed to shut down completely, and irreversibly, the activity of
the intended protein target they hit on cells. Conventional therapies connect
with targets in ways that put them in a state of ``dynamic equilibrium,''
meaning they bounce on and off targets, says chief executive Katrine Bosley. By
shutting down the target and thus halting the disease, Avila believes it has
found a way to improve upon the trailblazing work of Vertex in hepatitis C, and
it might be able to nail other targets pharma companies have long pursued, but
couldn't effectively block.

   ``Covalent drugs haven't been much explored in the industry,'' Bosley says.
``As we develop a data set that says we can develop very specific covalent
drugs, it's intrigued a lot of people.''

   Vertex's hepatitis C treatment, telaprevir, a protease inhibitor, has helped
the company build an $8 billion stock market valuation, largely because clinical
trials have shown it can basically double traditional cure rates, while
shortening the usual yearlong treatment by half. Analysts predict Vertex could
exceed $2 billion in US sales alone after a couple of years on the market.

   One of the challenges is that viruses mutate, essentially switching around an
amino acid or two, which is a sort of a survival mechanism, Bosley says. There
are four or five slightly mutated versions of the hepatitis C protease, and the
Vertex drug and others like it have varying degrees of potency when they
encounter the mutants, she says.

   The advantage of a covalent drug is that it doesn't allow the virus to escape
via mutation, Bosley says.

   Plus, there are different genotypes of the hepatitis C virus. Telaprevir is
most effective against genotype 1, while Avila's treatment is thought to be
effective against all genotypes, Bosley says.

   Ra Pharmaceuticals

   has raised $10.3 million

   Ra Pharmaceuticals has big-name backers and a cofounder of Transkaryotic
Therapies as chief executive, but not much else is known about the secretive
start-up. Last week, the Boston company reported that it raised $10.3 million of
a planned $27.6 million round of equity financing.

   The company is being incubated at the Boston office of Morgenthaler Ventures,
where Morgenthaler entrepreneur in residence Doug Treco is leading Ra as its
chief executive, according to the venture firm's website.

   Documents filed with regulators do not specify who invested in the company,
but they do say the board of directors includes Treco, Morgenthaler partner Jim
Broderick, Novartis Option Fund managing director Lauren Silverman, and New
Enterprise Associates partner Ed Mathers.

   Founded in 2008, Ra Pharmaceuticals appears to have money in the bank and a
leader who has had considerable success in developing drugs. Treco served as
senior vice president of research and development at the former Cambridge-based
Transkaryotic, which he cofounded. It was acquired by the Irish drug maker Shire
for $1.6 billion in 2005. He was part of a team at TKT that developed biotech
drugs for rare diseases, such as the Hunter syndrome treatment idursulfase
(Elaprase), which is now a core product for what has become the
Massachusetts-based human genetic therapies unit of Shire.

   Drug review delayed

   San Diego-based Amylin Pharmaceuticals, along with partners Eli Lilly and Co.
and Alkermes Inc., based in Waltham, said the Food and Drug Administration
deadline for reviewing a once-weekly injectable diabetes drug has been pushed
back to March 12, because of last month's mid-Atlantic snowstorm.

   Seahorse gets $5 million

   Seahorse Bioscience , a biomedical instrument company in Billerica, said it
has closed a $5 million financing round. Participants include return investors
Commonwealth Capital Ventures, Rock Maple Ventures, and Life Sciences Partners,
along with new investors FLIR Systems, Oxford Bioscience Partners, Healthcare
Ventures, New Science Ventures, and HLM Venture Partners. Seahorse will use the
money to beef up international sales, marketing, and manufacturing of
instruments that measure energy in cells and are used as cancer research tools.

   This report was compiled by the editors of Xconomy, an online news website
focused on the business of technology and innovation. For more New England
coverage, visit www.Xconomy.com/boston.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2010


                              120 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Courier-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            February 21, 2010 Sunday
                                 METRO Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2393 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL BREAKTHROUGHS IN THE BLUEGRASS; U of L researcher may hold key
to a

BYLINE: By, Laura Ungar lungar@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   By Laura Ungar

   lungar@courier-journal.com

   The Courier-Journal

   It strikes thousands of African Americans every year, clogging blood vessels
with sickle-shaped cells - causing strokes, blindness and excruciating pain as
it damages the heart, liver, lungs and kidneys.

   Half of its victims die by age 40.

   But University of Louisville researchers are testing a revolutionary cure for
sickle  cell disease, giving hope to a new generation of families that carry the
potentially fatal gene.

   Amos Igwe, 13, believes the procedure has given him a future.

   Before getting a bone-marrow transplant from his sister in 2006 as part of
the experiment, Amos was often so sick that he had trouble breathing and could
barely leave the living room couch.

   Today he plays quarterback on a football team at St. Albert the Great, where
he's an eighth-grader, is preparing to go to Trinity High School next year and
hopes to one day become a dentist or heart surgeon.

   "We are grateful to God," said his father, Tony Igwe of eastern Louisville.
"It's really a miracle."

   Amos was one of six patients treated as part of a study that aims to make
bone-marrow transplants safe enough to be used widely and possible beyond the
small portion of patients with perfectly  matched donors.  Such transplants can
potentially cure sickle  cell disease, but are considered too dangerous in most
cases because they can lead to deadly complications such as graft-versus-host
disease, in which a donor's cells attack the recipient as foreign.

   Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, research leader and director of UofL's Institute for
Cellular Therapeutics, is attempting to overcome such complications by inducing
a patient's tolerance to the donor cells.

   She said study results are promising - with two of six patients basically
cured and a third recent one doing well - and it shouldn't be long before new,
safe transplants are available to many of the nation's 70,000 sickle cell
patients.

   "Amos was one of our first two successes," said Ildstad, whose team is
collaborating with Duke University. "He's making normal red cells. He grew more
than a foot in the past year. ... He's living a normal life."

   Central to Ildstad's work is her discovery in 1994 of a "facilitating cell"
in bone marrow, which helps stem cells in a donor's marrow to "take" in a
recipient, lessening the chance that the patient's immune system will reject the
donor cells.

   Safe bone-marrow transplants may also offer new treatments for conditions
such as Type I diabetes and multiple sclerosis, she said, and a better approach
to organ transplants that doesn't require a lifetime of anti-rejection drugs.

   Ildstad's research has sparked excitement among scientists across the nation
and has attracted ongoing funding of up to $7million a year to UofL from such
organizations as the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Department of
Defense and the National Foundation to Support Cell Transplant Research.

   But not everyone is certain that Ildstad has found a widespread cure for
sickle cell disease. Dr. John DiPersio, chief of oncology at Washington
University in St. Louis, said it's unusual that her results haven't been
replicated by many other teams, and that there hasn't been more follow-up on
facilitating cells.

   "I think she's a little on the fringes here," DiPersio said.

   Ildstad countered that other researchers have studied these cells, which have
also been the subject of numerous medical journal articles and international
talks. And Dr. Joanne Kurtzberg, a Duke collaborator on the project, said
skepticism accompanies "every new innovation in the field."

   To Amos, Ildstad is a champion.

   "I used to have trouble breathing. Now I'm gaining some muscle. I can play
basketball with my friends. I can jump high," said the teen, who stands 5  feet
4. "She made all this happen. I feel like I'm cured."

   'MIXED  CHIMERISM'

   Blending two systems

   of bone marrow into one

   In Ildstad's office are images of the chimera, a mythical creature with a
lion's head, a goat's body and a serpent's tail. It symbolizes the premise of
her work - "mixed chimerism," in which two bone marrow systems exist and
function in one person.

   Ildstad, a 57-year-old married mother of two grown children, graduated from
Mayo Medical School in Minnesota, trained in Harvard University's general
surgery program and was a staff fellow at NIH. It was there that she helped
establish a model for a blood stem-cell chimerism, in which two genetically
different stem cell populations co-exist.

   One of her most well-known and controversial efforts took chimerism to the
extreme. In 1995, while at the University of Pittsburgh, she won federal
approval to give a 38-year-old AIDS patient a transfusion of baboon bone marrow
with added facilitating cells. While the marrow didn't take, the patient's
health improved.

   But the procedure was heavily criticized, with some scientists worrying it
could introduce baboon viruses into humans.

   Ildstad also applied the idea of chimerism to sickle cell disease. In the
United States, the inherited condition is most common among those of African
descent, and is marked by defective hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein in
red blood cells.

   Patients' red cells carry less oxygen than normal, and many are shaped like
crescents, or sickles, instead of doughnuts. The misshapen cells don't move
easily through tiny blood vessels, causing clogs and resulting in terrible pain
and damage to such organs as the kidneys, brain and heart.

   Ildstad reasoned that a safe bone-marrow transplant could halt this
destructive cycle by helping patients make normal red blood cells. And
chimerism, achieved with the help of facilitating cells, could make a transplant
safer, even for donor-recipient pairs who aren't perfect matches.

   She came to UofL in 1998 under Bucks for Brains, a state program designed to
bring top researchers to Kentucky universities, and she tested her procedure on
her first sickle cell patient in November 2005. The first two, including Amos,
were treated at Kosair Children's Hospital.

   Treatment of patients moved to Duke in North Carolina about three years ago,
Ildstad said, after the NIH encouraged her team to branch out beyond Kentucky.
But while Duke is a larger research institution with more clinicians available
to do the work, Ildstad said she hopes to resume enrolling patients for
treatment in Louisville as well in about a month.

   Kurtzberg, director of Duke's pediatric blood and marrow transplant program,
said her team "very much wanted to participate" and believes the procedure holds
great promise.

   "We wouldn't be doing it if we didn't," she said.

   Researchers at Northwestern University in Chicago also plan to begin treating
sickle cell patients through the study in about six months.

   Russ Prough, vice dean for research at UofL's medical school, said he's
excited about the collaborations, and counts Ildstad among the most high-powered
medical researchers at UofL.

   "Before Bucks for Brains, we had one or two people who really were doing
impressive research," he said. "Bucks for Brains brought a whole critical mass
of people."

   'WORK A MIRACLE'

   Transplant gave boy

   entirely different life

   When Tony Igwe heard about Ildstad's study, he consulted with his wife,
Eucharia. Both decided it was worth a try for their son.

   The Nigerian-born couple had watched Amos suffer for years. At 3, he
developed a pneumonia-like complication called acute chest syndrome that almost
killed him.

   As Amos grew older, he was pale and tired, hardly ate and suffered joint pain
that made it difficult to get around. He needed transfusions almost monthly. He
was often absent from school. The Igwes ran their lives around his illness,
skipping vacations and curtailing activities for their other three children, who
do not have the disease.

   "You didn't know what was going to happen day to day," Eucharia said.

   To get sickle cell disease, a child must inherit one gene from each parent,
and parents can either have the disease or be carriers, as are the Igwes.

   Doctors eventually tested everyone in the family to see if they could donate
marrow to Amos. Youngest daughter Chi-Chi proved a perfect match.

   "God gave me this child," Tony said of Chi-Chi, now 8. "Maybe He's trying to
work a miracle."

   Amos was among the 17 percent of sickle cell patients who have perfect
bone-marrow matches. Some other study subjects do not, but Ildstad's technique
also allows a partially matched mother, father or sibling to donate.

   In the procedure, marrow cells are harvested from the donor, sent to
Louisville, and processed in a clean room to remove active immune system cells
and bring out the facilitating cells. Meanwhile, recipients are "conditioned"
with chemotherapy and radiation, but in much lower doses than someone getting a
traditional bone-marrow transplant. Such low doses are one reason the technique
is safer than a traditional bone-marrow transplant.

   Another reason is that the facilitating cells, and marrow processing, are
thought to greatly reduce the possibility of graft-versus-host disease. Ildstad
said a traditional bone marrow transplant carries a 25 percent chance of
graft-versus-host and a 10 percent chance of death - a price doctors deem too
high for treatment of a noncancerous condition.

   But Ildstad's procedure, though safe enough to be done on an outpatient
basis, is not without risks. Even low doses of radiation can carry a long-term
risk of cancer, she said, and anti-rejection drugs can increase the chance of
infection even if tapered after six months, and ended after a year.

   Amos no longer takes anti-rejection drugs and hasn't had any problems since
the transplant. Jeanne Flowers, principal at St. Albert, said his health is so
much better that "he's a different child."

   During a recent gym class, his sneakers squeaked as he scrambled for a
basketball, grabbed it from a classmate and shot toward the basket.

   "For the past four years, he's never been at the hospital overnight," his
father said. "Before, he never eats. Now he eats more than anyone."

   In Amos, Ildstad said, chimerism worked. About 30 percent of his marrow can
now be traced to 8-year-old Chi-Chi - who said she's happy to have helped.

   "He's my brother," she said. "I love him."

   'HEALTHY SKEPTICISM'

   Not all persuaded,

   but optimism exists

   Amos and the other patient treated in Louisville, who has since moved out of
state, were successes, but not all cases have been. While one of the others
appears successful in the early stages, and another recent case is still
pending, two of the transplants didn't take.

   DiPersio, of Washington University, is skeptical about chimerism and predicts
that researchers will have trouble recruiting enough test subjects in the long
run because African Americans are often reluctant to join clinical trials. It's
a legacy of the infamous Tuskegee experiment, in which black men with syphilis
were left untreated.

   "The question is whether we can do this on a large scale," he said. "You must
have healthy skepticism when you look at these things."

   Other researchers are much more optimistic.

   Dr. Catherine Wu, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard who does
similar work, said Ildstad's trial fits into a growing field of modified
bone-marrow transplants that other scientists are testing. This line of
research, along with gene-therapy studies, represents the leading edge of the
search for a lasting and widespread sickle cell cure, she said.

   But Wu and others caution that it's still early in the research process. Even
if all goes well, Duke's Kurtzberg said the procedure would need to go through
the lengthy process of federal approval before being offered as a standard
treatment.

   Yet Dr. Ashok Raj, a UofL physician who treats sickle cell patients at
Kosair, said research success would be a godsend for the suffering children he
sees every day.

   While sickle cell treatments have improved over the years, the disease
remains disabling and deadly.

   "It would be fantastic if this technology makes a big impact on our kids," he
said. "That would be a very remarkable achievement."

   Reporter Laura Ungar can be reached at (502) 582-7190.

   Sickle cell disease

   What is it?: A disease in which the body makes sickle-shaped red blood cells
instead of normal doughnut-shaped cells. Clumps of sickle cells block blood flow
in the vessels leading to the limbs and organs, causing pain, infections and
organ damage.

   Causes: Those who have the disease inherit two recessive genes, one from each
parent. Carriers without the disease are considered to have sickle cell "trait,"
which is thought to be protective against a deadly type of malaria. It developed
in areas where malaria is endemic.

   Who's at risk?: It is most common in people whose families come from areas
prone to this malaria, such as Africa, South or Central America (especially
Panama), the Caribbean islands, Mediterranean countries, India and Saudi Arabia.
In the United States, it affects about 70,000 people, mainly African Americans.

   Signs and symptoms: Commonly fatigue, shortness of breath, dizziness,
headache, coldness in the hands and feet, pale skin, chest pain. Sudden pain
throughout the body is also common and is called a "sickle cell crisis," which
occurs when sickle blood cells form clumps in the bloodstream.

   Complications: Hand-foot syndrome, which causes fever and pain and swelling
in hands and feet; splenic crisis, which causes the spleen to shrink and may
require blood transfusions; infections; acute chest syndrome, similar to
pneumonia; pulmonary arterial hypertension, which makes it hard for the heart to
pump blood through the lungs; delayed growth and puberty in children; stroke;
eye problems; gallstones; ulcers on the legs; and multiple organ failure.

   Diagnosis: Newborns are screened for the disease, and if the test shows a
problem, a second blood test is done.

   Treatment: Among others, bone marrow transplants; medicines and fluids for
pain; a medicine called hydroxyurea to help prevent painful crises; blood
transfusions.

   Prognosis: In the past, sickle cell patients often died from organ failure
between ages 20 and 40. Now some patients can live into their 50s and beyond -
though half still die by 40.

   Sources: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; National Institutes of
Health; Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, University of Louisville

   INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC; ILLUSTRATION THAT SHOWS THE PROBLEMS WITH SICKLE CELLS
(SEE LIBRARY MICROFILM OR LIBRARY PDF PAGES)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2010


                              121 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Courier-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            February 19, 2010 Friday

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 2369 words

HEADLINE: University of Louisville researcher may hold key to a cure for sickle
cell disease

BYLINE: By, Laura Ungar lungar@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   It strikes thousands of African Americans every year, clogging blood vessels
with sickle-shaped cells - causing strokes, blindness and excruciating pain as
it damages the heart, liver, lungs and kidneys.

   Half of its victims die by age 40.

   (View a graphic: The problem with sickle cells)

   But University of Louisville researchers are testing a revolutionary cure for
sickle cell disease, giving hope to a new generation of families that carry the
potentially fatal gene.

   Amos Igwe, 13, believes the procedure has given him a future.

   Before getting a bone-marrow transplant from his sister in 2006 as part of
the experiment, Amos was often so sick that he had trouble breathing and could
barely leave the living room couch.

   Today he plays quarterback on a football team at St. Albert the Great, where
he's an eighth-grader, is preparing to go to Trinity High School next year and
hopes to one day become a dentist or heart surgeon.

   "We are grateful to God," said his father, Tony Igwe of eastern Louisville.
"It's really a miracle."

   Amos was one of six patients treated as part of a study that aims to make
bone-marrow transplants safe enough to be used widely and possible beyond the
small portion of patients with perfectly matched donors. Such transplants can
potentially cure sickle cell disease, but are considered too dangerous in most
cases because they can lead to deadly complications such as graft-versus-host
disease, in which a donor's cells attack the recipient as foreign.

   Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, research leader and director of UofL's Institute for
Cellular Therapeutics, is attempting to overcome such complications by inducing
a patient's tolerance to the donor cells.

   She said study results are promising - with two of six patients basically
cured and a third recent one doing well - and it shouldn't be long before new,
safe transplants are available to many of the nation's 70,000 sickle cell
patients.

   "Amos was one of our first two successes," said Ildstad, whose team is
collaborating with Duke University. "He's making normal red cells. He grew more
than a foot in the past year. ... He's living a normal life."

   Central to Ildstad's work is her discovery in 1994 of a "facilitating cell"
in bone marrow, which helps stem cells in a donor's marrow to "take" in a
recipient, lessening the chance that the patient's immune system will reject the
donor cells.

   Safe bone-marrow transplants may also offer new treatments for conditions
such as Type I diabetes and multiple sclerosis, she said, and a better approach
to organ transplants that doesn't require a lifetime of anti-rejection drugs.

   Ildstad's research has sparked excitement among scientists across the nation
and has attracted ongoing funding of up to $7million a year to UofL from such
organizations as the National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Department of
Defense and the National Foundation to Support Cell Transplant Research.

   But not everyone is certain that Ildstad has found a widespread cure for
sickle cell disease. Dr. John DiPersio, chief of oncology at Washington
University in St. Louis, said it's unusual that her results haven't been
replicated by many other teams, and that there hasn't been more follow-up on
facilitating cells.

   "I think she's a little on the fringes here," DiPersio said.

   Ildstad countered that other researchers have studied these cells, which have
also been the subject of numerous medical journal articles and international
talks. And Dr. Joanne Kurtzberg, a Duke collaborator on the project, said
skepticism accompanies "every new innovation in the field."

   To Amos, Ildstad is a champion.

   "I used to have trouble breathing. Now I'm gaining some muscle. I can play
basketball with my friends. I can jump high," said the teen, who stands 5 feet
4. "She made all this happen. I feel like I'm cured."

   'MIXED CHIMERISM'

   Blending two systems of bone marrow into one

   In Ildstad's office are images of the chimera, a mythical creature with a
lion's head, a goat's body and a serpent's tail. It symbolizes the premise of
her work - "mixed chimerism," in which two bone marrow systems exist and
function in one person.

   Ildstad, a 57-year-old married mother of two grown children, graduated from
Mayo Medical School in Minnesota, trained in Harvard University's general
surgery program and was a staff fellow at NIH. It was there that she helped
establish a model for a blood stem-cell chimerism, in which two genetically
different stem cell populations co-exist.

   One of her most well-known and controversial efforts took chimerism to the
extreme. In 1995, while at the University of Pittsburgh, she won federal
approval to give a 38-year-old AIDS patient a transfusion of baboon bone marrow
with added facilitating cells. While the marrow didn't take, the patient's
health improved.

   But the procedure was heavily criticized, with some scientists worrying it
could introduce baboon viruses into humans.

   Ildstad also applied the idea of chimerism to sickle cell disease. In the
United States, the inherited condition is most common among those of African
descent, and is marked by defective hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein in
red blood cells.

   Patients' red cells carry less oxygen than normal, and many are shaped like
crescents, or sickles, instead of doughnuts. The misshapen cells don't move
easily through tiny blood vessels, causing clogs and resulting in terrible pain
and damage to such organs as the kidneys, brain and heart.

   Ildstad reasoned that a safe bone-marrow transplant could halt this
destructive cycle by helping patients make normal red blood cells. And
chimerism, achieved with the help of facilitating cells, could make a transplant
safer, even for donor-recipient pairs who aren't perfect matches.

   She came to UofL in 1998 under Bucks for Brains, a state program designed to
bring top researchers to Kentucky universities, and she tested her procedure on
her first sickle cell patient in November 2005. The first two, including Amos,
were treated at Kosair Children's Hospital.

   Treatment of patients moved to Duke in North Carolina about three years ago,
Ildstad said, after the NIH encouraged her team to branch out beyond Kentucky.
But while Duke is a larger research institution with more clinicians available
to do the work, Ildstad said she hopes to resume enrolling patients for
treatment in Louisville as well in about a month.

   Kurtzberg, director of Duke's pediatric blood and marrow transplant program,
said her team "very much wanted to participate" and believes the procedure holds
great promise.

   "We wouldn't be doing it if we didn't," she said.

   Researchers at Northwestern University in Chicago also plan to begin treating
sickle cell patients through the study in about six months.

   Russ Prough, vice dean for research at UofL's medical school, said he's
excited about the collaborations, and counts Ildstad among the most high-powered
medical researchers at UofL.

   "Before Bucks for Brains, we had one or two people who really were doing
impressive research," he said. "Bucks for Brains brought a whole critical mass
of people."

   'WORK A MIRACLE'

   Transplant gave boy entirely different life

   When Tony Igwe heard about Ildstad's study, he consulted with his wife,
Eucharia. Both decided it was worth a try for their son.

   The Nigerian-born couple had watched Amos suffer for years. At 3, he
developed a pneumonia-like complication called acute chest syndrome that almost
killed him.

   As Amos grew older, he was pale, tired, hardly ate and suffered joint pain
that made it difficult to get around. He needed transfusions almost monthly. He
was often absent from school. The Igwes ran their lives around his illness,
skipping vacations and curtailing activities for their other three children, who
do not have the disease.

   "You didn't know what was going to happen day to day," Eucharia said.

   To get sickle cell disease, a child must inherit one gene from each parent,
and parents can either have the disease or be carriers, as are the Igwes.

   Doctors eventually tested everyone in the family to see if they could donate
marrow to Amos. Youngest daughter Chi-Chi proved a perfect match.

   "God gave me this child," Tony said of Chi-Chi, now 8. "Maybe He's trying to
work a miracle."

   Amos was among the 17 percent of sickle cell patients who have perfect
bone-marrow matches. Some other study subjects do not, but Ildstad's technique
also allows a partially matched mother, father or sibling to donate.

   In the procedure, marrow cells are harvested from the donor, sent to
Louisville, and processed in a clean room to remove active immune system cells
and bring out the facilitating cells. Meanwhile, recipients are "conditioned"
with chemotherapy and radiation, but in much lower doses than someone getting a
traditional bone-marrow transplant. Such low doses are one reason the technique
is safer than a traditional bone-marrow transplant.

   Another reason is that the facilitating cells, and marrow processing, are
thought to greatly reduce the possibility of graft-versus-host disease. Ildstad
said a traditional bone marrow transplant carries a 25 percent chance of
graft-versus-host and a 10 percent chance of death - a price doctors deem too
high for treatment of a noncancerous condition.

   But Ildstad's procedure, though safe enough to be done on an outpatient
basis, is not without risks. Even low doses of radiation can carry a long-term
risk of cancer, she said, and anti-rejection drugs can increase the chance of
infection even if tapered after six months, and ended after a year.

   Amos no longer takes anti-rejection drugs and hasn't had any problems since
the transplant. Jeanne Flowers, principal at St. Albert, said his health is so
much better that "he's a different child."

   During a recent gym class, his sneakers squeaked as he scrambled for a
basketball, grabbed it from a classmate and shot toward the basket.

   "For the past four years, he's never been at the hospital overnight," his
father said. "Before, he never eats. Now he eats more than anyone."

   In Amos, Ildstad said, chimerism worked. About 30 percent of his marrow can
now be traced to 8-year-old Chi-Chi - who said she's happy to have helped.

   "He's my brother," she said. "I love him."

   'HEALTHY SKEPTICISM'

   Not all persuaded, but optimism exists

   Amos and the other patient treated in Louisville, who has since moved out of
state, were successes, but not all cases have been. While one of the others
appears successful in the early stages, and another recent case is still
pending, two of the transplants didn't take.

   DiPersio, of Washington University, is skeptical about chimerism and predicts
that researchers will have trouble recruiting enough test subjects in the long
run because African Americans are often reluctant to join clinical trials. It's
a legacy of the infamous Tuskegee experiment, in which black men with syphilis
were left untreated.

   "The question is whether we can do this on a large scale," he said. "You must
have healthy skepticism when you look at these things."

   Other researchers are much more optimistic.

   Dr. Catherine Wu, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard who does
similar work, said Ildstad's trial fits into a growing field of modified
bone-marrow transplants that other scientists are testing. This line of
research, along with gene-therapy studies, represent the leading edge of the
search for a lasting and widespread sickle cell cure, she said.

   But Wu and others caution that it's still early in the research process. Even
if all goes well, Duke's Kurtzberg said the procedure would need to go through
the lengthy process of federal approval before being offered as a standard
treatment.

   Yet Dr. Ashok Raj, a UofL physician who treats sickle cell patients at
Kosair, said research success would be a godsend for the suffering children he
sees every day.

   While sickle cell treatments have improved over the years, the disease
remains disabling and deadly.

   "It would be fantastic if this technology makes a big impact on our kids," he
said. "That would be a very remarkable achievement."

   Reporter Laura Ungar can be reached at (502) 582-7190.

   Sickle cell disease

   What is it?: A disease in which the body makes sickle-shaped red blood cells
instead of normal doughnut-shaped cells. Clumps of sickle cells block blood flow
in the vessels leading to the limbs and organs, causing pain, infections and
organ damage.

   Causes: Those who have the disease inherit two recessive genes, one from each
parent. Carriers without the disease are considered to have sickle cell "trait,"
which is thought to be protective against a deadly type of malaria. It developed
in areas where malaria is endemic.

   Who's at risk?: It is most common in people whose families come from areas
prone to this malaria, such as Africa, South or Central America (especially
Panama), the Caribbean islands, Mediterranean countries, India and Saudi Arabia.
In the United States, it affects about 70,000 people, mainly African Americans.

   Signs and symptoms: Commonly fatigue, shortness of breath, dizziness,
headache, coldness in the hands and feet, pale skin, chest pain. Sudden pain
throughout the body is also common and is called a "sickle cell crisis," which
occurs when sickle blood cells form clumps in the bloodstream.

   Complications: Hand-foot syndrome, which causes fever and pain and swelling
in hands and feet; splenic crisis, which causes the spleen to shrink and may
require blood transfusions; infections; acute chest syndrome, similar to
pneumonia; pulmonary arterial hypertension, which makes it hard for the heart to
pump blood through the lungs; delayed growth and puberty in children; stroke;
eye problems; gallstones; ulcers on the legs; and multiple organ failure.

   Diagnosis: Newborns are screened for the disease, and if the test shows a
problem, a second blood test is done.

   Treatment: Among others, bone marrow transplants; medicines and fluids for
pain; a medicine called hydroxyurea to help prevent painful crises; blood
transfusions.

   Prognosis: In the past, sickle cell patients often died from organ failure
between ages 20 and 40. Now some patients can live into their 50s and beyond -
though half still die by 40.

   Sources: National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute; National Institutes of
Health; Dr. Suzanne Ildstad, University of Louisville

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2010


                              122 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                          February 17, 2010 Wednesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1405 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
Have athletes done all they can?;
Some scientists say so, and that the only way to achieve new performance records
is through technology -- or cheating.

BYLINE: Shari Roan

BODY:

   It merited only a few paragraphs inside newspaper sports sections. Crystal
Cox, a member of the gold-medal-winning U.S. women's 1,600-meter relay team in
the 2004 Athens Olympics, had admitted to using a performance-enhancing drug.
Cox would lose her medal and be banned from competition for four years.

   On the surface, the announcement last month seemed just another episode of
sports doping and its sad consequences. But to many sports scientists, the news
was evidence of a broader trend. They believe that human athletic performance
has peaked, and only cheating or technological advances will result in a rash of
new world records.

   A French researcher who analyzed a century's worth of world records concluded
in a recent paper that the peak of athletic achievement was reached in 1988.
Eleven world records were broken that year in track and field. Seven of them
still stand.

   That paper and others published in the last two years suggest that the
Olympic motto -- Citius, Altius, Fortius (Faster, Higher, Stronger) -- is
becoming an anachronism.

   "We saw a strong evolution of performance during the past century," says
study author Geoffroy Berthelot, a researcher at INSEP, an internationally
respected school and research institute for athletes in Paris. "Then in the
1990s we started to see a decrease in performance. Now, there are a lot of
events that don't show any progression at all."

   In track and field, Berthelot found, peak times have not improved in 64% of
events since 1993. In swimming, performances stagnated in 47% of events after
1990, rising again around 2000 when new high-tech swimsuits proven to improve
performance were introduced.

   Achievement appears to have plateaued throughout the sports world. Records in
winter sports -- which are, in general, younger than many summer sports -- are
still on the rise, but in ever-smaller increments, says Carl Foster, director of
the human performance laboratory at the University of Wisconsin, La Crosse, and
past president of the American College of Sports Medicine.

   "World records are indeed flattening," he says. "The likelihood that a world
record occurs is becoming less and less."

   The prospect that humans have given all they've got is generating some
discomfort among elite athletes, trainers, researchers and sports federation
officials, as evidenced by the furious interest in training methods and
nutritional enhancements that may squeeze an extra hundredth of a second off a
performance.

   Some sports scientists predict a greater reliance on equipment or waning
public interest in individual events. Others worry about heightened pressure to
cheat.

   "What happens when world records cease to be achieved on a regular basis?"
says Conrad Earnest, director of exercise biology at the Pennington Biomedical
Research Center in Baton Rouge, La., a leading science research organization. "I
think the public thinks that athletes will get better and better. That's why
they tune in to watch. I don't know if people realize that athletes can't keep
improving at the rates that they have been."

   --

   Using history as his guide, Berthelot doesn't expect a banner Winter
Olympics. His study, published in January in the journal PLoS One, is an
exhaustive analysis of track and field and swimming world records over the last
109 years. It reported that athletic prowess peaked in 1943 and again in 1958,
1968 and 1988, correlating with periods of international conflict or economic
wealth that stirred competitive juices.

   Italian researcher Giuseppe Lippi has also concluded that human athleticism
has reached its apogee. An associate professor in morphological-biomedical
sciences at the University of Verona, Lippi analyzed world records ratified by
the International Assn. of Athletics Federations from 1900 to 2007 in nine
sports disciplines. He found that "improvement has essentially stopped or
reached a plateau in several specialties."

   Mark Denny, a marine sciences and biomechanics professor at Stanford, says
athletic achievement is constrained by basic biomechanics. According to his
statistical models, the maximum attainable speed for male sprinters is only a
few percentage points greater than what has already been observed. Women have
already reached their top speed, by his calculations.

   Further, the global portrait of athletics is changing.

   In the last century, Foster says, participants from many parts of the world
have begun to compete. That makes it easier to find what researchers call
"extreme outliers," people blessed with the right genetics and right
circumstances to excel.

   And elite athletes have squeezed every ounce of advantage from their training
regimens. Most devote themselves to a single sport and utilize a team of
trainers and coaches in pursuit of a competitive edge.

   "Everyone in Vancouver is pretty much a full-time athlete," Foster said.
"Once you become a full-time athlete, the body only does so much."

   Technology has become so important in athletic competitions that the winner
of an event may be the person with the latest gear.

   Apprehension that technology may overtake sports was reflected in the
decision last year by the International Swimming Federation to ban the kind of
high-performance swimsuits that Michael Phelps used in the 2008 Olympics, where
he won eight gold medals.

   According to Berthelot's paper, in the Beijing Games, the swimsuit was the
determining factor in 21 of 22 world records.

   The swimming federation "made a decision to go away from world records,"
Foster said. "You can make an argument that there may never be a world record in
swimming again. We may have broken them all."

   --

   In today's sports, the wild card is science, says Lippi.

   "Future limits to athletic performance will be determined less and less by
the innate physiology of the athlete, and more and more by scientific and
technological advances and by the still-evolving judgment on where to draw the
line between what is 'natural' and what is artificially enhanced," he wrote in
his paper, published in 2008 in the British Medical Bulletin.

   Some observers fear an era of rampant doping as athletes seek an edge.

   Peter Weyand, an associate professor of applied physiology and biomechanics
at Southern Methodist University, used a series of biomechanics experiments on
runners to show that humans could theoretically top the world-record speed of 28
mph, set by Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt in 2008, ultimately reaching speeds of
35 or 40 mph.

   The prediction, outlined in a paper Weyand published last month in the
Journal of Applied Physiology, is based on the idea that humans could run faster
if they were able to apply much greater force to the ground.

   The speed at which muscle fibers contract limits how quickly a runner's limbs
can apply force to a running surface. The key to improved speed, Weyand says, is
to identify ways to allow muscle fibers to generate force more rapidly, such as
through drugs, nutrients or gene transfer.

   Use of gene therapies in sports is, so far, theoretical. But researchers
believe it won't be long before athletes use substances or therapies designed to
enhance their DNA.

   Researchers at the Salk Institute in San Diego have shown that an
experimental drug can reprogram how muscles respond to exercise. Mice given the
drug could run farther than with exercise training alone. In an editorial in
this month's issue of the journal Science, a leading genetic researcher warned
that some gene therapies may be used by athletes before they've been tested in
humans.

   But performance based on science, not natural ability, may have less public
appeal. And athletes who never improve may no longer hold our interest.

   "Today we really focus on who is the best: Who are the summiters. Who can
jump or run the highest," Berthelot notes. "Maybe we need to focus more on the
competition; focus more on the winner of the race, not the fastest guy on
Earth."

   Perhaps such a focus would have prevented Cox from using anabolic steroids in
her relay race in Athens and having to hand over her gold medal six years later.

   Even if athletes don't get any better, says Foster, they're still pretty darn
good. Just watch the replays of Bolt or tune in to speed skater Shani Davis'
races.

   "These people are just different to begin with, and they have devoted
unbelievable time to their sport," he says. "Sometimes you look at them and say,
'This is as good as it can be done. This is as good as the human species can
get.' "

   --

   shari.roan@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: IN 2008: Michael Phelps swam into Olympic history wearing
high-performance suits that have since been banned by the International Swimming
Federation. "There may never be a world record in swimming again," one sports
scientist said. "We may have broken them all."  PHOTOGRAPHER:Robert Gauthier Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: THE OUTER LIMITS? Some believe performance has peaked. PAGE
A1  PHOTOGRAPHER:

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2010


                              123 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 11, 2010 Thursday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 039

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: Stuttering linked to genes, government research finds

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   Government researchers have discovered the first genes linked to stuttering
-- a complex of three mutated genes that may be responsible for one in every 11
stuttering cases, especially in people of Asian descent.

   Studies of stuttering in both families and twins had long suggested that
stuttering has a significant genetic component. But until now, scientists had
not been able to identify specific genes that might cause the disorder.

   The finding is important, experts said, because it shows that stuttering,
which affects as many as 1 percent of all adults worldwide, is biological in
origin and not the result of poor parenting, emotional distress or other
nebulous factors that many physicians have cited as causes.

   "We hear every day from parents worried that they have caused their child's
stuttering," Jane Fraser, president of the Stuttering Foundation, said in a
statement. "Parents don't cause stuttering, and this research could lift the
burden of guilt from their shoulders."

   Surprisingly, the newly identified genes play a role in clearing metabolic
wastes out of brain cells, and when a person has two mutated copies of them,
they cause a lethal disease.

   Down the road, the research could help identify children who are likely to
develop stuttering problems, allowing early initiation of treatments that can
minimize or eliminate the problem. Even further in the future, it could lead to
new treatments to overcome the biological underpinnings of the disorder.

   But those goals are still far in the future. "The task of connecting the dots
between genes and stuttering is just beginning," wrote geneticist Simon E.
Fisher of Oxford University in an editorial accompanying the report in the New
England Journal of Medicine.

   Stuttering is marked by the involuntary repetition or prolongation of sounds,
syllables, words or phrases, as well as frequent pauses, impeding the fluency of
speech. An estimated 5 percent of children develop stuttering between the ages
of 3 and 6, but most either grow out of it or are successfully treated.

   The problems can be exacerbated by stress and anxiety, but most researchers
now believe that those are not the underlying causes.

   Researchers estimate that about 50 to 70 percent of stuttering is genetic in
origin, so there must be many other genes that play a role.

   The lead author of the study, geneticist Dennis Drayna of the National
Institute on Deafness and other Communication Disorders, speculated that it
might eventually be possible to screen at-risk children for the presence of the
gene so that therapy can be initiated earlier. It may be possible also to
develop therapies in which the affected enzymes are replaced with healthy ones
that would clear out the cellular garbage.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2010


                              124 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            February 9, 2010 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. A13

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 534 words

HEADLINE: Local Digest

BODY:


 EARNINGS

SRA nearly doubles quarterly profit

   SRA International said its profit for the second quarter of fiscal 2010
nearly doubled as it signed new contracts with government agencies. The Fairfax
company, which helps pharmaceutical companies manage clinical trials and deal
with regulators, said it earned $19.2 million in the period ended Dec. 31,
compared with $10.8 million a year earlier. Revenue rose 12 percent, to $413.5
million.

   During the quarter, the company said, it won new business, at a potential
value of $412 million, with the Food and Drug Administration, the Department of
Homeland Security, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

   -- Associated Press

American Capital Agency posts gains

   American Capital Agency of Bethesda reported sharply higher earnings for the
fourth quarter of 2009 after its government-backed mortgage securities gained
value.

   The company said it earned $40.7 million for the fourth quarter of 2009,
compared with $11 million a year earlier.

   For the year, the real estate investment trust earned $118.6 million. The
company started operation in May 2008, so no earlier figures are available.

   The trust, a subsidiary of American Capital, invests exclusively in mortgage
securities backed by government agencies such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

   -- Associated Press

Tax refund sends Chindex profit up

   Chindex International, which sells medical products in China, said its
third-quarter profit jumped because of a tax refund and greater sales of
surgical robots and ultrasound systems.

   In the quarter ended Dec. 31, Chindex's net income rose to $3.9 million, from
$846,000 in the year-ago period. The latest quarter included a tax refund of
$3.3 million related to the Bethesda company's health-care services business.
Revenue rose 12 percent, to $46.5 million.

   -- Associated Press

CONTRACTING

Lockheed plans unmanned chopper

   Lockheed Martin and Kaman Aerospace are launching their own unmanned military
helicopter, Lockheed announced Monday.

   Lockheed, based in Bethesda, said the companies have demonstrated to the
Marine Corps the capability of an unmanned helicopter to resupply troops in
Afghanistan.

   The announcement comes a week after another firm said it would pursue new
helicopter technology, including unmanned Black Hawks.

   Demand has jumped as the United States fights two wars while trying to keep
down casualties.

   -- Associated Press

BIOTECH

GenVec searching for gene-drug partner

   GenVec of Gaithersburg wants a partner to help market its lead gene-therapy
product outside the United States, chief executive Paul Fischer said Monday.

   GenVec's TNFerade delivers a gene with a cancer-fighting protein directly to
solid tumors. The pancreatic cancer treatment is currently in the last of three
phases of testing. It is also being evaluated for use in other cancers,
including rectal and esophageal.

   Data from an interim analysis of a 330-patient trial, which is evaluating
TNFerade's treatment of pancreatic cancer, will be available in late March or
early April, Fischer said. Positive data will encourage potential partners, he
said in an interview at the Biotechnology Industry Organization's CEO and
Investor Conference in New York.

   -- Bloomberg News

CORRECTION-DATE: March 16, 2010 Tuesday

CORRECTION:

   -- An Associated Press item in the Feb. 9 Local Business Digest about SRA
International's quarterly profits incorrectly described the company's focus as
helping "pharmaceutical companies manage clinical trials and deal with
regulators." In fact, SRA provides technology and strategic consulting services
to government agencies, including the Food and Drug Administration, which
reviews clinical trials.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2010


                              125 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            February 8, 2010 Monday

SECTION: ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 854 words

HEADLINE: NanoKnife giving patients hope Treatment's aim to kill cancer cells
using electrical impulses

BYLINE: CAROLYNE PARK ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Dr. David Hays leaned over the patient, carefully and methodically inserting
each of three probes through the skin and down to the edges of the small tumor
located just inside her liver.

   Placing the long needlelike probes is the most difficult part of the
procedure, said Hays, director of vascular interventional radiology at Baptist
Health Medical Center in Little Rock. They have to be precisely positioned in a
triangle around the tumor, with each point about two centimeters apart.

   Patient Yvonne Moore, 75, of Little Rock was undergoing a treatment with the
NanoKnife System, in which doctors send a series of short, 3,000-volt electric
impulses into the tumor to kill the cancer cells.

   It's one of a growing number of treatment options for cancer patients. In
addition to traditional treatments such as chemotherapy, radiation and surgery,
patients can have tumors treated with lasers, extreme heat or extreme cold.

   There are also bone marrow or stem-cell transplants, biological therapies,
gene therapies and a variety of medications, according to the National Cancer
Institute.

   As someone who is in her second bout with cancer, Moore said she's glad to
have choices.

   "I just want to give people hope that there's something more," she said.

   The NanoKnife was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in
November 2006, and is offered at nine medical centers around the world,
including Baptist Health, said John Mousaw, spokesman for AngioDynamics, its
Queensbury, N.Y.-based manufacturer.

   Moore is one of 109 patients who have been treated with the system.

   She was the sixth person treated with it in Arkansas, said David Fox, Baptist
Health's assistant vice president of clinical services.

   Moore was first diagnosed with breast cancer after an annual mammogram in
2006.

   She underwent two surgeries, and months of painful and exhausting radiation
and chemotherapy treatments.

   She hoped she was out of the woods.

   "I thought I was cancerfree for about a year," she said.

   Then in November 2008, Moore had a routine Computerized Axial Tomography,
known as a CAT or CT scan. It showed two growths in her liver. The cancer was
back.

   "The whole thing was just a shock," said Moore, a retired school secretary.
"It seems unreal, but it's very real." Again she went through chemotherapy and
radiation treatments. One of the growths disappeared, but the other stayed. It
shrunk under the treatments, but then grew back to its previous size.

   "I said I didn't want to go back and do chemo again," she said. "It's just
miserable. It's like having the flu, but it's four months you have it. It just
sort of takes your life away." Her husband, Harvey Moore, said he didn't want to
see his wife suffer through the treatment again either. The couple met at a
popular St. Louis-area dance hall, have been married for 56 years and have four
grown sons.

   "She and I agreed that taking the chemotherapy is no way to live," he said.

   Yvonne Moore said her doctor began discussing the NanoKnife procedure in
mid-December.

   The system is minimally invasive and has been used to treat prostate, liver,
lung, kidney, lymph node, bone and pancreatic cancers. Someone with multiple
lesions in different organs wouldn't be a candidate, Hays said.

   "The only limiting factor with this technology is you can't really do tumors
larger than three centimeters," he said.

   Hays said he's received calls from doctors throughout the country asking
about the system.

   "I got a call yesterday from a doctor at MD Anderson who was asking about
it," Hays said, referring to the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
in Houston.

   Mousaw, with AngioDynamics, said the procedure is reimbursed by insurance
companies "on a case-by-case and site-by-site basis." Moore's treatment last
month lasted for an hour and 15 minutes.

   Hays had CT scans taken periodically as he inserted the probes, so he could
see precisely where he was putting them.

   Once positioned, Julie Holton, clinical specialist with AngioDynamics, turned
on the NanoKnife machine. She travels throughout the Southeast for every
NanoKnife procedure in the region, helping run the equipment and determine where
probes should be placed.

   Gordon Single, field applications engineer with Angio-Dynamics, also was
there.

   He helped design the system and provides engineering support.

   Hays stepped on a floor pedal to deliver the electrical pulses in sync with
Moore's heartbeat. A total of 90 pulses was delivered to the tumor.

   The goal is irreversible electroporation, which opens pores on the cell
membranes of the cancer cells, killing them.

   "For lack of better terms, it withers away," Hays said.

   The patient is unconscious under anesthesia the entire time, keeping her
paralyzed.

   She has to be immobile or the electric current would likely lift her off the
table, Hays said.

   "We're basically making her the battery," he said.

   After the procedure, Moore said she had only minor pain. She spent just one
night in the hospital. She'll return for a follow-up with her oncologist in six
to eight weeks to determine the results.

   "Of all the surgeries I've had, this is the most minor," she said.

   This article was published 02/08/2010

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2010


                              126 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           February 3, 2010 Wednesday

SECTION: LIVING ARTS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 86 words

BODY:

   A reception was held at the Liberty Hotel last night for Wyc Grousbeck, the
Celts chief executive and new chairman of the board of the Mass. Eye and Ear
Infirmary. Grousbeck, whose son is blind, had founded a genetic therapy research
project targeting blindness, and his wife, Corinne, is chairwoman of the Trust
Board at Perkins School for the Blind. Guests included Sox chief executive Larry
Lucchino, Livingston Taylor, Mayor Tom Menino, Danny Ainge of the Celtics,
nightlife nabob Patrick Lyons, and chef Lydia Shire.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2010


                              127 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Courier-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            February 1, 2010 Monday

SECTION: ZONE

LENGTH: 227 words

HEADLINE: Goranflo family raising money for son with rare genetic disease

BYLINE: By, Patrick Howington phowington@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   The family of a Shepherdsville girl who died Jan. 17 of a rare genetic
disease is trying to raise $1 million by the end of February so her brother can
get a new treatment for the same fatal disease.

   Calling for a "Valentine's Day Miracle," the family of 4-year-old Carter
Goranflo launched an appeal on the Web site haileyandcartersdream.com, which
chronicles the family's battle against late infantile Batten disease.

   Carter's sister Hailey died at age 7 a year and a half after traveling to
China for stem-cell treatments.

   Family and friends raised about $130,000 over the past two years to fight the
disease, said Mike Roberts, the two children's uncle.

   But now, he said, they need $1 million to enter a clinical trial headed by a
Cornell University pioneer in gene therapy. Roberts said the portion of the
trial that Carter would take part in has no federal funding, and $1 million is
needed from private donations.

   He said the money must be raised before the end of February, when families
will be screened for possible inclusion in the trial. "This is an insane feat
for us," he said.

   Roberts said he is trying to get donors to give $10 and spread the word. Any
funds not needed for Carter would go to research.

   People can donate through the Web site or at any Fifth Third Bank under the
Goranflo Trust Fund.

   Reporter Patrick Howington can be reached at (502) 582-4229.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2010


                              128 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Courier-Journal
                              All Rights Reserved
                   The Courier-Journal (Louisville, Kentucky)

                            February 1, 2010 Monday
                             Kentucky-Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B6

LENGTH: 230 words

HEADLINE: Family seeks to raise $1 million for son with rare disease

BYLINE: By, Patrick Howington phowington@courier-journal.com

BODY:

   By Patrick Howington

   phowington@courier-journal.com

   The Courier-Journal

   The family of a Shepherdsville girl who died Jan. 17 of a rare genetic
disease is trying to raise $1million by the end of February so her brother can
get a new treatment for the same fatal illness..

   Calling for a "Valentine's Day Miracle," the family of 4-year-old Carter
Goranflo launched an appeal on the Web site haileyandcartersdream.com, which
chronicles the family's battle against late infantile Batten disease.

   Carter's sister Hailey died at age 7, a year and a half after traveling to
China for stem-cell treatments.

   Family and friends raised about $130,000 over the past two years to fight the
disease, said Mike Roberts, the children's uncle.

   But now, he said, the family needs $1million to enter a clinical trial headed
by a Cornell University pioneer in gene therapy.

   Roberts said the portion of the trial that Carter would take part in has no
federal funding, and the money

   must be raised before the end of February, when families will be screened for
possible inclusion in the trial. "This is an insane feat for us," he said.

   Roberts said he is trying to get donors to give $10 and spread the word. Any
funds not needed for Carter would go to research.

   People can donate through the Web site or at any Fifth Third Bank under the
Goranflo Trust Fund.

   Reporter Patrick Howington can be reached at (502) 582-4229.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2010


                              129 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 1, 2010 Monday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; P-com Obituaries; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 370 words

HEADLINE: Francisco Jose Branco, 44, instructor, researcher

BYLINE: By Sally A. Downey; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Francisco Jose Branco, 44, of Center City, an instructor at Community College
of Philadelphia for 17 years and a research scientist, died of heart failure
Jan. 6 at Pennsylvania Hospital.

   In 1993, Dr. Branco began teaching part time at Community College while
pursuing a doctoral degree in applied physiology at Temple University.

   He continued to teach part time at CCP after earning his doctorate in 1999
and while on fellowships in gene therapy at Thomas Jefferson University and in
microbiology at the University of Pennsylvania.

   As a fellow, he researched cancer, AIDS, and herpes simplex and coauthored
seven articles that were published in medical journals.

   After injuring his knee in 2005, he reduced the number of hours he worked in
research labs and began teaching at CCP full time, said his fiancee, Gail R.
Viola.

   He was committed to his students and provided them with an Ivy League
education, she said. They responded with grateful cards, letters, and e-mails.

   Dr. Branco taught science courses to nursing and medical-technician students.
He told them their education was important, Viola said, not only to them but to
him. " 'Someday you will be treating and caring for older folks like me, so I
want you to get it right,' " he said.

   Dr. Branco was born in Portugal and grew up in Kearny, N.J. He earned a
bachelor's degree in biology from the University of Pennsylvania, where he was a
discus and javelin thrower and runner on the track team. He earned a master's in
microbiology from Thomas Jefferson University.

   He and Viola shared a love for animals and had two German shepherds. After
finding a homeless German shepherd in 2004, they became active with the German
Shepherd Rescue of Southeastern Pennsylvania.

   In addition to his fiancee, Dr. Branco is survived by his parents, Francisco
and Maria Branco; a sister, Mary Costa; a niece; and a nephew.

   A memorial service will be at 3 p.m. Friday at Community College of
Philadelphia, Center for Business and Industry Building, 18th and Callowhill
Streets, Philadelphia.

   Donations may be made to German Shepherd Rescue of Southeastern Pennsylvania,
9012 Cargill Lane, Philadelphia 19115.

   Contact staff writer Sally A. Downey at 215-854-2913 or
sdowney@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2010


                              130 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2010 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            February 1, 2010 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A 01

LENGTH: 1297 words

HEADLINE: Local state colleges feeling pinched ;
Budget cuts affect students, faculty

BODY:

   Oliver Bonie is an aspiring musician who loves the city where jazz was born
-- so much so that he turned down scholarships from schools in New York City and
Boston to pursue a music degree at the University of New Orleans.

   But this semester, the 19-year-old saxophone player's zeal to improve his
skills has collided with the reality of budget cuts at state-run campuses all
over Louisiana. He had hoped to take drum lessons, but the part-time instructors
for those courses have been let go to save money.

   "I like going here, but, more and more, there are less resources," he said,
"and that's kind of a drag."

   What Bonie has encountered is only one of the many economies that colleges
and universities have been forced to impose to trim a total of $83.9 million
from their collective budgets. For instance:

   Class sizes are bigger because sections have been cut. As a result, some
students are having a tough time scheduling courses they need to graduate.

   Faculty members are being cut or furloughed.

   At UNO, lights are turned off when rooms are empty, and thermostats have been
reset to save energy. Building repairs also take longer.

   "Sometimes, rooms are really hot; sometimes, they're really cold," Bonie
said. "I think the teachers are on edge."

   Teachers are also trying to save paper wherever possible. On the first day of
class, instead of passing around copies of the syllabus giving a preview of the
semester, a UNO teacher asked students for their e-mail addresses so she could
distribute the syllabus electronically.

   "We do the best we can," said Phil Denette, an assistant professor of biology
at Delgado Community College. "Budget is the key word. We can't be spending
money frivolously. We have to make do with the money we have."

   The latest round of cuts -- the third since the 2008-09 fiscal year -- brings
to about $250 million the amount that has had to be pared from the budgets of
the four systems that run state-run colleges.

   The LSU System was told to shed $39.1 million, and the University of
Louisiana System was ordered to cut $21.2 million. The budget for the Louisiana
Community and Technical College System, which includes Delgado Community
College, had to be shrunk by $8.2 million, and the Southern University System
had to cut $4.2 million from its state allocation.

   The rest of the cuts were imposed on the Board of Regents, the governing body
of state-run higher education, which had to trim about $3 million from the
budget, and the Louisiana Office of Student Financial Aid, which had to pare
about $7.7 million.

   To make ends meet at Southern University at New Orleans, officials have left
nine positions vacant and cut the travel budget and money for basic supplies
such as paper. The university also may offer early retirements to eligible
personnel to trim its staff, Chancellor Victor Ukpolo said.

   But SUNO has continued to hire faculty members to meet demands in popular
subjects, such as health-information management.

   "We're doing the best we can "¦ to show that we are continuing to offer a
strong academic program," Ukpolo said.

   Harder to measure is the psychological impact of the cuts. They have made
recruiting difficult, LSU System spokesman Charles Zewe said, because some
people are leery of taking jobs out of fear that those positions could be
eliminated in the next round of budget cutbacks.

   "We're already skin and bones in terms of state funding," he said.

   The cuts come at time when enrollments are building back up to where they
were before Hurricane Katrina closed schools and drove many students into exile.

   At the University of New Orleans, for instance, 11,122 students have
registered for courses this semester -- the most since August 2005, when the
total was 17,251, spokeswoman Johanna Schindler said.

   "The bad news is that we haven't been allowed to replace any of the (faculty)
who left after Katrina," said James Hammann, acting chairman of the music
department. "We are servicing the same number of students we had in 2004 with
two-thirds of the faculty and are unable to hire any more because of the
freeze."

   As a result, UNO has had trouble offering some courses in a timely manner so
students can graduate in four years, he said.

   "We have been able to keep courses up and running, but it really is a
scramble," Hammann said. "All our faculty are teaching an overload."

   The goal for faculty members at these schools is to do as much as possible to
shield students from the cuts' impact, said Peter Schock, the chairman of UNO's
English department.

   "We have bent over backwards and will continue to do so," he said.

   A major accommodation may be in the works: Because of the hiring freeze, the
state Board of Regents is considering dropping the laboratory requirements for
non-science majors taking science courses.

   At Delgado Community College, Jancarlos Romero, the student body's vice
president, said he is in a double bind: His classes are crowded, and the Student
Government Association has less money to underwrite campus activities such as
Black History Month.

   "We would like to do more for the students," he said, "but we don't have the
money."

   Delgado's enrollment is booming: With nearly 17,000 students at its five
campuses, it's the most populous local institution of higher education. Besides
being a school where students can train for all sorts of jobs, Delgado has
become a magnet for people who want to brush up on their skills or learn new
ones.

   "I'm seeing so many more students in classrooms than ever before," Romero
said. "Every desk is taken."

   Classes that shouldn't have more than 25 students have as many as 33, "which
is not conducive to good learning," Delgado mathematics professor Pat Roux said.

   And because desks have to be large enough to hold students' textbooks,
calculators and binders, "it's hard to walk around the room and see how each
student is doing," she said.

   Roux thought that hiring six part-time teachers and adding extra sections for
more popular courses would solve the problem, "but they've been overfull as
well," she said.

   Enrollment has also hit record levels at LSU Health Sciences Center, where
about 2,500 students are in the schools of medicine, nursing, dentistry, public
health and allied health professions, as well as the graduate school, Chancellor
Larry Hollier said.

   But the center's budget has been sliced by about one-third since Katrina, he
said, and the number of employees has dropped by 27 percent during the same
period.

   Restructuring shortly after Katrina helped the center prepare for the hard
times that administrators knew were coming, Hollier said. The process included
consolidating departments and placing nearly 2,000 employees on indefinite
leave. Most did not come back.

   But, he said, "We're at the stage where the budget cuts are going to start
cutting into the services that we have delivered and would like to deliver."

   LSU won't be able to support the River Region Cancer Center in Sorrento,
which has provided free cancer screenings, Hollier said. Cutbacks are in store
for LSU's Epilepsy Center of Excellence and the travel budget for the
Neuroscience Center of Excellence, both of which are in New Orleans.

   Already, Hollier said, LSU has reduced its share of the money for the
gene-therapy center and for the cancer center rising at Tulane and South
Claiborne avenues. Travel to meetings is down, and teleconferencing is up.

   "We'll just continue to erode the services we provide," he said.

   Nicole Joseph, the secretary of Delgado's Student Government Association, has
adopted a coping strategy: staying in school, even though her classes are
crowded and parking spaces are scarce.

   "I could have graduated already," she said. "I'm waiting it out because of
the recession. I can't get a job."

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3317.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2010


                              131 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2010 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            January 29, 2010 Friday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Pg. WE41

DISTRIBUTION: Prince George's County

LENGTH: 86 words

HEADLINE: Gallery opening of the week

BODY:

   Opening Friday from 6 to 9 p.m. at the Arlington Arts Center, "Transhuman
Conditions" features 10 contemporary artists whose work probes issues related to
the future of the human body. Some of the cutting-edge themes explored include
gender identity, biotechnology, immortality, gene therapy and even   the thorny
question of whether two people can share a single body.

   At 3550 Wilson Blvd., Arlington (Metro: Virginia Square), through April 3.
703-248-6800. http://www.arlingtonartscenter.org.

    -- Michael O'Sullivan

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; Phillip Warnell; Images from Phillip Warnell's "Endo-Ecto"
project, in which he swallowed an endoscopic camera.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2010


                              132 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           January 28, 2010 Thursday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; ON BUSINESS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 678 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH PROSPERITY WILL TAKE TIME, CASH

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

BODY:

   If Americans like quick economic results, Floridians want them yesterday.

   So it's no surprise that a sophisticated industry Florida wants to call one
of its own - biotech - is still in its infancy here despite $1.5 billion-plus in
state and local economic incentives thrown at just eight biotech organizations.

   How many jobs has $1.5 billion generated so far? About 1,100. That's $1.3
million or so spent per job, so far. Of course, the goal is to attract more
biotech firms to create a cluster or concentration of industry activity - with
more jobs.

   As the huge dollars reflect, Florida is a state obsessed with generating 21st
century-style jobs. Florida wants to be able to say we're more than a tourist
destination or the capital of real estate sprawl.

   My, how serendipity plays a role in Florida's economic directions.

   If Jeb Bush had not been our federally befriended governor when brother
George W. was the nation's president...

   If Jeb had not secretly and on his own pitched Scripps Research in California
to open a facility in Florida...

   And if Jeb did not have $310 million in funds in 2003 to entice Scripps
with...

   ... then Florida would be back in the dark ages wishing it were a biotech
player.

   A new state government report called Biotechnology Clusters Developing Slowly
examines the role of state incentives and the progress of Florida's heavily
subsidized effort to create a concentration of biotech firms here. The report is
the work of the Florida Legislature's Office of Program Policy Analysis &
Government Accountability.

   It concludes the $1.5 billion commitment thus far to this industry "has not
yet resulted in the growth of technology clusters in the counties where program
grantees have established facilities."

   Where's the biotech beef?

   Florida possesses everything it needs to kick-start a biotech industry except
one ingredient: venture capital, an industry of investors willing to stake
young, promising companies in exchange for future returns.

   That's long been Florida's Achilles' heel. And that's why the Legislature in
2007 created the Florida Opportunity Fund as a surrogate investor.

   But there are problems.

   First, the opportunity fund can invest not only in biotech firms but also
businesses involved in information technology, homeland security and defense.
That dilutes the money that can be focused on building up one cluster.

   Second, the Florida Opportunity Fund was handed only $29.5 million. It's a
puny sum compared with the $310 million Jeb Bush first waved at Scripps.

   To help, Florida's State Board of Administration was authorized to invest up
to 1.5 percent of the net assets of the state retirement system trust fund in
technology and high-growth investments.

   That idea may sound progressive, at least until the pension assets take
losses from higher-risk investing. As of November 2009, the board had committed
to invest $26.5 million in just three companies.

   The report suggests more economic incentives may help push Florida toward a
biotech tipping point. If we can find the money. And the nerve.

   No doubt we could use the extra bucks. But Florida also needs more patience
to let its biotech cluster mature and blossom.

   Don't rush this one. Don't neglect it, either.

   Contact Robert Trigaux at trigaux@sptimes.com

   * * *

   What has $1.5 billion in incentives brought Florida in biotech?

   2004: Scripps Florida, Jupiter Disease research, $579 million

   2006: Burnham Institute, Orlando Disease research , $310 million

   2008: Max Planck Florida, Jupiter Molecular processes, $188 million

   2008: Miami Institute for Human Genomics, Miami Gene research, $180 million*

   2008: Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute Florida, Port St. Lucie Vaccines for
elderly, $120 million*

   2006: Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies, Port St. Lucie Disease
research, $97 million

   2006: SRI International, St. Petersburg Marine science research, $50 million*

   1008: Charles Stark Draper Laboratory Inc., Tampa and St. PetersburgMiniature
medical/military systems, $30 million

   * Includes private funding

   Source: Florida Office of Tourism, Trade and Economic Development, January
2010

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2010


                              133 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                           January 23, 2010 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS

LENGTH: 1211 words

HEADLINE: Film shines light on rare genetic disorder

BYLINE: By, Peggy O'Farrell

BODY:

   There was a time when John Cole expected to die young.

   "Before Myozyme, I wouldn't have bet a nickel that I'd make it to 50," the
Cherry Grove man said. "Now, I plan on lasting another 20 years. I might be in a
wheelchair, but I fully anticipate making it that long."

   Cole, now 47, was 26 when he learned he had Pompe disease, a rare inherited
enzyme deficiency that leads to crippling muscle weakness and respiratory
failure.

   For years, Cole grew progressively weaker from the disease until researchers
developed Myozyme, a drug that replaces the missing enzyme. The Food and Drug
Administration approved Myozyme in 2006.

   On Friday, "Extreme Measures," a new film starring Harrison Ford and Brendan
Fraser, opened. It tells the story of the development of Myozyme, the only drug
available to treat Pompe disease.

   ·  Metromix's review of "Extraordinary Measures"

   Pompe disease is rare, found in about 1 in 40,000 births in the United
States. In contrast, half of all men and a third of all women will develop
cancer at some point in their lives. People with Pompe lack an enzyme that
allows muscle cells to use glycogen, a form of sugar. The sugar builds up and
the cells are destroyed.

   Myozyme doesn't cure the disease, but does slow its progression, said Gregory
Grabowski, director of the division of human genetics at Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center.

   The Corryville hospital has a long history of researching Pompe disease and
other enzyme deficiencies.

   A Dutch scientist identified the disease in the 1930s.

   In the 1960s, two scientists at Cincinnati Children's - William Schubert and
George Hug - cultured the enzyme from a fungus, and then infused it into
children with the disease.

   "They showed that replacing the enzyme had a biochemical effect on the
children, but they couldn't show it had a therapeutic effect," Grabowski said.

   From there, decades of research began, culminating, as the movie shows, with
the development of Myozyme.

   When it was time to begin testing the drug, Cincinnati Children's was one of
a handful of sites that participated in the clinical trials.

   Cole was one of the first patients enrolled in the clinical trial in 2005.

   "I was deteriorating so rapidly that they were afraid I wouldn't qualify if
they didn't sign me up right away," he said.

   Diagnosed at birth

   Maria Duff, 13, was diagnosed with the disease at birth.

   Her brother, Joseph, was only 15 months old when he died of Pompe disease in
1993.

   "Her milestones have always been late," said her mother, Eileen Duff of
Hamilton. "She didn't walk until 21 months."

   Like most babies born with the disease, Maria's heart was enlarged, making it
difficult for her to walk or play or even breathe.

   Maria was 7 when she began taking Myozyme while it was still being tested. By
then, she needed a ventilator to help her breathe, and a wheelchair.

   "She was at the point where she couldn't even use her legs anymore," Eileen
Duff said.

   Maria still needs the wheelchair and ventilator, her mother said, but her
heart has returned to a more normal size, and her muscle weakness isn't getting
worse.

   "She's holding her own," Eileen Duff said. "If she didn't have Myozyme, her
heart would still be enlarged, and she probably wouldn't even be here."

   Babies born with the disease develop extremely enlarged hearts, and many die
by their second birthday without treatment.

   Older children and adults, like Cole and Richard Oliver of Covington, also
develop the disease, but it tends to focus on the muscles. The heart is rarely
affected.

   Oliver, 43, was diagnosed with the disease in 2008. He'd been having problems
with muscle weakness in his back and doctors thought he might have a form of
muscular dystrophy.

   It wasn't until he went into respiratory failure in November 2007 that
doctors pinpointed his problem as Pompe disease.

   Pompe disease affects people at different rates. People diagnosed as children
are affected more severely.

   Cole is on disability. He has difficulty breathing when he has to walk too
far or too fast, and the disease has caused the muscles in his core to
deteriorate to the point that it's difficult for him to maintain his balance.

   Oliver, a quality engineer for a company that makes aircraft engine
components, can still work.

   He and Cole both need to use a breathing apparatus at night that helps get
more air into their lungs.

   Maria Duff is home-schooled. For her last birthday, she got Cocoa, a
miniature horse.

   Grooming Cocoa and petting her helps Maria keep her strength up, said her
father, Tim Duff.

   One day, the family hopes Maria will be strong enough to ride Cocoa.

   Just the first step

   Myozyme is an important first step in treating Pompe disease, experts say,
but patients need more.

   "Once a child goes on a ventilator, they don't come off," said Nancy Leslie,
a physician and researcher at Cincinnati Children's.

   Myozyme replaces enough of the missing enzyme to slow the damage Pompe
disease does to muscle tissue, but once the damage is done, there's currently no
way to reverse it, Grabowski said.

   Another issue is that the body doesn't use Myozyme very efficiently, he said,
so patients need a lot of the drug. But it's difficult for Genzyme, its
manufacturer, to make the drug in extremely large quantities, he said.

   Researchers are looking at ways to make the medication more efficient.

   Gene therapy might prove to be a better way to treat the disease, Grabowski
said.

   For the therapy, doctors would insert a healthy copy of the gene that
controls the production of the missing enzyme into a virus, then inject the
virus into a patient. As the virus multiplied, the healthy copy of the gene
would replace the defective gene in the patient's cells, and allow the body to
produce the necessary enzyme.

   But while it's a possibility, it could be years before such a therapy is
available, he said.

   "There are a lot of hurdles to be faced there," he said.

   About Pompe disease

   Pompe (pronounced POM-pay) disease is a genetic disorder in which the body
doesn't produce an enzyme that lets cells convert glycogen into glucose, a form
of sugar that the body uses for energy.

   The glycogen builds up cells, eventually causing them to rupture. The
destruction damages muscle development, especially in the skeletal muscles and
those that control breathing. In infants, cardiac muscles are severely affected,
causing the developing heart to become enlarged and floppy.

   Pompe disease is classified as a lysosomal storage disorder. Lysosomes are
structures that serve to digest and dispose of proteins, sugars and other
substances inside cells. Without the proper enzymes that allow the digestion to
take place, the lysosomes can't do their jobs, and the proteins or sugars build
up in cells and eventually destroy them.

   There are two forms of Pompe disease:

   · One affects infants, and is usually fatal by age 2 if not properly
diagnosed and treated.

   · One affects older children and adults. The later-onset form rarely affects
the heart muscles.

   The two forms combined affect 1 in 40,000 people born in the United States.

   A medication called Myozyme was approved in 2006 to treat Pompe disease. It
works by replacing the missing enzyme, which allows the body to properly use
glycogen.

   Myozyme slows the progression of the disease, but it's not a cure, and it
can't repair muscle damage already done.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2010


                              134 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2010 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland Oregon)

                            January 22, 2010 Friday
                                SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: Familiar sights get starring role

BYLINE: KRISTI TURNQUIST

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Oregon filming locations for "Extraordinary Measures" include OHSU
and Nike, which donates its fee

   Familiar sights get starring role Film follows

   father's quest

   to treat disease

   KRISTI TURNQUIST

   A nybody who has seen commercials for the new movie "Extraordinary Measures,"
which opens today, knows that it stars Harrison Ford, Brendan Fraser and Keri
Russell. But for the crowd gathered Wednesday night for a special preview
screening in Beaverton, the film's true luminaries are familiar institutions:
Oregon Health & Science University, Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Nike.

   The screening, held in the Stanford Theater on the Nike campus, was a
thank-you from the "Extraordinary Measures" production company to the Portland
organizations that allowed the film to shoot on location. The film shot at
several spots in and around Portland (see map).

   In turn, Nike chose the screening to announce that the company was donating
the $60,000 it received as a location fee to OHSU's Doernbecher Children's
Hospital.

   Pam Catlett, Nike vice president of investor relations, said this was the
first time Nike had agreed to have a major movie shoot on the grounds of its
campus. "Nike is a company of people who believe in human potential," she said,
adding that the story told in "Extraordinary Measures" is an inspiring example
of what people can achieve.

   When it was filming in Oregon in spring 2009, the movie was known as "The
Untitled Crowley Project," after the character John Crowley, played by Fraser.
The real John Crowley is a Harvard MBA who, when his children were diagnosed
with Pompe disease, became involved with biotech companies that eventually
developed a treatment for the previously untreatable disease.

   People born with Pompe disease, which is genetic, lack an enzyme that helps
their cells break down glycogen. Sugars are normally stored in the cells as
glycogen, and when the body can't break them down, excess glycogen accumulates,
leading to progressive muscular weakness and damage to the heart and other
organs.

   To make a movie of Crowley's battle to find an enzyme replacement therapy for
his children, CBS Films --the company behind "Extraordinary Measures" --required
real hospitals, as well as a location that could pass for a biotech startup
site. Enter OHSU and VA Medical Center for medical locations and Nike as the
biotech company stand-in.

   Adding to the appeal for the filmmakers, OHSU is home to the largest Pompe
disease research and treatment center on the West Coast. One of that center's
researchers, Robert Steiner, attended the screening.

   Steiner, an OHSU professor of pediatrics and molecular and medical genetics,
is a principal investigator or co-investigator for more than a dozen ongoing
clinical trials and research studies on Pompe disease and other conditions. He's
not surprised that most people have never heard of Pompe disease, which can be
diagnosed in adults as well as children. "I think even many health care
providers don't know about it," says Steiner, 49. The disease is rare, he says,
affecting about one in every 50,000 babies born.

   "I've been caring for patients with Pompe disease for about 15 years,"
Steiner says. "My hope is that the movie will familiarize health care providers
and parents about Pompe disease. There are almost certainly patients out there
who haven't been diagnosed yet and who could potentially benefit from the
therapy. In addition, we need more awareness to raise funding for research to
continue."

   The filmmakers also benefited from expert advice from Melanie Sanders, a
staff educator in pediatrics at Doernbecher. "The producers were trying to
select a technical adviser who could answer questions about Pompe," Sanders, 36,
recalls. "I ended up working several days a week for about three months."

   Sanders worked with the prop department to make sure equipment was positioned
and operating correctly and with the actors on how to perform the nursing care
that kids with Pompe would need.

   Sanders also attended Wednesday's screening. She enjoyed her movie
experience, she says. "It was really interesting. But I'll stick with my career.
I had no idea they have so many people working behind the scenes. All we see is
the finished product. I was very, very impressed with how well people do their
jobs."

   In addition to advising, Sanders makes a brief appearance in "Extraordinary
Measures," bringing flowers to the Crowleys' daughter as the girl lies in the
intensive care unit.

   After all her efforts to ensure accuracy, Sanders had to laugh when thinking
about her scene. "All my friends at the hospital will tease me," she said.
"Because you can't have flowers in intensive care."

   Kristi Turnquist: 503-221-8227; kristiturnquist@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2010


                              135 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                          Plain Dealer (Cleveland, OH)

                            January 19, 2010 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BODY:

   UH seeks patients for Alzheimer's trial

   University Hospitals Case Medical Center will be one of 12 national sites to
conduct the first phase-2 clinical trial of a gene-therapy treatment for
Alzheimer's disease. Local researchers are looking to recruit five patients to
participate in the trial, which will include about 50 patients nationally. The
goal of the study will be to test the safety of a viral-based gene-transfer
system, which will deliver nerve growth factor, or NGF, into the brain. NGF is a
naturally occurring protein that may prevent nerve cells in the brain from dying
and may help them function better. In the study, the protein will be injected
into an area of the brain where nerve cells typically die in Alzheimer's
patients. Participants will be randomly placed in a treatment or placebo group
but will have the option to receive treatment at the end of the trial if the
treatment is determined to be safe and effective. For information: 216-464-6412
or tiny.cc/Z1C4u.

   Two malls to host epilepsy walks

   The Cleveland Clinic Epilepsy Center will hold the fifth annual Winter Walk
for Epilepsy Saturday at the Great Lakes Mall, 7850 Mentor Ave., Mentor, and at
Westfield SouthPark mall, Interstate 71 and Ohio 82, Strongsville. The free
event will feature games, activities and raffle drawings. Registration is at 8
a.m. The walk begins at 9 a.m. Walkers who raise at least $35 will receive a
free T-shirt. Register online: epilepsyinfo.org, or call Mallory Wiltshire:
216-579-1330, Ext. 824, or e-mail mwiltshire@epilepsyinfo.org

   Group lends support for peripheral neuropathy

   Do you have tingling and burning in your feet or other parts of your body? Do
you feel you are the only one in the world that feels this way? Join Northeast
Ohio Peripheral Neuropathy Support Group Meeting at 1:30 p.m. Tuesday, Jan. 26,
at the Good Shepherd Christian Church, 9571 Shepard Road, Twinsburg
(intersection of Ledge and Shepard roads). For information: 330-468-2526 or
kjcright@yahoo.com The group meets every fourth Tuesday.

   CWRU dental school providing free exams

   The School of Dental Medicine at Case Western Reserve University will host
Prophy Day from 9 a.m. to noon Saturday, Jan. 30, at the CWRU Dental Clinic at
the corner of Cornell Road and Emergency Drive, Cleveland, two blocks south of
Euclid Avenue. The event is an opportunity for people to receive a free oral
exam, limited X-rays and a dental cleaning. Walk-ins are welcome for people ages
18 and older who are not current school patients and who do not wear full-mouth
dentures. For information: 216-368-3864 or 216-368-0450. Do not leave a message.

   Class offering info on nursing your baby

   TriPoint Medical Center, 7590 Auburn Road, Concord Township, offers helpful
information and practical suggestions for nursing your baby in a class scheduled
from 6 to 9 p.m. Tuesday, Jan 26. Registration and fee required. Call:
440-953-6000 or 1-800-454-9800.

   Foundation donates to Ireland Cancer Center

   The Marilyn B. Gula Mountains of Hope Foundation has donated $50,000 to
University Hospitals Ireland Cancer Center to fund clinical research and
treatment options for metastatic breast cancer. This donation, as well as future
Cleveland fund-raising activities by the foundation, will benefit the Ireland
Cancer Center's Miracle Fund, which focuses on new clinical trials and therapies
aimed at treating advanced breast cancer and extending lives. The foundation,
named in honor of Garfield Heights native Marilyn Barry Gula, was established in
2003.

CORRECTION-DATE: January 19, 2010

CORRECTION:

   Health briefs

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2010


                              136 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            January 17, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; West; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Stepping up courtship of biotech firms

BYLINE: By Rachel Lebeaux, GLOBE Correspondent

BODY:

   Like a growing number of area communities, Franklin is talking about
streamlining its regulatory process to attract biotechnology companies, hoping
to benefit from the tax revenue and jobs that would accompany their move into
town.

   The Town Council is considering eliminating a special permit that
biotechnology companies must obtain before setting up business operations, a
requirement that officials say has been hampering Franklin's ability to attract
commercial growth.

   ``With the economy slow, the town is looking at economic development, and
we're trying to do everything possible to get people interested in developing
here,'' said Bryan Taberner, the town's director of planning and community
development, who proposed the elimination of the special permit at the council's
Jan. 6 meeting.

   Town Council members, who are slated to discuss the proposal during their
meeting Wednesday, voiced support for the intent behind the initiative, and the
projected effect it could have on the town's tax base and employment
opportunities.

   ``It's a very thoughtful and proactive way to do something smart on behalf of
the town by attracting quality industries or businesses to it, while still
maintaining safety regulations,'' said Councilor Shannon Zollo.

   Over the past decade, the biotechnology industry has exploded across the
region. In Framingham, the Cambridge-based Genzyme Corp. has spent hundreds of
millions of dollars to expand its manufacturing and warehouse facilities.
Hopkinton boasts a strong presence as well, hosting facilities for Lonza
Biologics, Caliper Life Sciences, and Stryker Corp.

   Last year, an English company, Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC, transferred
many of the operations of its human genetic therapies unit from Cambridge to
Lexington, where it is investing $394 million to expand its campus.

   Support is also strong at the state level. Last month, the Massachusetts Life
Sciences Center awarded $25 million in tax incentives to 28 companies statewide,
part of a 10-year, $1 billion initiative to promote the industry's growth.

   Across the state, biotechnology employment grew by 42.6 percent between 2001
and 2008, according to Peter Abair, director of economic development at the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, an industry advocacy group.

   In 2008, 46,000 people were working for biotechnology operations in
Massachusetts, Abair said, many of them in Boston's western suburbs. While
Cambridge remains the area's biotechnology king, many of those more mature
companies with operations there are now also seeking cheaper land outside the
city for manufacturing facilities, Abair said.

   The Mass. Biotechnology Council runs a program aimed at increasing the number
of sites around the state that can serve as destinations for its members, and
helping municipalities understand how they can attract the industry, Abair said.

   ``It helps get you in the game, because speed - either to the research bench
or to market with a product - is very critical for biotechnology companies,''
Abair said.

   The council's BioReady Communities program has signed up 61 municipalities
for its ranking system, which Abair said serves as a marketing tool for
communities looking to woo companies.

   Among area communities, the council has awarded its highest rating, platinum,
to Framingham, Lexington, and Waltham. Watertown has been rated a gold
community; Marlborough and Norfolk are silver communities; and Franklin,
Holliston, and Newton hold bronze ratings.

   Franklin could jump up to a gold rating if it follows through with the
proposed regulatory changes, Abair said.

   Franklin has already taken steps toward welcoming more industry to town. Last
year, officials designated three areas as targets for economic growth: Forge
Park, the Franklin Industrial Park, and a town-owned parcel on Pond Street
adjacent to I-495. Officials are also looking to increase the size of its
biotechnology district in and around the Forge Park industrial area, town
development director Taberner said.

   The town's special-permit requirement slows the development process and
dissuades companies from setting up shop in Franklin, Taberner said.

   ``This additional special permit is really an additional layer of regulation
that other communities don't have, which appears to be the key reason that
companies are looking elsewhere,'' Taberner said.

   ``They can get through the process a lot quicker somewhere else, so they go
somewhere else.''

   The areas in Franklin slated for biotechnology are also considered priority
development sites, requiring officials to make permitting decisions within 180
days. The special permit makes it more difficult to meet this timeline, Taberner
said.

   Under the suggested changes to the biotechnology use zoning bylaw, the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Board of Health would still be
charged with reviewing proposals. Moreover, the proposed regulations would
require the Board of Health to hold a public hearing on biotechnology proposals,
offering an additional layer of oversight, Taberner said.

   Councilor Robert Vallee said that while the bylaw changes would help Franklin
catch up with its neighboring communities, they may not go far enough.

   ``I would welcome legislation that would put us ahead so we could attract
biotechnology companies,'' Vallee said.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2010


                              137 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2010 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            January 17, 2010 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; West; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 878 words

HEADLINE: Franklin stepping up its courtship of biotech firms

BYLINE: By Rachel Lebeaux, GLOBE Correspondent

BODY:

   Like a growing number of area communities, Franklin is talking about
streamlining its regulatory process to attract biotechnology companies, hoping
to benefit from the tax revenue and jobs that would accompany their move into
town.

   The Town Council is considering eliminating a special permit that
biotechnology companies must obtain before setting up business operations, a
requirement that officials say has been hampering Franklin's ability to attract
commercial growth.

   ``With the economy slow, the town is looking at economic development, and
we're trying to do everything possible to get people interested in developing
here,'' said Bryan Taberner, the town's director of planning and community
development, who proposed the elimination of the special permit at the council's
Jan. 6 meeting.

   Town Council members, who are slated to discuss the proposal during their
meeting Wednesday, voiced support for the intent behind the initiative, and the
projected effect it could have on the town's tax base and employment
opportunities.

   ``It's a very thoughtful and proactive way to do something smart on behalf of
the town by attracting quality industries or businesses to it, while still
maintaining safety regulations,'' said Councilor Shannon Zollo.

   Over the past decade, the biotechnology industry has exploded across the
region. In Framingham, the Cambridge-based Genzyme Corp. has spent hundreds of
millions of dollars to expand its manufacturing and warehouse facilities.
Hopkinton boasts a strong presence as well, hosting facilities for Lonza
Biologics, Caliper Life Sciences, and Stryker Corp.

   Last year, an English company, Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC, transferred
many of the operations of its human genetic therapies unit from Cambridge to
Lexington, where it is investing $394 million to expand its campus.

   Support is also strong at the state level. Last month, the Massachusetts Life
Sciences Center awarded $25 million in tax incentives to 28 companies statewide,
part of a 10-year, $1 billion initiative to promote the industry's growth.

   Across the state, biotechnology employment grew by 42.6 percent between 2001
and 2008, according to Peter Abair, director of economic development at the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, an industry advocacy group.

   In 2008, 46,000 people were working for biotechnology operations in
Massachusetts, Abair said, many of them in Boston's western suburbs. While
Cambridge remains the area's biotechnology king, many of those more mature
companies with operations there are now also seeking cheaper land outside the
city for manufacturing facilities, Abair said.

   The Mass. Biotechnology Council runs a program aimed at increasing the number
of sites around the state that can serve as destinations for its members, and
helping municipalities understand how they can attract the industry, Abair said.
``It helps get you in the game, because speed - either to the research bench or
to market with a product - is very critical for biotechnology companies.''

   The council's BioReady Communities program has signed up 61 municipalities
for its ranking system, which Abair said serves as a marketing tool for
communities looking to woo companies.

   Among area communities, the council has awarded its highest rating, platinum,
to Framingham, Lexington, and Waltham. Watertown has been rated a gold
community; Marlborough and Norfolk are silver communities; and Franklin,
Holliston, and Newton hold bronze ratings.

   Franklin could jump up to a gold rating if it follows through with the
proposed regulatory changes, Abair said.

   Franklin has already taken steps toward welcoming more industry to town. Last
year, officials designated three areas as targets for economic growth: Forge
Park, the Franklin Industrial Park, and a town-owned parcel on Pond Street
adjacent to I-495. Officials are also looking to increase the size of its
biotechnology district in and around the Forge Park industrial area, town
development director Taberner said.

   The town's special-permit requirement slows the development process and
dissuades companies from setting up shop in Franklin, Taberner said.

   ``This additional special permit is really an additional layer of regulation
that other communities don't have, which appears to be the key reason that
companies are looking elsewhere,'' Taberner said. ``They can get through the
process a lot quicker somewhere else, so they go somewhere else.''

   The areas in Franklin slated for biotechnology are also considered priority
development sites, requiring officials to make permitting decisions within 180
days. The special permit makes it more difficult to meet this timeline, Taberner
said.

   Under the suggested changes to the biotechnology use zoning bylaw, the
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Board of Health would still be
charged with reviewing proposals. Moreover, the proposed regulations would
require the Board of Health to hold a public hearing on biotechnology proposals,
offering an additional layer of oversight, Taberner said.

   Councilor Robert Vallee said that while the bylaw changes would help Franklin
catch up with its neighboring communities, they may not go far enough.

   ``I would welcome legislation that would put us ahead so we could attract
biotechnology companies,'' Vallee said.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2010


                              138 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2010 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 17, 2010 Sunday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY; Pg. 005

LENGTH: 1553 words

HEADLINE: I am New Jersey | SUBHA BARRY Counting on diversity ;
Former corporate executive wants to level the playing field for everyone

BYLINE: Susan Todd, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   As dusk fell over Chennai, India, on an evening more than two decades ago,
Subha Viswanathan, a strong-willed teenager and blossoming feminist, waited at a
bus stop down the road from her family's home, quietly waging a challenge
against one of the little rules separating girls from boys.

   While she and other girls had to be home before dark, her male cousins and
boys like them were allowed to stay out. To protest the unfair restriction,
Subha waited out the setting sun.

   "I was not going to enter the front door of my home until it was dark,'' she
recalls. "It was something small. I know it sounds ridiculous, but there was a
little pleasure in defying the rule.

   "I realized at a young age,'' she says, "that women had to advocate for
themselves to have the same privileges as men.''

   Subha Viswanathan became Subha Barry, corporate executive, mild-mannered
feminist, cancer survivor, collaborator and a woman described by colleagues and
friends as an effective, passionate leader.

   "She has such confidence and enthusiasm,'' says Lisa Carnoy, a Bank of
America Merrill Lynch executive who worked closely with Barry for five years.
"She's just got such a can-do attitude.''

   After a career in finance and four years as head of diversity and inclusion
at Merrill Lynch, Barry is now playing a key role in Drexel University's Vision
20/20. The ambitious 10-year program will celebrate the centennial of women's
right to vote by bringing together female delegates from across the country for
a mega-dialogue on women's equality and leadership. No subject could be closer
to Barry's heart, and according to people who know Barry, no one may be better
suited for the task.

   "Subha has been deeply committed to gender equality and social equality.
Those are passions of hers,'' says Karen Kaplowitz, a friend and businesswoman
who is working with Barry to select the delegates.

   HONING HER STYLE

   Barry came to the United States from India when she was 21. On a scholarship,
she completed two master's degrees, in accounting and business, at Rice
University in Houston. Although her parents were conservative, education had
always been important, especially to Barry's mother, who was the first female in
her family to go to college.

   Her father was a traveling salesman while her mother, an undeclared feminist
as Barry puts it, ran the household. As much as her mother wanted her daughters
to be educated -- Barry has a sister five years younger than her -- she also
wanted them to be married.

   As Barry prepared to leave for Houston, her parents clung to one tradition,
offering to arrange a suitable match so their oldest daughter could be married
before her studies were completed. Instead, she fell in love with and eventually
married Jim Barry, an American man she met two weeks after arriving at Rice.

   When she graduated from Rice in 1985, Barry went to work with the
International Trading Group in Somerset. She plunged into commodities trading, a
fast-paced, all-consuming world that breeds workaholics. In 1989, she decided to
leave to work as a financial adviser at Merrill Lynch. "It was a very considered
decision,'' she says, "for family and lifestyle.''

   Barry, 48, lives with her husband and their two children, 21-year-old Tara
and 14-year-old Jay, in a woodsy suburban Princeton Township neighborhood.

   Merrill Lynch's culture and training programs appealed to Barry, but she
started her career with a handicap: She lacked a natural network of family and
friends that some of her colleagues depended on to begin amassing clients.
Instead of cold-calling, Barry exhibited a resourcefulness and confidence that
would come to characterize her career. She invited people to seminars where she
introduced them to her expertise and style. It served as one of the primary ways
she collected revenue-producing clients.

   Subha, which is pronounced Sue-baa, is a shortened version of Subhashini. In
India, the name translates to someone who speaks sweetly, but by the mid-'90s,
Barry, who grew up speaking Tamil in India, did not view her accent as an asset.

   With her husband as a patient sounding board, Barry spent a year rehearsing
seminar presentations and client pitches and, often, recording herself. "The
first thing I learned to do was speak slower and enunciate words more clearly,''
she says. "As I began to get fewer hang-ups and have more people come out to the
seminars, it was affirmation that (her practice) was working.''

   REAPING REWARDS

   It wasn't long before Barry was collecting successes the way a baseball
player amasses home runs.

   In 1995, she opened a stock option plan at Merck & Co. At the time, it was
the largest stock option plan started by an individual financial planner. Her
ability to land such business would help redefine the model for how financial
advisers worked, allowing them to partner and, potentially, gain more business.

   "In many ways,'' she says, "I was unafraid to try new things.''

   Not long after initiating Merck's stock option plan, she worked with
Piscataway-based Datanomics to establish the first 401(k) for a midsized
company.

   Meanwhile, she continued landing clients. "I believed the financial adviser
job was to be a translator between the client and the company,'' she says. "My
sweet spot was corporate executives, retirees and widowed women. Being a teacher
to them was wonderful.''

   When a supervisor asked her to manage one of the company's small, local
offices, Barry jumped at the chance. But in 1997, when she was averaging just
four hours of sleep around her busy days at work, she became ill. The stunning
diagnosis: Hodgkin's lymphoma, formerly known as Hodgkin's disease.

   Doctors removed Barry's spleen and started her on a six-month regimen of
chemotherapy. She would get chemo on Thursday afternoons, spend Fridays at home
and return to work on Mondays.

   Work served as a catharsis. "I didn't slow down at all,'' she says, "but I
started to ask myself, "If I had died, what would they have remembered about me?
That I helped people? That I made money?' ''

   The cancer returned in 2000 and Barry remembers thinking, "Life is giving me
a wake-up call.''

   Yet, her drive hardly let up.

   WHAT CLIENTS WANT

   The number of Asians and Indians living around Merrill Lynch's Plainsboro
office gave the area a diversity that ignited Barry's creativity and enterprise.
She remembers thinking, "Why aren't we doing business with these communities?''

   She went to Stanley O'Neal, Merrill's chief executive officer at the time,
and proposed a multicultural business development group. Each community seemed
to have an organization that served as a conduit to its residents. Barry's team
learned what they were, as well as the services and products that would be most
attractive to residents within the communities.

   "Having grown up in a culture that had some deep bias against women made me
aware of how things ought to be. It gave me an innate sense of fairness,'' she
says. "If I'm a community that's successful, give me my due respect. Give me
products I might need.''

   It's that sort of passion and smarts that made Barry successful in Merrill's
multicultural business development efforts and then later as the company's head
of inclusion and diversity, says Carnoy, managing director of equity capital
markets at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

   "I don't think people say "no' to Subha very often,'' Carnoy says. "They want
to partner with her. They want to deliver for her. She is so passionate.''

   NO STOPPING HER

   Friends say it is easy to forget Barry has endured a serious health issue.
She continues to be treated for Hodgkin's lymphoma.

   Barry falls into a small group of patients with Hodgkin's who have the
Epstein-Barr virus present in their tumors. After two relapses of the cancer --
the second occurred in 2003 -- Barry faced limited treatment options. One of the
most promising, which Barry later chose, was a therapy being studied by doctors
at the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston.

   The experimental treatment involves stimulating the patient's immune system
to recognize the Epstein-Barr virus and equipping it to attack, and possibly
destroy, the tumor. The treatments involved exposing Barry's T-cells to the
virus and then giving them back to her as a transfusion. She received her final
treatment in early August.

   "The cancer has been in remission. There's been no progression, no growth of
the tumor,'' says Roger Strair, a hematology specialist at the Cancer Institute
of New Jersey, who has advised Barry on her treatment.

   "She's a woman who has not been at all debilitated by the treatment,'' Strair
says. "If anything, it has empowered her.''

   A NEW DIRECTION

   In 2008, when Merrill Lynch became part of Bank of America, Barry decided to
take her career in a different direction. As she carries out the task of
choosing delegates for Drexel's Vision 20/20, she is also planning a new
business venture involving microfinancing or small loan-making.

   As Barry envisions it, the business would partner industry, high-net-worth
individuals and government, and create a viable source of lending for small
business people. While it's still early, she is optimistic about its prospects.

   "I have a track record of being able to take a good idea,'' she says, "and
creating great traction around it.''

   Susan Todd may be reached at stodd@starledger.com or (973) 392-4125.

GRAPHIC: 1. SUBHA BARRY 2. Subha Barry of Princeton Township, meeting with
trustees of the Cancer Institute of New Jersey Foundation in New Brunswick,
battled Hodgkin's lymphoma for years. 3.Subha Barry, a former executive at
Merrill Lynch, meets with trustees of the Cancer Institute of New Jersey
Foundation in New Brunswick. 4. Barry looks over some information during the
session. CURRENTLY READING: "I'm reading two books, 'One Amazing Thing' by
Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni and 'Stones into Schools' by Greg Mortenson." A
FAVORITE MEMORY OF INDIA: "Mango season. I don't care where else you are in the
world, mangoes don't taste the same. But mango season in India is hot season, so
it's not a time when I like to go now. I have not gone back during mango season
since 1993, the year my father passed away." LAST TRIP TO INDIA: "November 2008.
I try to go at least every other year.'' WHAT KEEPS YOU GOING: "A real desire
and willingness to make change. To say, it's going to be better for my daughter
and the next generation of women. If it can be better here, it will be better in
the rest of the world.'' LESSON LEARNED: "As I did my work in diversity, I found
some real powerful male allies. I often wondered what defining characteristic
made certain men the best allies for women? Was it that they all had teenage
daughters or strong mothers? What I came to realize is they all -- like myself
-- had a strong sense of fairness.' 1. AMANDA BROWN/THE STAR-LEDGER 2-4. PHOTOS
BY MITSU YASUKAWA/THE STAR-LEDGER

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2010


                              139 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 16, 2010 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
Slug uses plant genes to live on sunlight

BYLINE: Amina Khan

BODY:

   Part animal, part plant! This may sound like a tabloid headline, but
scientists say that a green sea slug has managed to incorporate enough algae
parts to easily live off of sunlight, just as a plant does.

   Scientists already knew that a few slugs could eat algae but save the algae's
chloroplasts from digestion and feed off of their energy. Chloroplasts are where
the photosynthesis process of turning light into energy occurs.

   But this was not a self-sustaining system, since most slugs cannot make their
own chlorophyll, a green pigment that fuels the chloroplasts. To get more
chlorophyll, the slugs would have to eat more algae.

   The green sea slug, however, can make its own chlorophyll.

   Scientists at the University of South Florida have identified several algae
genes within the slug's body that are crucial to photosynthesis.

   "This is the ultimate in horizontal gene transfer," said Terry Gaasterland, a
UC San Diego professor and director of the Scripps Genome Center, who was not
involved in the study.

   Once it incorporates algae genes into its system, the green sea slug, which
lives in salt marshes in New England and Canada, passes the genes on to its
offspring. The babies need chloroplasts to make the system work (the slugs don't
have the genetic instructions to produce them on their own). But all a young
slug has to do to acquire such instructions is have a big meal of algae. Once
the chloroplasts are in its system, the slug can make food out of light. It
might never have to forage for algae again, said Sidney K. Pierce, a University
of South Florida biology professor.

   The slugs' success at biologically incorporating another species' genes could
help unlock key advancements in genetic technology, Pierce said.

   "This whole idea of gene transfer is enormously important," said Pierce, who
presented the findings Jan. 7 at a meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology.

   "If we can figure this out, it may help with not only genetic engineering,
but gene therapy."

   --

   amina.khan@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2010


                              140 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2010 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                           January 13, 2010 Wednesday
                               FINAL - 5 EDITION

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 147 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY

BYLINE: - Mara Lee

BODY:

   STATE

   Helix Of New Haven Gets $500,000

   Helix Therapeutics LLC of New Haven has received $500,000 in venture capital
from Connecticut Innovations, the state's quasi-public authority responsible for
technology investing.

   Helix also received $100,000 from a combination of individual investors and
LaunchCapital, a venture capital firm with an office in New Haven. This follows
a $515,000 investment from Connecticut Innovations in March 2009, which was part
of a $965,000 funding round involving LaunchCapital, individual investors and a
line of credit from Webster Bank.

   Helix, which comes out of Yale University research, is trying to find gene
therapies that could treat or cure sickle cell anemia, B-Thalassemia, Hurler
syndrome, Gaucher's Disease or HIV.

   This latest investment in Helix represents Connecticut Innovations' sixth
investment since the state's fiscal year began in July.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2010


                              141 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 6, 2010 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; SQUARE FEET; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1228 words

HEADLINE: Near Boston, Biotech Industry Builds on Fertile Ground

BYLINE: By SUSAN DIESENHOUSE

BODY:

   Companies battling for an edge in the biopharmaceutical industry have $2.3
billion in manufacturing plants in development in the Boston area to produce
genetically engineered drugs.

     For the first time since the early 1990s, new factories  --  not just
expansions of existing ones  --  are going up in this area, according to the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council. In the early '90s, about 20
biopharmaceutical companies with about 2,500 workers built manufacturing plants
in the state, according to the council.

     With development costing about $2,400 a square foot for special materials,
equipment and equipment testing, decisions to build in Massachusetts, where the
cost of living is high, are not made lightly. But biotech companies come here to
mine the region's research and production talent.

     Those already here tend to stay to keep together the teams of scientists,
doctors and engineers who create manufacturing processes to grow living cells
that produce therapeutic drugs. By contrast, traditional drugs are often made by
combining chemicals that react to one another.

     Many biotech businesses want to be in Cambridge or Boston, close to
mentors, colleagues, friends and competitors in the research communities around
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard. But in the last few
years, several companies have developed space  in nearby, less-expensive
suburbs.

     The companies can build a campus with separate buildings for offices, labs,
storage and the factories that must be nearly as clean as a surgical suite to
avoid product contamination. If a factory occupies its own building, it is
easier to control the environment and avoid costly production slowdowns that can
batter a company's image and stock price. Some suburbs approve new projects in
months rather than the years Boston may require.

     Seeking a balance between suburban convenience and proximity to Boston and
Cambridge,  the New York-based Bristol-Myers Squibb Company chose a site about
40 miles west of Cambridge for its largest development: a $750 million,
300,000-square-foot manufacturing and office complex with about 260 workers, a
company spokeswoman said.

     Construction has just been completed on the self-financed project, which
has six buildings. In 2007 the company acquired the 89-acre site at Fort Devens,
a former military base that the state converted into an office and industrial
park. The company expects to have the factory in commercial production in 2011,
said Christopher R. Perley, general manager of the complex.

     ''Massachusetts is supporting life science in places like Devens where it
installed the utilities, wastewater treatment and roads we need,'' Mr. Perley
said.

     This complex gives Bristol-Myers Squibb a chance to become a significant
player in biopharma, said John Boris, managing director for investment research
at Citigroup.

     Bristol-Myers Squibb can now commercially produce the first major biologic
drug  that the company developed itself, Orencia, for rheumatoid arthritis,
rather than contract out production.

     ''Its future growth depends on positioning itself for the biopharma
explosion,'' said Mr. Boris. Compared with chemically based pharmaceuticals,
biologics are in demand because they can slow and even halt the progression of
diseases. ''They are life-saving, targeted medicines,'' Mr. Boris said. But
prices can be 10 times higher, reflecting the cost and expertise needed to
produce them, he said. By 2015, he estimated, biologics could generate $3
billion, about 20 percent of annual company revenue, with half coming just from
Orencia.

     The architect for the new plant is Fluor Enterprises, a unit of the Fluor
Corporation of Irving, Tex. Howard Boman, a senior vice president, said that
creating  a biopharmaceutical plant was very different from other jobs.

     ''It's like designing a fine chemical plant with a hospital on top,'' said
Mr. Boman, in reference to the sanitary conditions required.

     Outside, the plant seems to be a red panel and glass suburban office.
Inside, it is dominated by two steel 30-ton water tanks and six 25,000-liter
stainless-steel bioreactors. These are so large, they hang between floors, and
the ceilings are nearly 30-feet high, said Michael A. Benedetto, the project
executive for Skanska USA Building, the contractor.

     ''These facilities have a top-down layout because gravity helps move
liquids through the system,'' he said.

     To create an uncontaminated environment, walls and floors are made of
easy-to-clean materials like epoxy, urethane and tile that can cost $15 a
square foot compared with the concrete floor of a typical factory, which costs
25 cents a  square foot. During construction, cleanliness was paramount. Pipes
and ducts were sealed during fabrication, transport and construction to keep out
dust and dirt. The building was sealed and special walkways set up for the crew
''to limit boot and mud traffic,'' Mr. Benedetto said.

     Given the cost of building, companies want their facilities to be in
operation quickly. To speed up the process, sections of the factory were built
elsewhere, brought to an assembly plant nearby, then transported to Devens.
During six months, 78 truckloads carried modules of tanks, pipes, instruments,
platforms and stairs on trips that often required special permits, police
escorts and road closings because of load size, he said.

     In suburban Framingham, the Genzyme Corporation has just built a $300
million manufacturing complex and $150 million warehouse facility nearby, said
Henry Fitzgerald, vice president of facilities operations for the
Cambridge-based biotech company. Last month,  Genzyme completed construction on
a self-financed $168 million, 70,000-square-foot factory in the Framingham
Technology Park that is expected to start commercial production in 2011. Genzyme
already occupies one million square feet in 18 buildings there, 15 of which it
owns, he said.

     Framingham approved the new plant in 60 days and invested $12.9 million in
water and sewer upgrades.

     ''It's striking that $13 million helped us make a $300 million investment,
but we can't grow without infrastructure,'' Mr. Fitzgerald said.

     A competitor, Shire Human Genetic Therapies, a unit of Shire, based in
England, recently uprooted from Cambridge to build a $394 million,
545,000-square-foot production complex in Lexington, where construction will be
completed early this year. In Cambridge, its staff was in different buildings
spread over several blocks. ''In Lexington, it had its pick of spaces,'' said
Mr. Boris of Citi.

     Meanwhile, Organogenesis, a company in Canton, Mass., is designing a
54,000-square-foot production plant across the street from its current site,
said Geoff MacKay, the chief executive.

     ''We make living cells that replace tissue injured by accident, disease or
aging,'' he said. ''A wound center can call us at 5 p.m. and we guarantee that
by 8 a.m. the next morning we ship a live product with a 15-day shelf life.

     ''This is one of those rare instances when it doesn't make sense to
manufacture offshore,'' he said.

     He added: ''We have 50 Ph.D. scientists, medical doctors and engineers who
work every day shoulder to shoulder with our manufacturing people.'' He said
that ''we're an M.I.T. spinoff plugged into the academic and scientific
community. We didn't want to lose those ties or our employees.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 20, 2010

CORRECTION:

   An article in the Square Feet pages on Jan. 5 about a construction boom for
the biopharmaceutical industry in Massachusetts misidentified the construction
manager for a development being built by the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company. It is
Parsons, not Skanska USA Building Inc. (Skanska personnel worked with Parsons as
part of the management team.)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Genzyme Corporation, a biotech company, has built a $300
million plant in Framingham, Mass. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ERIK JACOBS FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)
 Bristol-Myers Squibb expects to employ 260 workers at its new plant, which the
company built on a former military base 40 miles from Cambridge, Mass.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB COMPANY)

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2010


                              142 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2010 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                             January 4, 2010 Monday
                                 1-dot Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 891 words

HEADLINE: Cryonics believers aim to come back from the dead

BYLINE: By, Kim Kozlowski

BODY:

   The Detroit News

   Clinton Township - Every year, Paul Hagen travels from Wisconsin to Clinton
Township to pay respects to his father, one of 94 frozen corpses that one day
may outsmart death.

   The father and son were tight. They spoke every day. And Hagen wants to
continue those conversations in the future, when they're reanimated by
yet-invented technology and come back to life. Maybe forever.

   Sounds crazy?

   Not to Hagen or hundreds of other members at The Cryonics Institute, which is
housed in a nondescript industrial park off Interstate 94. Dismissed by
mainstream science, some religions and much of the public, cryonics followers
don't believe this lifetime is long enough and want to come back from the dead.

   And business is good.

   "If there's any possible chance that I might be able to speak with my dad
again, I'd like to do that," said Hagen, 45, who recently became a member at the
Cryonics Institute. "What's the worst that could happen? If I am buried or
cremated, I know I am gone. There is a possibility, however remote, that this
may actually pan out, and I may speak with my family members again."

   Robert Ettinger, a former Wayne State University professor and Clinton
Township resident, founded the institute more than 30 years ago. Unable to
persuade scientists to preserve bodies at low temperatures after death in hopes
of rejuvenation by yet-invented technology, Ettinger did it himself. The
Cryonics Institute opened in Detroit in 1976 before moving in 1993 to Clinton
Township.

   For years, membership was in the single digits, but it has exploded 500
percent since 2000 to 830 worldwide folks who want to preserve themselves, DNA
or pets. The facility has preserved 64 animals, mostly dogs and cats, but a few
birds and a hamster.

   Some credit the Internet for the growth. Others chalk it up to contemporary
advances in science, including research into aging and disease, resuscitation
after deep cooling and regenerative medicine.

   Joseph Kowalsky likens cryonics to "an ambulance to the future" and thinks of
it this way: Most people would have considered someone dead in the 1800s if they
had dropped to the ground of a heart attack.

   But defibrillators and other technologies have evolved to normalize the heart
and allowed many people to live.

   "The whole question of cryonics is, when does somebody die?" said Kowalsky,
an Oak Park resident who is a board member of the Cryonics Institute. "If you
can hold someone in stasis, stop decomposition so that we can find out later
with medical technology if the person is really dead. It may be that person
needed some form of medication, gene therapy, things we may not have even heard
of yet."

   But most regard cryonics as science fiction.

   "It's one of the craziest things I've ever heard anyone wanted to do," said
Ty Martin of Redford.

   Cost higher than burial

   Preparation of the body is a five-day procedure. It begins with keeping the
body as cool as possible before arriving at the facility, to slow decomposition.
Upon arrival, the body is put in a sleeping bag, strapped to a backboard and put
in a cooling box. The body is cooled to 321 degrees below zero before it is
submerged upside down in a tank, known as a cryostat, filled with liquid
nitrogen. Cryostats accommodate several bodies. Two people take daily
measurements of the nitrogen levels to makes sure the bodies stay cold.

   The Cryonics Institute provides services only to members after they are
declared legally dead. Members pay an annual $120 fee or lifetime rate of
$1,200. Preparation and long-term maintenance costs start at $28,000, not
including costs for transportation to the facility. Members typically cover the
cost with a life insurance policy.

   The cost is about 2 1/2 times an average funeral and burial, excluding other
cemetery charges, flowers and other costs, according to the National Funeral
Directors Association.

   But the Cryonics Institute's fees are less than other cryonics facilities,
such as Alcor Life Extension Foundation in Scottsdale, Ariz., which charges
$150,000 for whole-body cryopreservation.

   There also are cryonics facilities in California and near Moscow.

   "We want to make this available to all people," said Ben Best, president of
the Cryonics Institute. "You don't want this to be just for rich people."

   Experts say it's impossible

   Though cryonics has been around since the late '60s, it was in the spotlight
after the 2002 death of baseball legend Ted Williams, whose family was involved
in a legal battle over whether to preserve his body at Alcor.

   Experts, however, say the science is just not there. Currently, it is
possible to store human cells for therapeutic uses such as banked blood or sperm
or embryos created by barren couples through in vitro fertilization, according
to cryobiologists who study how to store cells or small tissues at low
temperatures for an extended period of time.

   "All the scientific data we have today indicates that it is not possible to
successfully store at low temperature relatively large tissues, much less organs
(and) large whole bodies," said John K. Critser, president of the Society for
Cryobiology.

   Even so, people like Luguan Yan, a Miami resident, are not discouraged.

   "Even if it's in a thousand years," said Yan, "I still have hope."

   More information

   Go to cryonics.org to learn more about the Cryonics Institute.

   kkozlowski@detnews.com (313) 222-2024

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2010


                              143 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           December 31, 2009 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                                 SOUTH EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. S-1

LENGTH: 6202 words

HEADLINE: THE TOP SOUTH STORIES FOR 2009

BYLINE: \ Virginia Kopas Joe, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   The new year 2010 has a certain ring to it, doesn't it?

   Its clarion call to promise -- a new decade, another chance to get it right
-- is unlike the dull thud of the fading moments of this year.

   But then a recession will do that.

   Yes, 2009 is a year when the bleak economy dominated the headlines across the
globe, the nation and here at home. The South Hills saw more and more folks
without jobs staying home more and shopping less -- when they did shop, it was
at a growing number of thrift shops -- and using food banks in what one service
provider called "the quiet poverty" of the suburbs.

   Signs of the recession were -- are -- everywhere.

   This year, the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank served a record 100,000
people per month at its 380 pantries. The increase is blamed on more people
losing their jobs -- the jobless rate is 10 percent nationwide and 8.5 percent
here -- as well as growing under employment.

   In Washington County, a record 3,400 families each month are visiting the 35
pantries served by the Greater Washington County Food Bank.

   Accordingly, it's no surprise that the year brought a new cachet to shopping
at thrift shops. A big new St. Vincent DePaul store opened in Castle Shannon,
and it became vogue to wear a "gently" used gown to the prom.

   The one exception to all this newfound penny-pinching: Brides in the South
Hills still spend as if it were 1999. We found weddings bills here match the
national average cost of a $20,000 a pop. But then, romance always blooms -- and
never uses a calculator.

   Then there are the libraries. While threatened closures affect mostly city
neighborhoods -- and have been resolved for now -- the impact sill echoes
through the South suburbs and schools.

   Ironically, 2009 also was distinguished by the G-20 Summit right in our own
back yard. This gathering of global leaders talked about economic matters and
chose Pittsburgh for its meeting. The summit thrust our city into the world
spotlight for two days in late September, but kept us home. While the world
watched the movers and shakers talk money and hype Pittsburgh as a "City of the
Future," commuters and students stayed home, fearing traffic as much as
terrorism.

   It wasn't the moment we thought it would be: Except for student-police
clashes mostly in Oakland, it would have been downright dull.

   The president likes our neighborhoods but as yet has not figured out a way to
fix them.

   School news always makes headlines, but no district made more than West
Mifflin. We reported on rowdy meetings where threats "to take it outside" were
made, controversial coaching changes, an upset at the polls, the abrupt
resignation of the superintendent and a federal lawsuit.

   Then there's the (sob, sob) Steelers. We'll leave that postmortem to our
sports pages, but here we will remind you of how we celebrated those heady Super
days of January on our way to becoming Six-burg. Then a new season began -- at
first as befitting a Super Bowl team -- then late in the season, the team fell
apart.

   Still, at this writing, an astounding five-game losing streak was broken Dec.
20 and there is a sliver of a chance for a playoff berth. Stay tuned.

   Here is a review of a news story from every edition of South this year. We
made our choices on the feedback the news article received and its impact on the
community.

   You can access the full version of these stories by visiting our Web site:
www.post-gazette.com. Go to the search box at the top of page and type in a
name.

   'Eyes right' - March 12 Mt. Lebanon PTA volunteers continue to perform the
yearly eye screenings they have done for more than 30 years at the community's
preschools.

   WHAT HAPPENED: More than 40 PTA volunteers, trained by the Blind & Vision
Rehabilitation Services of Pittsburgh, have screened more than 700 youngsters.

   'Engineer helps brother climb Mount Kilimanjaro' - May 28 Brian Hart, of
Washington, wants to help his younger brother, Brad Hart, see the sunrise from
Mount Kilimanjaro before Brad's eyesight fails. Brad Hart, of Reading, suffers
from a degenerative eye disorder that is causing blindness. The pair prepare to
climb Kilimanjaro, Africa's tallest mountain peak, which was immortalized in
Ernest Hemingway's "Snows of Kilimanjaro."

   WHAT HAPPENED: The brothers and a friend largely succeeded, climbing to
16,000 feet -- about 3,000 feet short of the summit -- in eight days in early
August. They stopped short because shadows were obscuring nearly all of Brad's
remaining vision. The trio raised $40,000 for the Volunteer Optometric Services
to Humanity, a nonprofit organization dedicated to reducing avoidable blindness
in developing countries. For more, visit www.voshpa.org. The men maintain a
blog, which includes videos and photos, at www.act-2009.blogspot.com.

   'History as a hobby' - July 2 To mark Independence Day, we profile a number
of local history re-enactors. And, we attend a re-enactment of an 18th century
wedding at the Oliver Miller Homestead in South Park.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Re-enactors we talked to spent the rest of the warm weather
months going to festivals throughout the region. The history actors sew their
own clothing, using the stitching techniques of the time, and preserve all
traditions.

   'Show goes on at 85-year-old theater' - July 30 The Hollywood Theater on
Potomac Avenue in Dormont gets ready for its second act. The theater is under
new management by Motion Picture Heritage Corp., a nonprofit in Franklin, Ind.,
that rehabs and operates classic cinemas nationwide in partnership with local
communities.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Crowds continue to enjoy classic films at the renovated
theater with its refurbished lobby and balcony, new seats, new screen and
production booth. On Black Friday, Nov. 27, the theater hosted two Christmas
slasher films -- one was the cult classic, "Silent Night, Evil Night" -- in a
fun break from traditional shopping and football. Hundreds attended.

   'Voters create upsets in local races' - Nov. 5 WHAT HAPPENED: Yes, we went
out to vote -- if not in droves. Slightly under 25 percent of eligible Allegheny
County voters turned out to vote in the Nov. 3 general election. We ran complete
results for Allegheny and surrounding counties. Those totals became official
earlier this month and can still be accessed on our Web site,
www.post-gazette.com.

   'Modernettes take the world stage' - May 7 The Modernettes, a dance-twirl
group in the South Hills, wins an incredible sixth world title in what is known
as the Olympics of Baton during a competition in Brussels, Belgium. The group is
made up of girls ages 13 to 23, who each raised about $3,400 to make this year's
trip. They were accompanied by about 100 family and friends.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The world title holders continue to practice many hours a week
at their home base, the Ruby Daugherty and Sherry School of Dance in South Park.
They plan to make another trip to Europe in the spring as they try to hang on to
that prestigious title.

   'High school repairs studied' - Jan. 8 The new year brings serious
discussions on proposals for renovations or new construction at Mt. Lebanon High
School. A series of public meetings kicks off the project. The original school
was constructed in 1930. A six-story addition was built in 1972. No major
updates have been done since.

   WHAT HAPPENED: This month, the school board approved a design development
plan for the high school renovation and authorized start of construction
drawings. The board requested that the Pittsburgh architecture firm Celli-Flynn
Brennan examine recommendations from the Community Advisory Committee, which
conducted a review of the design. The approval of the design development plans
and start of construction drawings marked a significant step forward for the
projected $113.3 million renovation project.

   Here we go Steelers here we go! For three successive Sundays in January, we
join faithful Steelers fans at the Pittsburgh Sports Bar in Castle Shannon to
gauge their reaction as they watch the home team on the road to a record sixth
Super Bowl. We record the high fives and, good reporters that we are, even belly
up to the bar.

   'Fans ready for another Super Bowl run' - Jan. 15 'Fantastic: Outcome never
in doubt' - Jan. 22 'Super stoked' - Jan. 29 WHAT HAPPENED: On Super Bowl
Sunday, Feb. 1, the Pittsburgh Steelers beat the Arizona Cardinals to become the
first team in NFL history to win six Super Bowls. On Feb. 5, "Steelers Nation
celebrates victory" reported the reaction of frenetic fans. We also reported on
the Feb. 3 victory parade through Downtown, which included the Bethel Park High
School Band in the line of march.

   The team started training camp at Saint Vincent College in Unity in July and
August. We reported from there and talked to fans from the South Hills and all
over.

   "We're Steelers Nation" is how West Mifflin native Dan Mrkich, 53, summed up
the pre-season crowds that numbered in the thousands.

   The season started out great. But by this month, fans -- and the team itself
-- were stunned at the team's precipitous fall from grace with a five-game
losing streak. By mid-December, the team and the city were trying to finger out
what exactly went wrong. They were heartened by a last-minute win against Green
Bay Packers on Dec. 20, then another big win against Baltimore on Sunday. It
means there's a remote chance of a playoff berth.

   'Use of libraries booms' - Feb. 5 In the first of a continuing series, we
report on the State of Our Economy and how the use of local libraries has
boomed. This inaugural story hones in on the demand for use of library
computers. At the Carnegie Library of McKeesport, for example, patrons who want
computer time sometimes line up at the doors when the library opens in the
morning.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The awful state of the economy continued -- especially for
libraries, as we saw throughout the year.

   'Washington County opens tourism office' - Feb. 19 Washington County Tourism
Promotion Agency hosts "George Washington" -- in costume -- to spread the word
about the county's merits at one of its newest and most successful venues,
Tanger Outlets in South Strabane.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Despite the economy, outlet managers say business remains
brisk. On Black Friday, shoppers lined up by the hundreds to get into the
74-store outlet mall. On that day, Tanger (rhymes with hanger) had more than
100,000 shoppers, more than on its opening day in September 2008.

   Above: George Washington, representing the Washington County Tourism
Promotion Agency, serves up a 3-foot cherry pie for visitors to the Tanger
Outlets food court on Presidents Day.

   'Finding the perfect dress for less' - Feb. 26 The ugly state of the economy
affects even the search for the perfect prom dress this spring. We talk to mom
and daughter duos, such as Cindy Kleckner and her daughter, Chrissie, of
Brentwood, who find a flock of dresses on sale for just $30. We also preview a
vintage prom fashion show at Mt. Lebanon High School.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Chrissie enjoyed the prom. High school students all over the
South Hills are already shopping for the spring 2010 fashion extravaganza, which
will be here in just a few months.

   Above: Stephanie Smigiel, a senior at Mt. Lebanon High School, looks over
dresses from the 1950s for the school's Vintage Prom Fashion Show.

   'Prospect Park owners address complaints' - March 5

   Some neighbors of the Prospect Park complex in Whitehall worry about the
deterioration they see in the rental housing that surrounds their homes. In
recent years, the buildings, with 1,200 units, have fallen into disrepair New
owner Zul Capital LLC, of Philadelphia, says it is cooperating to improve the
complex.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Progress has been slow, but after a meeting with Zul, borough
officials and police Chief Don Dolfi said the firm is committed to renovating
its property. Zul also promised to better scrutinize its tenants and evict those
who are a nuisance. The firm is working on exterior doors, cleaning up the
property and painting.

   'School closing saddens St. Valentine community' - March 19 The Diocese of
Pittsburgh would not confirm what parents say they have been told: The
close-knit St. Valentine School in Bethel Park will close at the end of the
school year due to declining enrollment, which had dropped to 56 students. "We
thought we were the little engine that could. But this was just too much to
overcome,'' parent Colleen Murray says.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Within days, St. Valentine School was joined by Bishop John
McDowell School in Baldwin Borough, Elizabeth Seton Regional in Sheraden, St.
Titus School in Aliquippa and others on the Catholic school chopping block. All
cuts were blamed on lowered enrollments in troubled financial times. Students
from all of the schools were reassigned to regional parochial schools.

   'Junior-senior prom pairs old and new' - March 26 A prom for juniors and
actual seniors at The Devonshire of Mt. Lebanon pairs students from
Seton-LaSalle High School and residents at the assisted living community for a
night of dancing and fellowship.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Activities coordinators at The Devonshire and the high school
are looking to repeat the inter-generational prom in the new year.

   'Tighten those belts' - April 2 In another of our State of the Economy polls,
we find that vacations and dining out are taking a hit as South Hills residents
cut back in the tough economic times. We also start our Community Forum on this
date, asking readers to comment. Many do, saying these were the top two items
their families would do without this year.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We continued the series at random times throughout 2009. In
early May, we found that despite the recession, brides in the South Hills
continue a national trend of spending more than $20,000 on their wedding day. In
summer, we found that fewer residents were taking exotic vacations. Rather,
local travel agents said, most folks are doing day trips, so-called
"stay-cations" and traveling no farther than 50 miles from home. We found, in
the usually busy season of Thanksgiving through New Year's, that fewer residents
planned to go away.

   This month and last, we reported on the growing need at local food banks in
Allegheny and Washington counties. Jim Guffey, director of South Hills
Interfaith Ministries, called suburban poverty "a quiet poverty."

   'Mental health center defeated' - April 9 Baldwin Township commissioners deny
an application by Mercy Behavioral Health to operate a residential mental health
facility in the township. The proposal had been opposed by some residents. Mercy
had asked for a conditional permit to operate the project at the site of a
former assisted living center.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Mercy did not appeal.

   'Expanded Meadows draws crowds, jobs' - April 16 The Meadows opens its $175
million permanent facility April 15 to raves from more than 10,000 opening-day
patrons and the 1,000 workers at the North Strabane site. In the first five
days' operation, the permanent casino takes in gross revenues exceeding $8
million. Wagers at 3,319 slot machines total about $87.4 million, with payouts
at a rate of about 91 percent.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We continued to track happenings at The Meadows in a series of
stories. The most recent, Dec. 3, found revenue down but the facility a big
local booster. A spokesperson for the Greater Washington County Food Bank said
the casino food drive is what got the bank through a tough year, in which it saw
a 32 percent increase in clients.

   In addition, Las Vegas-based Cannery Casino Resorts, which owns the Meadows,
donated 2.25 acres to North Strabane in September to build a new fire and police
substation.

   'Thrift shops busy in frugal times' - April 23 A new St. Vincent DePaul
thrift store, which announces it will open in May in Castle Shannon, is part of
a growing trend where recession-weary residents shop for bargains.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The store opened, and in the May 7 edition, we told readers
how to donate to this and other such thrift stores. We then checked to see if
the store -- and other discounters-- were favored by bargain hunters this
holiday season. Indeed they were. On Nov. 12, Goodwill of Southwestern
Pennsylvania spokesman David Tobiczyk said, "People of all incomes shop [used
goods] now, whether looking for antiques or just good prices."

   'Report card for Obama's first 100 days' - April 30 In a casual poll, we ask
residents of the South Hills how they grade the new president on his first 100
days.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We found that residents here, much like the two of three
Americans in a national poll, wholeheartedly endorsed the president's early
days. When asked for a letter grade, local residents gave Mr. Obama a B or B+ on
his first report card.

   But this month, as joblessness continues to hover around 10 percent, the war
drags on, a troop surge to Afghanistan is planned and concerns about health care
continue, the president's approval rating in the last month of his first year in
the Oval Office is about 50 percent.

   'New RAD formula may hurt libraries' - May 14 Proposed changes to Regional
Asset District Funding could hurt some libraries, but help others. Under a
proposed formula change, a town such as Mt. Lebanon would lose money, but
Carnegie Library of McKeesport would gain. RAD funding has been helping 44
suburban libraries in Allegheny County since 1994. The formula change would help
those libraries in distress.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Coupled with declining public revenues, inflation and the
recession, the nature of a shrinking city spurred the Carnegie library's board
of trustees in October to order the closing of four branches and the merger of
two in 2010. The action was based on factors contained in a study by Carnegie
Mellon University's Center for Economic Development prepared for the library and
given to the Allegheny County Regional Asset District board. RAD funding is the
library's major source of funds -- $17.6 million this year and the same amount
next year. The board's decision stirred community protests, moved local
politicians to propose financial solutions, and prompted the RAD board to
re-examine.

   The branches targeted for closing: Lawrenceville, Hazelwood, West End and
Beechview; selected to merge in a new location are Knoxville and Carrick.

   Then, on Nov. 24, the libraries were cast a lifeline by City Council when it
agreed to transfer $600,000 to Carnegie, the first step to avoid the closures
and mergers -- at least through the new year. The money comes from a fund the
city uses to pay for vehicle fuel.

   'All atwitter about Tweets' - May 21 South Allegheny School District is part
of a rapidly growing number of school districts and towns using Twitter, a
social networking service. The district is using Twitter to update parents on
school happenings.

   WHAT HAPPENED: South Allegheny and other districts, such as Mt. Lebanon,
continue to use the system to inform residents. For example, Mt. Lebanon used it
to alert parents when a water main beak temporarily closed a school.

   'Class of 2009: What now?' - June 5 Interviews with a cross-section of high
school students from the South Hills offer a window into the world of
18-year-olds grasping the excitement of new schools and jobs. The students also
tell us they were stressed and concerned about the economy.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The students have gone on to new jobs and, for the most part,
have finished their first semester of college.

   'Superintendent mostly works from home' - June 11 West Mifflin Superintendent
Patrick Risha manages the school district of about 3,200 students largely from
his home in Belle Vernon with the apparent permission of the school board.

   The issue comes to light when Phil Shar, longtime coach of the district's
high school girls' basketball team, called Mr. Risha an "absentee
superintendent" after Mr. Shar's coaching contract was reopened by the
superintendent.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Mr. Risha answered all allegations in a story published June
18. He said he worked from home because of weight-related health problems and
that he was awaiting gastric bypass surgery. He also acknowledged that he
ordered the contract of longtime and successful girls' varsity basketball coach
Phil Shar be opened -- in effect firing the coach. Mr. Risha said he took the
action after Mr. Shar made disparaging comments about the superintendent in an
article published in a hometown newspaper. The superintendent acted within the
bounds of his authority.

   At a standing-room-only meeting June 30, the board voted to replace Mr. Shar
by hiring his assistant, Mindy McClelland. The story was the first in what would
be a continuing series about Mr. Risha, at left, the school board and happenings
in school district.

   In November, Mr. Shar scored an upset at the polls when he waged a successful
write-in campaign for a school board seat and replaced an incumbent. Mr. Shar,
who was sworn in this month, said he thought the win came from voters who were
tired of the way Mr. Risha was running the district.

   Then, on Nov. 12, Mr. Risha said he would retire Dec. 23. He had two years
left on his contract. He was given $30,000 in severance. And, before he left
office, the board granted four other administrators contracts, including
severance clauses if they are terminated. On Nov. 20, Assistant Superintendent
Janet Sardon was appointed to fill Mr. Risha's post.

   At a meeting in early December, the first after a much-anticipated shift of
power took place, the board appointed former school director John Donis to an
open two-year seat on the board and named Michael Price as president.

   On Dec. 18, Mr. Shar sued the school district and Mr. Risha over Mr. Shar's
dismissal. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court, seeks his reinstatement as
coach, lost wages and damages.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   '20 kids, counting'- June 18 Steve and Amy Morrison, of Whitaker, celebrate
Father's Day with their five children and some of the 20 children for whom the
couple has been foster parents. The couple was honored as outstanding Foster
Parents of the Year by the Allegheny County Department of Human Services.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We revisited the Morrison family to see how they celebrated
Thanksgiving. "Use paper plates and serve buffet style" was some practical
advice from Mrs. Morrison, who had some two dozen people -- but not all of her
foster kids -- in her dining room that day.

   'Three top jobs cut, one created' - June 25 Steel Valley school board
eliminates three administrative positions and creates but does not fill a new
one. Jobs eliminated included those of Carole Policastro, director of elementary
education, and Diana Borges, director of pupil personnel and special services.
Both women moved back to teaching ranks. Also eliminated was the post of
director of secondary education, which had gone unfilled for a year.

   The board created a job with a long title: director of pupil personnel
services and special services/elementary education.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Diana Borges got the new job.

   'Swimmers cross Channel as fundraiser' - July 9 Mt. Lebanon native Kiersten
Rosenberg. who was on the Villanova University swim team, and two friends plan
to swim across the English Channel to raise money for multiple sclerosis
research to honor a friend who contracted the disease.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Ms. Rosenberg, now of Philadelphia, and her team completed the
crossing -- despite jellyfish and icy waters -- in 11 hours, one minute. They
raised more than $4,000.

   'To Mr. Obama: All I need is air that I breathe' - July 16 In the first of a
series of stories on how residents of the South Hills are getting ready for the
Group of 20 summit, South Allegheny Elementary School in Port Vue has students
write letters to the president. Students ask Mr. Obama to look at issues such as
air pollution. Two of the neighborhoods that make up the South Allegheny
district have significant pollution concerns. A June report from the
Environmental Protection Agency says that Glassport residents have the
fourth-highest risk rate for cancer in the country. The American Lung
Association State of Air report, released in April, said that Liberty has the
nation's worst small particulate pollution.

   WHAT HAPPENED: A spokesperson from the White House called and said that the
president could not visit the school during G-20 but the school would be put on
a list for a future visit. So far, no call.

   'A celebration for many generations' - July 23 Congregations at several
parishes in the South Hills reflect as they prepare to hold their churches'
annual summer festival, generally each congregation's biggest fundraiser. The
festival season is in full swing from mid-July to mid-August.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We visited and photographed several, including one at SS.
Simon and Jude in Scott and at St. Anne's in Castle Shannon, which attracted
thousands.

   'Concerns at casino: parking, traffic' - Aug. 6 The new, opulent 24/7 Rivers
Casino on the North Shore gets ready to open, and we talk to some residents of
the South Hills about the long-awaited, much-debated facility.

   Some were anxious to visit. Retired steelworker John Dindak, mayor of West
Homestead, is among them. The mayor, however, was concerned about traffic,
something he said he does not have to worry about when visiting the Meadows
Racetrack & Casino in North Strabane.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Mr. Dindak said earlier this month that he has gone to the new
casino twice -- but was not a winner. He said he liked the location overlooking
the river and the city. "I was pleasantly surprised at how easy it was to enter,
park and exit," he said. About 2.4 million people of gambling age live within a
50-mile radius of the new casino, and officials say a typical visitor to such a
casino drops about $50.

   'Some suburbanites opt to stay home' - Aug. 13 Pittsburgh is in the midst of
preparing for world focus as the city hosts the G-20 summit Sept. 24 and 25. But
because of security and anxiety about traffic and protesters, many residents of
the South Hills said they planned to stay home those days.

   WHAT HAPPENED: So many commuters stayed home during the G-20 that Downtown
appeared vacant at times. By the weekend, it was all over but the shouting by
students who said they were treated unfairly during earlier protests.

   'Back to school' - Aug. 20 New people, new buildings is the theme for the new
school year in South Hills districts as students head back to class. New
superintendents were in place in the Duquesne, Elizabeth Forward, Mt. Lebanon,
McKeesport and South Allegheny districts, and a new superintendent expected in
South Fayette.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The new South Fayette superintendent is Bille P. Rondinelli,
who earlier in the summer had been named associate superintendent in the Shaler
Area School District.

   Bethel Park had a groundbreaking in October for a new high school, and West
Mifflin Area broke ground in October for a middle school.

   'Board meeting turns rowdy' - Aug. 27 A Boy Scout appeared before the West
Mifflin Area school board to ask permission to work on his Eagle Scout project
on school property. What he got was a look at the adults in the room as they
hurled insults and threats during the meeting, the first held since June, when
the board voted to replace longtime high school girls' basketball coach Phil
Shar with one of his former assistants.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The Scout, Kevin Squires, got approval to go ahead with the
project. But all year long, divisiveness continued on the board and throughout
the community.

   'Young brothers cope with rare disease'

   Sept. 10

   Valerie and Chris Grady, of Upper St. Clair, share the story of their sons
Trent, 2, and Drew, 5, who have Batten disease, an extremely rare and mostly
fatal disease caused by mutations in the soluble protein of body cells. There is
no known cure, and insurance has denied a gene therapy trial for one of the boys
at Cornell University.

   WHAT HAPPENED: We checked back on the Gradys this month to see how the boys
are faring: as well as can be expected. And we reported on how the family is
celebrating the holidays: with vigor and hope.

   'The health of our health care debate'

   Sept. 17

   President Barack Obama delivers a prime-time address to a joint session of
Congress in which he outlines plans for an historic overhaul of the nation's
health care system. We ask residents what they thought about the idea, which
would provide new protections to Americans with insurance, help the nation's
uninsured afford coverage, require most individuals to carry coverage and aim to
slow the growth of medical costs overall. The measure -- estimated to cost
nearly $1 trillion -- would be paid for through reductions in planned Medicare
spending and tax increases. Residents we talked to were divided on the proposal.

   WHAT HAPPENED: A sweeping health care reform bill was passed by the House in
November. The Senate's version was passed on Christmas Eve. The legislation
would impose new restrictions on insurance companies and provide coverage to 31
million Americans, while saving the government an estimated $130 billion over
the next decade, mostly through Medicare cuts and tax hikes. Now the two
versions must merge in a conference committee. That committee will debate the
fate of the so-called public option as well as what combination of taxes will
fund the bill and how the bill addresses government funding of abortion.

   President Obama said the bills meet every criteria his campaign sought.
Still, folks in the South Hills -- like much of the nation -- remain divided on
the issue.

   'Police enlist help for G-20 peace'

   Sept. 23

   Police from several suburban departments say they will assist Pittsburgh
police as the city locks down for G-20 summit Sept. 24 and 25. McKeesport and
Clairton, in the South Hills, are sending officers to assist. Whitehall's canine
officer and dog also will assist. The city says it needs about 4,000 officers to
handle security.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Protesters clashed with police throughout days and nights of
the summit. Some of the biggest confrontations occurred in Oakland and involved
college students as well as the professional anarchists who came to town. A
little more than 200 arrests are made, but no serious injuries were reported and
vandalism was not widespread.

   'Suspension examined'

   Oct. 1

   A week after the suspension of West Jefferson Hills School Superintendent
Terry Kinavey, the investigation into her intervention into the hiring of an
English and reading teacher at Thomas Jefferson High School continues.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Ms. Kinavey faces charges of incompetency, immorality,
intemperance and neglect of duty at a termination hearing before the newly
seated school board. The charges are among those listed as "reasons for
dismissal" in the state School Code, said district Solicitor Ira Weiss. The
immorality charge refers to the nature of her conduct and not personal behavior.

   Mrs. Kinavey has requested an open hearing, which is set for 6 p.m. Jan. 12
in the high school cafeteria.

   The school board on Oct. 6 hired Terry Kushner as substitute superintendent.
Mr. Kushner is the retired assistant superintendent of the Upper St. Clair
School District. He is paid $500 per day with no benefits.

   Mrs. Kinavey had 3 1/2 years remaining on a five-year contract. Payment on
her $124,000 annual salary and benefits was stopped Nov. 18.

   'Making every dollar count'

   Oct. 8

   The recession is abating, it is said, but you would not guess it from the
traffic at local consignment and thrift stores. We talk to several, including
Claudia Richardson who was stocking her consignment store, My House to Yours, in
Pleasant Hills. Ms. Richardson said folks were doing their holiday shopping
early this year and many wanted "something from childhood ...glass Christmas
bulbs like Grandma's."

   WHAT HAPPENED: On Black Friday, the traditional opening day for holiday
shopping, we found that stores in the South Hills -- big box chains and mom and
pop -- were busy but not crazy busy. The National Retail Federation said holiday
sales this year will decrease 1 percent to $437.6 billion.

   'From diagnosis to Discovery'

   Oct. 15

   Walter Breidigan, 52, of Bethel Park, films an episode of "Mystery
Diagnosis," a show on the Discovery Health Channel. Mr. Breidigan, at left, was
chosen after a producer came across his case of systemic capillary leak
syndrome, a disorder so rare that only 32 cases are known worldwide. An attack
of the syndrome resulted in Mr. Breidigan gaining 105 pounds in 24 hours.
Individuals with CLS suffer breakdowns in the integrity of their capillary wall,
allowing fluid to leak out.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The episode has no set date to air but will be broadcast
between January and March. "Mystery Diagnosis" is on at 10 p.m. each Monday on
the Discovery Health Channel. Mr. Breidigan remains healthy, even if the
condition cannot be cured.

   '$317 million for schools gone'

   Oct. 22

   The loss of a potential pot of $317 million statewide, which the governor had
proposed school districts spend on a wide range of uses, affects lots of schools
here and across the state.

   The money no longer is available because the Legislature used the $1.56
billion in the state fiscal stabilization fund -- part of the federal stimulus
package -- for other educational spending.

   WHAT HAPPENED: School districts continue to scramble to fill the gap.

   'Out of the broom closet'

   Oct. 29

   We profile the Pittsburgh Black Hat Society Network, an Internet-based social
network intended to offer support to witches, pagans and others. Members meet in
their homes or at restaurants and discuss topics such as recipes, herbs and
metaphysics.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The group continues, and those interested can learn more by
visiting thepghblackhatsociety.blogspot.com.

   'Lotsa luck'

   Nov. 12

   The next day was Friday the 13th, the third Friday the 13th in 2009. This
triple threat won't occur again until 2015. The Stress Management Center and
Phobia Institute in Asheville, N.C., says an estimated 17 million to 21 million
people in the states are affected by a fear of this date. One of them, Laurie
Ferretti, of Brookline, said she was a child when the death of a camp counselor
on a Friday the 13th cemented her hatred of the day.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The next Friday the 13th to worry about occurs in August.

   'Closing one more blow to Mon Valley'

   Nov. 19

   The announcement that DISH Network will close its 600-person call center in
McKeesport is a devastating blow to a city already saddled with a 10.7 percent
jobless rate. Residents, such as George Branick, 80, say the town has been going
downhill since the 1980s, when he lost his job at National Tube Works.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Brooks Robinson Jr., of the Regional Industrial Development
Corp., which owns the colossal structure that houses the center, said he hopes
to turn over the space to another company. The search for that firm continues. A
first round of employees has gone; the rest leave in March.

   'Pay it forward'

   Nov. 25

   Students from the South Hills and other suburban school districts take on
service projects that benefit the elderly, the lonely, children in the hospital,
needy families, those in homeless shelters and those in the military. We talk to
a number of them, including students at Neil Armstrong Middle School in Bethel
Park who were shopping for the needy at the Target in Trinity Point in
Washington County.

   WHAT HAPPENED: More school service projects continue throughout this
recession-dampened holiday season. California University of Pennsylvania
professor Holiday Adair said that such projects are designed so "children
acquire a sense of empathy."

   'Step-up in war no pleasant present'

   Dec. 10

   Some veterans we talk to did not agree with President Obama's plan to send
more troops to Afghanistan. We ask in a casual poll for some opinions and get
answers such as this one, from Stewart Owens, 84, of Liberty, a veteran of both
World War II and Korean War: "We should pull them all out. We're killing our
boys for a religious war."

   WHAT HAPPENED: Mr. Obama, in an interview Dec. 13 on "60 Minutes," said his
earlier speech at West Point announcing the deployment was the "most emotional"
he had ever made. The 30,000 additional combat troops will be in place by
summer. Americans are divided on the troop surge.

   'Needs up, donations down at food banks'

   Dec. 17

   This year, the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank serves a record 100,000
people per month through a network of 380 pantries and member organizations. The
increase is due to rising unemployment and underemployment and other effects of
the recession, food bank officials say. In the Washington County area, food is
distributed to 35 pantries from the central distribution location of the
nonprofit Greater Washington County Food Bank, which serves more than 3,400
families a month and counting.

   WHAT HAPPENED: The recession continues into a new year, and this holiday
season the food bank workers say flour and sugar is in short supply.

   'Santa's traditional stop continues'

   Dec. 24

   For the past half-century, Santa has made his first stop in the Parkridge
Plan, which straddles Upper St. Clair and Bethel Park. Neighbors back in 1959
thought it would be fun to have the jolly old elf visit their neighborhood
before he started his world run. Residents give him some help, of course, says
Peggy Wolf, an organizer.

   WHAT HAPPENED: Santa, as always, delivered the goods.

   Happy New Year!

NOTES: This look back was based on reports written by staff writers Moriah
Balingit, Janice Crompton, Virginia Kopas Joe, Kate McCaffrey, Mary
Niederberger, Kaitlynn Riely and Maria Scuillo. Also contributing were freelance
writers Jonathan Barnes, Jennifer Goga, Zak Koeske, Ken McCarthy, Kathy
Samudovsky, Margaret Smykla, Jill Thurston and Dave Zuchowski. Photos by
Post-Gazette staff photographers. / Virginia Kopas Joe can be reached at
412-263-1414 or vkjoe@post-gazette.com /

CORRECTION-DATE: January 7, 2010

CORRECTION:

    A photo caption on page S-4 of last week's South had incorrect
identification. The senior citizen couple shown embracing are Regis and Toni
Shalley, who were part of a group renewing wedding vows in February at Paramount
Senior Living in Baldwin Borough.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Volunteer Alisa Nash doing eye screening with Southminster
nursery school pupil Brayden Wertz, 3.\
PHOTO: Engineer Brian helps brother Brad Hart climb Mount Kilimanjaro.\
PHOTO: Michael Henninger/Post-Gazette: From left, \ Max Hanscak, Noel Moebs and
Sarah Olesky participate in a re-enactment of an 18th-century wedding at the
Oliver Miller Homestead in South Park.\
PHOTO: Marquee of Hollywood Theater in Dormont.\
PHOTO: Dan Remely, successful candidate for Mt. Lebanon school board.\
PHOTO: The Modernettes, from South Park.\
PHOTO: Pam Panchak/Post-Gazette: Stephanie Smigiel, a senior at Mt. Lebanon High
School, looks over dresses from the 1950s for the school's Vintage Prom Fashion
Show.\
PHOTO: Lucy Bruce smiles as she talks about her career.\
PHOTO: George Washington, representing the Washington County Tourism Promotion
Agency, serves up cherry pie for visitors to the Tanger Outlets food court on
Presidents Day.\
PHOTO: John Renne, resident of Paramount Senior Living, kisses his wife Sally
after renewal of vows ceremony on Feb. 7. They have been married for 66 years.\
\ PHOTO: The Gradys hold their sons as they wait to ride the fire truck from
their home to the Bower Hill Fire station for a party. \
PHOTO: Walter Kuczma, of West Mifflin, applauds while holding a flag after the
fifth grade chorus performs at Homeville Elementary's ceremony to honor veterans
Nov. 10. Mr. Kuczma served in the Navy aboard the USS Intrepid 914 during WW II.
He belongs to VFW 914.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2010


                              144 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          December 30, 2009 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 44 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about new cancer
treatments based on older ideas misspelled part of the name of the university
that is home to the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics. It is
Johns Hopkins University, not John Hopkins.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 2009


                              145 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 29, 2009 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; FORTY YEARS' WAR; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2735 words

HEADLINE: In War on Cancer, Old Ideas Can Lead to Fresh Directions

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Mina Bissell will never forget the reception she got from a prominent
scientist visiting Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, where she worked. She
gave him a paper she had just published on the genesis of cancer.

     ''He took the paper and held it over the wastebasket and said, 'What do you
want me to do with it?' Then he dropped it in.''

     That was 20 years ago, and ever since, Dr. Bissell and a few others have
struggled for acceptance of what seemed a radical idea: Gene mutations are part
of the process of cancer, but mutations alone are not enough. Cancer involves an
interaction between rogue cells and surrounding tissue.

     The idea seemed messy and unduly complicated. And cancer genes seemed
comparatively clear-cut. So it was often ignored or dismissed as researchers
focused on genes and on isolated cancer cells growing in Petri dishes in
laboratories.

     Now, though, more and more researchers are plunging into those murky
depths, studying tumors in their cellular environments. And, once they do, they
say, they can explain many anomalies of cancer. The new focus on a cancer's
surroundings, researchers say, is a major shift in thinking about why cancer
occurs and how to stop it.

     As yet, the research has not led to cures, and scientists expect the real
fruits of their efforts -- if they occur at all -- will be years in the future.

     But as the war on cancer drags on, nearly 40 years after it began,
scientists say new directions are urgently needed. The death rate has barely
budged for most cancers, and the gene mutation strategy has so far had a limited
effect. That is probably because cancer cells have so many genetic
abnormalities. If one mutated gene is attacked, others take over.

     So some researchers are taking a fresh look at ideas that were dismissed as
folklore -- a blow to the breast might spur cancer, an infection might fuel
cancer cells, a weak immune system might let cancer spread. They also say the
new approach may help explain mysteries, like why the breast cancer rate
plummeted when women stopped taking menopausal hormones. One answer may be that
hormone therapy changes normal cells of the breast and may allow some tiny
tumors to escape from the milk ducts where breast cancer starts.

     The basic idea -- still in the experimental stages -- is that cancer cells
cannot turn into a lethal tumor without the cooperation of other cells nearby.
That may be why autopsies repeatedly find that most people who die of causes
other than cancer have at least some tiny tumors in their bodies that had gone
unnoticed. According to current thinking, the tumors were kept in check, causing
no harm.

     It also may mean that cancers grow in part because normal cells surrounding
them allowed them to escape. It also means that there might be a new way to
think about treatment: cancer might be kept under control by preventing healthy
cells around it from crumbling.

     ''Think of it as this kid in a bad neighborhood,'' said Dr. Susan Love, a
breast cancer surgeon and president of the Dr. Susan Love Research Foundation.
''You can take the kid out of the neighborhood and put him in a different
environment and he will behave totally differently.''

     ''It's exciting,'' Dr. Love added. ''What it means, if all this
environmental stuff is right, is that we should be able to reverse cancer
without having to kill cells. This could open up a whole new way of thinking
about cancer that would be much less assaultive.''

     Some companies are taking note. Genentech, for example, is investigating
the way some skin, ovarian, colon and brain cancers signal surrounding cells to
promote cancer growth. The company has an experimental drug that it hopes might
block this signaling.

     Others are studying drugs like statins or anti-inflammatory drugs that may
act by affecting signals between surrounding cells and cancers. But, says Dr.
Robert Weinberg, a cancer researcher at M.I.T., ''this is not a clearly
articulated scientific agenda, in large part because we still know too little
about these signals and how their release is controlled.''

     The researchers are cautious. They, more than anyone else, know the blind
alleys of cancer research over the past few decades. And no one is suggesting
that controlling a tumor's environment will, by itself, cure cancer.

     And they are not discounting cancer-causing genes. But even some who have
made their careers studying cancer genes say a tumor's environment can no longer
be ignored.

     ''I am an unabashed cancer geneticist,'' said Dr. Bert Vogelstein, director
of the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics at John Hopkins. ''The
genetic alterations in the cancer cells are the proximate cause of the
malignancy.''

     But, Dr. Vogelstein said, ''one cannot fully understand that disease unless
one understands'' the tumor's environment.

     It can be a reciprocal interaction, especially as cancers grow and become
more advanced. The surrounding cells might let cancers start, but once they do,
cancers appear to change the surrounding cells to help fuel the cancers' growth.

     ''This notion is not a flash in the pan that will come and go,'' said Dr.
Weinberg, who, in 1981, discovered the first human oncogene, a naturally
occurring gene that, when mutated, can cause cancer.

     And Dr. Bissell is now hailed as a hero, with an award named after her.

     ''You have created a paradigm shift,'' the Federation of American Societies
for Experimental Biology wrote in a letter announcing that she had won its 2008
Excellence in Science award.

     Struggle for Acceptance

     Dr. Barnett Kramer, associate director for disease prevention at the
National Institutes of Health, recently discovered a paper that startled him. It
was published in the medical journal The Lancet in 1962, about a decade before
the war on cancer was announced by President Richard M. Nixon. In it, Dr. D. W.
Smithers, then at Royal Marsden Hospital in London, argued that cancer was not a
disease caused by a rogue cell that divides and multiplies until it destroys its
host. Instead, he said, cancer may be a disorder of cellular organization.

     ''Cancer is no more a disease of cells than a traffic jam is a disease of
cars,'' Dr. Smithers wrote. ''A lifetime of study of the internal-combustion
engine would not help anyone understand our traffic problems.''

     Dr. Kramer said: ''I only wish I had read this paper early in my career.
Here we are, 46 years later, still struggling with issues this author predicted
we'd be struggling with.''

     Others say the time was just not right for such ideas. They know, they say,
because they were excoriated when they advanced them.

     Dr. Bissell said she had struggled for decades to find acceptance for her
ideas.

     She was not alone. In 1975, not long after Dr. Bissell started her work,
another scientist published a hard-to-refute seminal experiment that seemed to
indicate that cancer cells could become normal in the right environment.

     The scientist, Beatrice Mintz  of the Fox Chase Cancer Center in
Philadelphia, inserted mouse cancer cells into early mouse embryos. The embryos
grew into mice with cells from the cancer, a teratocarcinoma, and cells from the
original embryo. The cancer cells had certainly been incorporated into the mouse
embryo, but they were defanged, developing normally. Yet the same cancer cells
will spread and kill an adult mouse if they are injected under the skin or into
the abdomen.

     ''It was a sensational experiment,'' Dr. Mintz said.

     Dr. Bissell also thought the experiment was sensational. But she wanted to
know why cells would become deadly tumors in one location and not another.

     At the time, she was working with Rous sarcoma virus, or R.S.V., which
causes fatal tumors in chickens when inserted into cells. Then, one of her
postdoctoral fellows, Dr. David Dolberg, unearthed papers suggesting that the
cancer virus would behave differently in chicken embryos.

     They injected the virus into embryos. The old papers were correct.

     ''That meant that if you put the virus in cells in an embryo, you don't get
cancer,'' Dr. Bissell said. ''And if you put it in a chicken, you do.''

     Dr. Bissell and Dr. Dolberg's paper -- the one the visiting scientist
dropped into a wastebasket, thinking it ridiculous and clearly wrong -- was
published in the journal Nature in 1984. The scientist was not the only one who
scoffed, Dr. Bissell said.

     She interprets the response to the sociology of science.

     ''The people who are successful become vested in their ideas,'' Dr. Bissell
said. ''It becomes extraordinarily difficult for new ideas to find their way.''

     But, to her, the R.S.V. experiments were a clarion call.

     Sleeping Cells Awakened

     Next, Dr. Bissell did an experiment that gave some credence to an old idea
oft dismissed.

     Over and over, doctors and patients tell stories of injuries that seemed to
spur a cancer. A blow to the breast, an operation, and suddenly cancer takes
off. It may mean nothing, just an effort to explain the seemingly inexplicable.

     Yet some stories end up in publications. For example, says Dr. Michael
Baum, emeritus professor of surgery at University College London, there is a
report of eight men with advanced testicular cancer who had surgery to remove
the tumors, followed by ''a sudden and dramatic exacerbation of the disease.''
Animal studies find similar effects, Dr. Baum says.

     And in breast cancer, he says, observations of women whose cancer
accelerated after breast surgery as well as mathematical modeling indicates that
surgery at the site of a dormant tumor can spur it to grow. In some unusual
cases, chronic inflammation, as can happen with hepatitis B and C viruses, for
example, is thought to lead to cancer. The current hypothesis is that chronic
liver inflammation can disrupt the normal architecture of cells, allowing
cancers that might have lain dormant to thrive.

     Most likely, if wounding or inflammation has an effect, it happens only
under unusual conditions and if tiny cancers are already present at the site of
the wound.

     That is what happened when Dr. Bissell did an experiment in chickens.

     She knew that when she injected a chicken with R.S.V., the cancer-causing
virus, the bird would develop a huge tumor at the site of the injection. But Dr.
Bissell had injected the virus into the bird's blood. Why weren't there tumors
everywhere?

     She reasoned it through.

     ''What do we do when we inject?'' Dr. Bissell asked. ''Well, we make a
wound. We injected the virus in one wing and got a huge tumor. What would happen
if we injected the virus in one wing and wounded the other wing?''

     She tried it. A huge tumor grew where she had injected the virus and
another grew on the other wing where she had made the wound.

     Researchers are not saying that infections or simple cuts or most cancer
operations will cause cancer or make an existing cancer spread. Most likely, if
there is an effect, it happens only if tiny cancers are already present at the
site of the injury.

     ''Obviously it's more than just surgery,'' Dr. Love said. ''The majority of
people who have surgery don't have a problem.''

     But, she said, the findings tell her that if people have a choice of more
or less invasive surgery -- laparoscopy versus open surgery, for example -- they
might want to choose the less invasive.

     ''And I say this as a surgeon who likes to put her hands in and muck
around,'' Dr. Love added.

     Dr. Kramer said that made sense, but added: ''Would I avoid operations? No.
I don't think the evidence is good enough.''

     A bigger risk than wounding, Dr. Bissell says, is simply aging, in which
cell architecture crumbles, which is why people get wrinkles, for example. And
it may be why most cancer occurs in older people.

     ''I think that this is unfortunately a fundamental problem in cancer,'' Dr.
Bissell said. ''Unfortunately, we haven't discovered what to do about aging.''

     One of the great mysteries about breast cancer is what to make of tiny
tumors known as ductal carcinoma in situ, or D.C.I.S. They are so small they
cannot be felt and so common they account for about a quarter of tumors found
with mammograms. But, studies show, most stay in the milk ducts, where they
originate, never spreading to the rest of the breast where they can become
lethal.

     The problem is that doctors cannot tell the dangerous D.C.I.S. tumors from
the harmless ones, so they treat all such tumors as if they were dangerous.

     Dr. Kornelia Polyak of Harvard Medical School, like many others, thought
she could solve the problem. From the start, she thought, dangerous D.C.I.S.
might have genes different from those of D.C.I.S. that remains harmlessly
enclosed in milk ducts. Dangerous D.C.I.S. would look like invasive breast
cancer cells and harmless D.C.I.S. would not.

     But, she found, D.C.I.S. cells looked just like cells from aggressive
breast cancers -- gene expression patterns, mutations and cell maturation
patterns were all the same.

     ''It's just that one tumor is inside the duct, and the other is outside the
duct,'' Dr. Polyak said.

     ''That was surprising,'' she added. ''Why is it D.C.I.S. if it looks like
invasive cancer?''

     She looked at cells surrounding D.C.I.S.

     The first thing she noticed was that when D.C.I.S. broke free of a milk
duct, the duct's outer layer had broken down. It could be that the duct falls
apart because the cancer is bursting out. Or it could be that the cancer is
escaping the duct because the outer layer disintegrated -- which is what her
research showed. As long as the milk duct is intact, D.C.I.S. cells cannot
escape.

     She also found that when breast tissue is injured, wound healing can
destroy the crucial outer layer of ducts, allowing D.C.I.S. to escape. That is
what happens in animals, and it is her hypothesis that it happens in humans.

     It made her ask about biopsies. They are unavoidable, as she knows, because
she recently had one herself. And they cannot be a huge factor in causing cancer
or millions of women would be getting breast cancer at the site of their
biopsies -- and they are not.

     Still, she worries. ''Frankly, this has not been studied extensively,'' Dr.
Polyak said. ''People don't like to bring it up.''

     A Nudge Over Time

     The dream of many cancer researchers is to find a way to prevent a cancer
cell's environment from allowing it to grow. They could then prevent cancer.

     And in one situation, they might have accidentally stumbled upon a possible
method.

     The discovery began with a surprise in 2003, when breast cancer rates in
women 50 and older suddenly fell 15 percent, after the rates for all women had
steadily risen since 1945. The pattern held in 2004.

     The drop was traced to the release of a large federal study in 2002 that
reported that Prempro, a hormone therapy for menopause that was supposed to keep
women healthy and protect them from heart disease, actually made heart disease
more likely and slightly increased the risk of breast cancer.

     Sales plunged after the report was released, as millions of women stopped
taking the drug.

     But cancer is supposed to take years, even decades, to develop. How, some
asked, could cancer rates drop so quickly?

     Could it be possible that the hormone treatment somehow changed the
environment of naturally occurring cancer cells and let them progress?

     Dr. Karla Kerlikowske, professor of medicine, epidemiology and
biostatistics at the University of California, San Francisco, now believes that
is a possibility. A combination of estrogen and progestin, like that in Prempro,
may change the structure and activity of breast tissue, Dr. Kerlikowske finds,
making breast tissue denser, a condition that has nothing to do with how breasts
look or feel. Breast density is a cellular structure seen on mammograms and has
long been associated with higher cancer risk.

     Her hypothesis is that hormone therapy can give ''that little bit of nudge
over a long enough period to promote breast cancer,'' Dr. Kerlikowske said.

     For some cancers destined to be aggressive, she suggests, it probably makes
no difference if a woman takes hormones because the cancer will spread anyway.
But she thinks that ''for the average person, it becomes very important.''

     That, of course, makes it even harder to figure out cancer.

     ''If it was easy,'' Dr. Polyak said, ''we would have done it already.''

     Forty Years' War: Articles in this series are examining the struggle to
defeat cancer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: December 30, 2009

CORRECTION:

   Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about new cancer
treatments based on older ideas misspelled part of the name of the university
that is home to the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and Therapeutics. It is
Johns Hopkins University, not John Hopkins.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Dr. Mina Bissell has been lauded for creating ''a paradigm
shift'' in the study of the genesis of cancer.(PHOTOGRAPH BY NATHAN WEYLAND FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)
Dr. Kornelia Polyak has studied tiny tumors in the breast that may or may not
turn dangerous.(PHOTOGRAPH BY GRETCHEN ERTL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
PHOTOS (A19) TIMELINE: Shifting Ideas on Cancer: Cancer treatment has been
guided by prevailing ideas of what cancer is and how it spreads, as illustrated
by the treatment of breast cancer(Sources: Michael Baum
Current Surgery
''History of Surgery for Breast Cancer: Radical to the Sublime,'' by Alvin M.
Cotlar, et al.
 Annals of Oncology)(A19)

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2009


                              146 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           December 29, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1688 words

HEADLINE: In New Way to Edit DNA, Hope for Treating Disease

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Only one man seems to have ever been cured of AIDS, a patient who also had
leukemia. To treat the leukemia, he received a bone marrow transplant in Berlin
from a donor who, as luck would have it, was naturally immune to the AIDS virus.

     If that natural mutation could be mimicked in human blood cells, patients
could be endowed with immunity to the deadly virus. But there is no effective
way of making precise alterations in human DNA.

     That may be about to change, if a powerful new technique for editing the
genetic text proves to be safe and effective. At the University of Pennsylvania,
Dr. Carl June and colleagues have used the technique to disrupt a gene in
patients' T cells, the type attacked by the AIDS virus. They have then infused
those cells back into the body. A clinical trial is now under way to see if the
treated cells will reconstitute a patient's immune system and defeat the virus.

     The technique, which depends on natural agents called zinc fingers, may
revive the lagging fortunes of gene therapy because it overcomes the inability
to insert new genes at a chosen site. Other researchers plan to use the zinc
finger technique to provide genetic treatments for diseases like bubble-boy
disease, hemophilia and sickle-cell anemia.

     In principle, the zinc finger approach should work on almost any site on
any chromosome of any plant or animal. If so, it would provide a general method
for generating new crop plants, treating many human diseases, and even making
inheritable changes in human sperm or eggs, should such interventions ever be
regarded as ethically justifiable.

     Zinc fingers are essential components of proteins used by living cells to
turn genes on and off. Their name derives from the atom of zinc that holds two
loops of protein together to form a ''finger.'' Because the fingers recognize
specific sequences of DNA, they guide the control proteins to the exact site
where their target gene begins.

     After many years of development, biologists have learned how to modify
nature's DNA recognition system into a general system for manipulating genes.
Each natural zinc finger recognizes a set of three letters, or bases, on the DNA
molecule. By stringing three or four fingers together, researchers can generate
artificial proteins that match a particular site.

     The new system has been developed by a small biotech company, Sangamo
BioSciences of Richmond, Calif., and, to some degree separately, by academic
researchers who belong to the Zinc Finger Consortium.

     Sangamo was founded in 1995 by Edward O. Lanphier II, a former executive
with a gene therapy company. Reading an article by  Aaron Klug, the British
crystallographer who discovered the zinc finger design, he saw the technique's
potential for genetic manipulation. He bought a company Dr. Klug had founded and
worked with him and  researchers like Carl O. Pabo to improve the technique and
develop combinations of zinc fingers to match any sequence of DNA letters.

     ''We now have a full alphabet of zinc fingers,'' Mr. Lanphier said, ''but
when we started the company it was like typing a novel with two fingers.''

     Zinc finger proteins have many potential uses. One is to link them to
agents that turn on or turn off the gene at the site recognized by the fingers.

     More powerfully, the zinc fingers can be deployed as a word processing
system for cutting and pasting genetic text. Two sets of zinc fingers are
attached to a protein that cuts the DNA in between the two sites matched by the
fingers. The cell quickly repairs the break but sometimes in a way that disrupts
the gene. This is the approach used in destroying the gene for the receptor used
by the AIDS virus to gain entry to white blood cells.

     Or, if DNA for a new gene is inserted into a cell at the same time as the
zinc fingers that scissor the DNA, the new gene will be incorporated by the
cell's repair system into the DNA at the break site. Most gene therapy
techniques use a virus to carry new genes into a cell but cannot direct the
virus to insert genes at a specific site.

     ''I think it's a broadly applicable technology which has already allowed
experiments that would not have been possible before,''  said J. Keith Joung, a
biologist who designs zinc finger proteins at the Massachusetts General
Hospital.

     Daniel F. Voytas, a plant geneticist at the University of Minnesota, said
the zinc finger technique would allow breeders to change the oil composition of
any plant, the types of carbohydrates produced or the way carbon dioxide is
captured. ''We can go in and make any change we want to any plant species,'' Dr.
Voytas said.

     Zinc fingers can also be used for ''trait stacking,'' the positioning of
several beneficial genes at a single site. This avoids heavy regulatory costs
because genetically altered plants must be tested for safety for each site that
is modified.

     The zinc finger technology has taken many years to prepare because of the
difficulty of designing the fingers and also of preventing them from cutting the
genome in the wrong places. Only a handful of laboratories are currently using
the technique, but proponents expect to see rapid growth.

     The Zinc Finger Consortium, founded by Dr. Joung and Dr. Voytas, makes the
method available free, and researchers need only pay for materials. But there
are some 200 steps in Dr. Joung's recipe for making zinc fingers, and it takes
time and dedication to do them all correctly.

     The alternative is to buy zinc fingers. Sangamo has a commanding patent
position and has licensed Sigma-Aldrich, a large life science company in St.
Louis, to make zinc finger proteins for researchers. Sigma-Aldrich's charge for
a zinc finger protein that cuts the genome at the site of your choice is
$39,000, with a discount for academic researchers. Zinc fingers that cut
well-known human genes cost $12,000. Sigma-Aldrich has used the technology to
generate rats with genetic defects that mimic human disease. A schizophrenic rat
can be had for $100.

     David Smoller, president of Sigma-Aldrich's biotechnology unit, licensed
the technology from Sangamo in 2006 when he felt the company had proved it
worked. ''This technology is just amazing,'' Dr. Smoller said. ''It's a game
changer.''

     Sangamo has licensed the use of zinc fingers to Dow Agrosciences for
creating new crop plants, and has reserved medical uses for itself. It has four
Phase 2 clinical trials in progress, including treatments for diabetic
neuropathy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

     In an ambitious effort to cure AIDS, Sangamo and the University of
Pennsylvania started a clinical trial in February.

     The AIDS virus enters the T cells of the immune system by latching on to a
receptor called CCR5, but about 10 percent of Europeans have a mutation that
disables the CCR5 gene. People who inherit two disabled copies of the gene do
not have CCR5 on the surface of their T cells, so the AIDS virus has nothing to
grab. These people are highly resistant to H.I.V.

     In the zinc finger approach, the patient's T cells are removed, and zinc
finger scissors are used to disable the CCR5 gene. The treated cells are allowed
to multiply, then reinjected into the patient. In experiments with mice, the
treated cells turned out to have a strong natural advantage over the untreated
ones, since those are under constant attack by the AIDS virus.

     Whether or not zinc fingers will make gene therapy practical remains to be
seen. ''It's a little too early to know since clinical trials are in their early
stages,'' said Dr. Katherine A. High, a hemophilia expert at the University of
Pennsylvania.

     Dr. Matthew H. Porteus, a pediatric geneticist at the University of Texas,
said, ''I think it has the potential to solve alot of the problems that have
plagued the gene therapy field.'' But Dr. Porteus noted that even the most
carefully designed zinc fingers seemed to do some snipping away from their
target site, a potentially serious safety problem.

     Zinc fingers could be the gift that stem cell researchers have been waiting
for. Stem cells taken from a patient may need to be genetically corrected before
use, but until now there had been no way of doing so.

     Dr. Rudolf Jaenisch, a stem cell expert at the Whitehead Institute in
Cambridge, Mass., reported in August that he had successfully singled out three
genes in induced embryonic stem cells with the help of zinc finger scissors
designed by Sangamo. ''This is a really important tool for human embryonic stem
cells,'' Dr. Jaenisch said. The technology has not yet reached perfection. Some
of the zinc fingers Sangamo provided ''worked beautifully,'' he said, but some
did not.

     Zinc fingers may also make technically possible a morally fraught procedure
that has been merely a theoretical possibility -- the alteration of the human
germ line, meaning the egg or sperm cells. Genetic changes made in current gene
therapy are to body cells, and they would die with the individual. But changes
made to the germ line would be inherited. Many ethicists and others say this is
a bridge that should not be crossed, since altering the germ line, even if
justifiable for medical reasons, would lower the barrier to other kinds of
change.

     Several scientists were reluctant to discuss the issue, or dismissed it by
saying that even zinc fingers did not meet the error-free standards that would
be required for germ-line engineering. But zinc finger scissors are so efficient
that only 5 to 10 embryos need be treated to get one with the desired result.
This could make it practical to alter the germ line.

     Since the germ lines of rats and zebra fish have already been altered with
zinc finger scissors, ''in principle there is no reason why a similar strategy
could not be used to modify the human germ line,'' Dr. Porteus said. The kind of
disease that might be better treated in the germ line, if ethically acceptable,
is cystic fibrosis, which affects many different tissues.

     The disease could be corrected in unfertilized eggs, using the zinc finger
technique, Dr. Porteus said. But he added, ''I don't think our society is ready
for someone to propose this.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Cut and Paste: Biologists are developing a powerful technique
for making precise modifications to DNA.
ZINC FINGERS are naturally occuring proteins, each built around a single ion of
zinc. Each zinc finger recognizes a set of three letters of DNA, and several can
be chained together to match a particular site on the genome.
 ALTERING DNA: Zinc fingers can be linked to other proteins that do useful work,
like activating a gene or cutting a specific DNA sequence. The cell quickly
repairs the break, but if DNA for a new gene is inserted into the cell it may be
incorporated into the repair. (Source: Nature) (pg.D6)

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2009


                              147 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            December 27, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; West; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 3114 words

BODY:

   Arlington

   VACCINATION CLINIC - The town's Health Department will hold a swine flu and
seasonal flu vaccination clinic for residents on Wednesday from 5 to 8 p.m. in
the Red Gym at Arlington High School. The swine flu, or H1N1, vaccine will be
available to all residents ages 6 months and older. Seasonal flu vaccinations
will be available for all residents ages 3 and over. Forms to fill out before
the clinic are available at www.arlingtonma.gov/health. There is no fee for the
vaccination, but residents with insurance are being asked to bring their cards
to the clinic, since the Health Department is able to bill insurance companies
for the cost of administering the shots.

   - Brock Parker

   TALKING TO PARENTS - A Cambridge-based clinical psychologist, Katy Aisenberg,
will speak on ``Perfectionism and Parenting'' during a public presentation at 7
p.m. Jan. 13 at Lesley Ellis School, a private elementary school at 41 Foster
St. For more information, call 781-641-5987 or visit www.lesleyellis.org.

   - Brock Parker

   BELMONT

   SCHOOL ISSUE RESOLVED - Thanks to some legislative maneuvering, the town has
resolved its difficulties with the state over a property-tax increase approved
by residents last spring for the Wellington Elementary School project. Assistant
Town Administrator Jeffrey Conti said the Legislature and the governor last week
approved a bill, brought forward by Belmont legislators, that should clear up a
misunderstanding over the town's language in a Proposition 2 1/2 debt-exclusion
question and Town Meeting warrant article. This fall, the state's Bond Council
and the Department of Revenue had informed Belmont officials that the wording of
the ballot question and warrant article might have confused voters. Conti said
that if not resolved, the matter could have held up expected payments of $12.4
million from the Massachusetts School Building Authority toward the construction
of a new Wellington School, which is set to begin next month. - Christina
Pazzanese

   Brookline

   COOLING IT - Despite chilly weather, the campaign to cool the climate is
heating up with the Jan. 10 launch of the Community Climate Challenge. Brookline
2010, a joint effort by Climate Change Action Brookline and the Board of
Selectmen's Climate Action Committee, is challenging the town to shrink its
waste, go on a carbon diet, and think about other steps, large and small, to
reduce its carbon footprint. The group is taking over the new Brookline Access
TV studios at 46 Tappan St. near the Brookline Hills MBTA stop from 3 to 5 p.m.
for a showing of ``Green on the Inside.'' There will also be a raffle for those
who bring a recent electric bill, along with information about renewable energy,
their carbon footprint and home energy audits. The Fireplace, Brookline's first
certified Green Restaurant, and others will cater food, and Perfect Pitch, one
of the high school's a cappella groups, will perform. For details, visit
www.climatechangeactionbrookline.org. - Andreae Downs

   TRANSPORTATION MEMBER BUMPED - Some local activists have expressed puzzlement
at the selectmen's recent vote to replace a high-profile member of the town's
Transportation Board. Northeastern professor Peter Furth, who is known for his
work with students designing streets and bikeways, and is a member of the town's
Bicycle Advisory Committee, lost his seat on the Transportation Board on Dec.
15, when selectmen voted unanimously to appoint consultant Bill Schwartz in his
place. Furth had clashed with the business community about a proposal to remove
parking spaces on Carlton Street in favor of a bike lane (he lost), but Harvey
Bravman, president of the Coolidge Corner Merchants Association, said the group
had not held it against him. ``I thought, of all the people on that board, he
had the most expertise,'' Bravman said. ``We'll miss him.'' Selectwoman Nancy
Daley, the board's chairwoman, said Furth ``did a great job and worked very
hard, but he stirred up controversy generally,'' perhaps because of his strong
opinions. Selectwoman Betsy DeWitt said she endorsed Schwartz because the board
needed to be ``more effective. It has a history of bumpy operations.'' - Andreae
Downs

   PROGRESS ON SCHOOL PERMIT - The Planning Board has recommended approval of a
special permit to allow the expansion of the Runkle School as planned. Neighbors
of the school, which has students in kindergarten through Grade 8, had
questioned some zoning calculations by the building commissioner, so the school
district applied for the special permit to resolve the issue. The special permit
application's next step is a Jan. 14 hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
School officials have said the need for more space is becoming acute as
elementary school enrollments continue to surge. Neighbors counter that the new
building would be too big and remove essential parking spaces. - Andreae Downs

   SHOVELING REQUIRED - Local homeowners can face fines of $25 to $100 if the
sidewalks around their properties are not cleared within 30 hours of a
snowstorm. Landlords with five or more apartments have just three hours to clear
the sidewalks. For details, check the town's website, www.brooklinema.gov, under
the Winter Guide link, or call 617-730-2610.

   - Andreae Downs

   VACATION WEEK OFFERINGS - Parents worried about how their children will spend
the February school break can check the Brookline Adult and Community Education
vacation week offerings at www.brooklinema.gov or by calling 617-730-2700.
Registration for the program, which covers children ages 5 to 11, is open until
Feb. 1. - Andreae Downs

   Lexington

   SENIOR CENTER RENOVATIONS - The kitchen and dining room at the town's Senior
Center will be closed beginning tomorrow for construction and renovations, with
the project expected to last for three to four weeks. However, the Council on
Aging's Meals on Wheels program will continue while the kitchen is closed. The
remodeling work at the center, 1475 Massachusetts Ave., includes installation of
a new sink, disposal, and countertops along with new flooring and a retractable
wall. - Brock Parker

   THE ART OF MEDICINE - An author and clinical professor of surgery at Yale
University, Dr. Sherwin Nuland, will be speaking in town on Jan. 10. Nuland is
the author of ``How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter,'' which won the
National Book Award and spent 34 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list.
His talk, ``The Art & Science of Medicine: Today and Tomorrow,'' will begin at 2
p.m. in Cary Hall, 1605 Massachusetts Ave., as part of a Cary Memorial Library
health and wellness series funded by a gift from Shire Human Genetic Therapies.

   - Brock Parker

   NEEDHAM

   PRIVATE DETECTIVE HIRED - Frustrated by the pace of the official
investigation into Nicholas Burdett's death last spring in Miami Beach, his
parents have hired a former head of the Massachusetts State Police Crime Lab to
evaluate the evidence. The Needham resident was fatally shot March 16 by an
off-duty sheriff's deputy, who told police he was walking on the beach with his
girlfriend when Burdett tried to rob them at knifepoint. Burdett had arrived in
Florida earlier that day with his girlfriend to celebrate his 25th birthday, his
family said. Abbe Rifkin, the local prosecutor handling the case, said she hopes
to have the inquiry wrapped up by next month. ``The timing is commensurate with
the thoroughness of the investigation, and I am not going to complete this
investigation until I have absolutely every piece of information to make my
determination,'' she said. The family's request to preserve evidence for
independent evaluation is not unusual, she said, adding that her investigators
will accommodate the request as best they can. - Lisa Kocian

   NEWTON

   NEW LEASH ON LIFE - The city's Parks and Recreation Commission has voted to
allow dogs to run off-leash in a portion of Cold Spring Park for another three
months. The pilot program's extension, which passed by a 5-3 vote at the board's
meeting Monday night, will keep Newton's only off-leash dog area open through at
least March 31. Some residents have complained about letting dogs run loose in
the park, citing uncollected droppings and the risk of attack by out-of-control
animals. Advocates for the arrangement say they hope to work with the incoming
mayor early next year to establish a permanent policy allowing dogs to run
off-leash on some public parklands.

   - Erica Noonan

   WALTHAM

   A WALK IN THE DARK - If you're looking for something to do on a cold winter's
night, try ``Living in the Dark: A Full Moon Tour,'' 7 p.m. Wednesday at Gore
Place, 52 Gore St. The tour, led by a guide in early 19th-century costume, looks
at life in the days before electric lights, according to the historical
property's description. Admission is $12, $8 for children ages 6 to 12; the tour
is not recommended for younger children. The fee includes light refreshments,
and parking is free. For reservations, call 781-894-2798; more details are
available at www.goreplace.org.

   - Lisa Kocian

   WATERTOWN

   IN WITH THE NEW, AND THE OLD - It will be a low-key affair when the town's
newly elected officials are formally introduced next week. The Town Council's
current vice president, Mark Sideris, who will be taking the gavel as the
panel's new president, said the oath of office ceremony and reception will be
held Jan. 4 at 7 p.m. in the Watertown Free Public Library on Main Street. Town
Clerk John Flynn will swear in the new and returning councilors, School
Committee members, and library trustees during the public ceremony. A free
reception with light refreshments will follow. - Christina Pazzanese

   WATERTOWN

   DIG OUT THOSE HYDRANTS - The Fire Department is asking residents to lend a
hand by helping make sure hydrants are accessible during the winter months. The
department encourage students, businesses, and other volunteers to choose a
specific hydrant to watch over, and clear it of snow and ice promptly following
a snowstorm. Lieutenant Thomas Thibeau said department staffers routinely shovel
out hydrants, but with 950 in town, the task is a long process, and having to
clear a hydrant of snow during an emergency can eat up precious time. ``We do
them, but it takes us three or four days,'' said Thibeau. Middle and high school
students can earn four hours of community service credits if they commit to
monitoring one hydrant and 10 hours if they select two, he said. For more
information, call Thibeau at 617-605-8317 or e-mail him at tommytwfd@aol.com

   - Christina Pazzanese

   WESTON

   MONEY FOR DESERVING CAUSES - The town's Community Preservation Committee is
accepting applications for grants to support new projects. For a project to be
eligible, it must involve affordable housing, open space or historical
preservation efforts. The money may also be used to maintain or improve
recreation facilities if Community Preservation Act funds were used to acquire
them. Tracey Lembo, the town's community preservation administrator, said as of
June 30, the town had accrued $6.3 million in CPA funds, which are drawn from an
annual surcharge on local property taxes and matching grants from the state. The
committee reviews applications and holds a public hearing before deciding which
projects it will recommend for approval by Town Meeting in May, said Lembo.
Applications and funding guidelines are on the town's website,
weston.govoffice.com. The deadline to file is Feb. 1.

   - Christina Pazzanese

   AROUND THE REGION

   Ashland

   NO FOOD AT SCHOOL PARTIES - The School Committee has voted to ban food during
in-school birthday celebrations. The new policy adopted at the committee's Dec.
17 meeting states: ``In addition to the nutritional concerns of all students,
there are several members of our school community that have food allergies or
are diabetics. To safeguard the health and wellness of all our students while
they are in our care, as well as to be inclusive of all students in our
celebrations, birthday celebrations held during the school day may not include
food.'' Students can still acknowledge their birthdays in other ways, such as by
bringing in pencils, stickers or donating a book to the class. This is already
the practice at elementary schools, ``and it was felt that making this practice
concrete through policy was a good idea,'' said School Committee member Marcia
Reni. At the same time, the board loosened some of its restrictions regarding
food at events that occur outside the school day, because it does not have the
staff to restrict what happens at concession stands on the weekends, for
instance. ``We felt that it is not the responsibility of the School Committee to
dictate food choices to adults from the general community,'' Reni said. To read
the policy in full, visit www.ashland.k12.ma.us.

   - Rachel Lebeaux

   BEDFORD

   HEARING ON HANSCOM - The Massachusetts Port Authority will hold a public
meeting for local residents regarding the status of the proposed Hangar 24
demolition and construction project at Hanscom Field. During the hearing, slated
for Jan. 7 at 6:30 p.m. in the Hanscom Civil Air Terminal, 200 Hanscom Drive,
Massport representatives will provide an update on plans to demolish the
existing structure and build a service facility for corporate jets, which
numerous local groups have opposed. Contact Dorothy Steele at
dsteele@massport.com with questions about the meeting. - Nancy Shohet West

   LINCOLN

   CAUTIONARY TALE FOR ELDERS - Local seniors are being warned to take extra
precautions with their money following the exploitation of a Lincoln couple.
Lettie McLeod, of Tewksbury, pleaded guilty last week to stealing more than
$10,000 from a Lincoln couple who had employed her for several years. The
couple, who were not identified by the Middlesex district attorney's office,
hired McLeod as a personal assistant. When their health began to decline, they
moved into an assisted-living facility and McLeod began to use their ATM card
for personal purchases. Lincoln and Concord police collected surveillance
footage of McLeod using the couple's ATM card in May 2008 and arrested her
several months later. McLeod was ordered to pay $10,000 in restitution, and was
sentenced to one year in prison, with the sentence suspended for two years. -
Adam J.V. Sell

   BONDS FOR GROVES COMPLEX - The Massachusetts Development Finance Agency
announced last week that it has issued $117 million in tax-exempt bonds to help
finance the Groves in Lincoln, a residential complex for ages 62 or older. The
168-unit facility will include eight units set aside for income-eligible
residents. The Groves is scheduled to open in late spring, and nearly 80 percent
of its units have been reserved. - Adam J.V. Sell

   MILLIS

   THEFTS AT FAMILY BUSINESS - A local police detective and members of a
regional law enforcement consortium, the Norfolk County Police Anti-Crime Task
Force, on Dec. 18 arrested the son and grandson of Collt Manufacturing Inc.
owner Lottie Ward on charges they had stolen company equipment. Ward contacted
the Millis officer, Detective Domenic Tiberi, a few months after determining
that one of the company's dies, a tool weighing hundreds of pounds and worth
tens of thousands of dollars, was missing. Tiberi said Ward suspected that her
son, Thomas Cordell Sr., 56, and grandson Thomas Jr., 26, had stolen the tool
after leaving their jobs at the company's Main Street factory several months
ago. Tiberi obtained a search warrant to enter an Attleboro manufacturing
facility and allegedly found the die as well as hundreds of thousands of the
shoelace loops that it produces. The loops, which include versions used on
military boots, make up the bulk of Collt's business. In addition, police
searched a business the Cordell father and son had recently started in
Woonsocket, R.I., and allegedly found another large quantity of the boot loops.
Tiberi said he believes the Cordells were going into competition with the family
operation. The two men were arraigned on Dec. 18 on multiple charges, including
conspiracy, larceny of trade secrets, and larceny over $250. Tiberi reported
that Ward ``was thrilled'' at the outcome of his investigation. ``She's just
glad to get that die back.''

   - Megan McKee

   SOUTHBOROUGH

   SKATING RINK ALMOST READY - After years of planning and fund-raising, the
town's Recreation Department and the Friends of Southborough Recreation are
hoping to announce the official opening of the new skating area this week, at
the Fayville Fields property on Center Street. Recreation director Doreen
Ferguson has spearheaded the project, working with the Friends group to raise
money to help cover the $3,000 estimated cost of materials. A major fund-raising
effort for the cause was this year's Thanksgiving Gobble Wobble Run, according
to Ferguson. The sheet of ice measures 50 feet by 100 feet. Both Recreation
Department and Department of Public Works officials said the Fayville Field rink
will be a safer alternative to the Neary Pond public skating site used in recent
years, which the town has faced difficulty maintaining and making smooth enough
for skaters. The Recreation Department will use its page on the municipal
website, www.southboroughtown.com, announced the official opening date and a
schedule for the rink. A grand opening event is being planned for Jan. 9,
featuring hot chocolate, food, and skating for local residents. - Jennifer Roach

   STOW

   MATH TEAMS SCORE WELL - Nashoba Regional High School's A and B math teams
finished 12th and 23d, respectively, in the recent Harvard-MIT Mathematics
Tournament, according to the school's page on the district website,
www.nrsd.net. The tournament drew 335 students on 63 teams from private and
public schools within 75 miles of Harvard University and MIT, with the
competition taking place in early November. - Matt Gunderson

   WESTBOROUGH

   APARTMENT COMPLEX SOLD - AvalonBay Communities has sold its 280-unit
apartment complex at Interstate 495 and the Mass. Turnpike to a Dallas-based
company, Invesco Real Estate. The new owner announced Monday that it had
purchased the property on behalf of one of its pension fund clients. According
to state land records, the site sold for $40,875,000. In the sale, Simon Butler
and Biria St. John of Cushman & Wakefield represented Invesco, a company that
manages $25.6 billion in real estate investments. The Flanders Hill complex is
97 percent leased, officials said. Construction on the project began when Avalon
received approval from the town in 2001, with 25 percent of the units set aside
for income-eligible tenants under the Chapter 40B affordable housing program.
Flanders Hill is the larger of two AvalonBay complexes in Westborough; Avalon
West, on Charlestown Meadow Drive, is still owned by the developer. - Jennifer
Roach

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2009


                              148 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            December 27, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; West; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 3161 words

BODY:

   Ashland


   NO FOOD AT SCHOOL PARTIES - The School Committee has voted to ban food being
brought in for student birthday celebrations. The new policy adopted at the
committee's Dec. 17 meeting states: ``In addition to the nutritional concerns of
all students, there are several members of our school community that have food
allergies or are diabetics. To safeguard the health and wellness of all our
students while they are in our care, as well as to be inclusive of all students
in our celebrations, birthday celebrations held during the school day may not
include food.'' Students can still acknowledge their birthdays in other ways,
such as by bringing in pencils, stickers or donating a book to the class. This
is already the practice at elementary schools, ``and it was felt that making
this practice concrete through policy was a good idea,'' said School Committee
member Marcia Reni. At the same time, the board loosened some of its
restrictions regarding food at events that occur outside the school day, because
it does not have the staff to restrict what happens at concession stands on the
weekends, for instance. ``We felt that it is not the responsibility of the
School Committee to dictate food choices to adults from the general community,''
Reni said. The full text of the policy has been posted online at
www.ashland.k12.ma.us. - Rachel Lebeaux


   Bellingham

   PRESCHOOL FAIR - The Moms Club of Medway/Bellingham (which also includes
mothers from Millis and Blackstone) invites the public to attend a free
preschool fair on Jan. 7 from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. in the Bellingham Public
Library's community room. Representatives from preschools in Bellingham, Medway,
and surrounding towns will answer questions and provide information to parents
seeking education options for the 2010-2011 school year. To learn more about the
fair, call 508-966-1470. The Bellingham library is at 100 Blackstone St. -
Rachel Lebeaux

   FRAMINGHAM

   TALK OF REORGANIZING SCHOOLS - A proposal to restructure Framingham's school
system that is slated to be presented to the public next month could include
creating new districts for the schools. In a memo recently sent to parents and
posted on the district's website, www.framingham.k12.ma.us, Superintendent
Steven A. Hiersche said the plan is the recommendation of a committee that set
out to determine whether Framingham can ``gain educational and financial
advantages by shifting the way students are assigned to schools.'' A series of
meetings to provide details of the proposal will start with the superintendent's
presentation to the School Committee on Jan. 5, during the board's regular
meeting at the high school. On Jan. 6 and 7, the superintendent will brief
school district staff members. Forums for the public to go over the proposals
are planned for 7 p.m. on Jan. 11 in the Fuller Middle School cafeteria, and on
Jan. 14 in the Framingham High School auditorium. - Matt Rocheleau

   Franklin

   HELP MOVE MUSEUM - The Franklin Historical Commission is seeking the help of
residents in preparing to move the town's history museum from its space on
Washington Street to its new home. On Tuesday, the commission is planning a work
session at the Washington Street location and is asking interested parties to
help pack and label items for transfer to the new museum space on West Central
Street, formerly the home of the town's senior center. Those who wish to
participate can call commission member Alan Earls at 508-528-6930 or e-mail
alan.earls@comcast.net, or member Del Arnold at 508-528-0867 or delarn@aol.com
for more details.

   - Rachel Lebeaux

   HOLLISTON

   FLU VACCINE CLINICS - The Board of Health is holding a free seasonal flu
vaccine clinic for all town residents age 18 and older in Town Hall tomorrow
from 5 p.m. to 6 p.m. and Tuesday from 12 p.m. to 1 p.m. No appointment is
necessary. Call 508-429-0605 for more information. - Megan McKee

   MEDFIELD

   STATE NOTES GAPS IN WATER REPORT - The state Department of Environmental
Protection issued a notice of noncompliance to the town's Water Department this
month in connection with information that was missing from its annual report on
contaminant levels in drinking water. Ed Coletta, spokesman for the DEP, said
last week that the department has confirmed that Medfield's water is safe,
however. While the town's report covering 2008 did not submit detection levels
for substances such as lead, coliform bacteria, chlorine, and trihalomethanes (a
compound in solvents and refrigerants), among other potential contaminants,
Coletta said the DEP has determined levels were below hazardous levels last
year. ``We don't consider this a gross inadequacy,'' Coletta said of the missing
information. ``We will allow them to put the combined detection-level data into
their 2009 report.'' Town Administrator Michael Sullivan said Medfield switched
its method of generating the report last year from an outside contractor to
municipal staff. The omission, he said, was probably a result of the change. -
James O'Brien

   Medway

   RED SOX TICKETS - The town's Community Education program is offering tickets
to three Boston Red Sox games next season to local residents. Seats have been
reserved for the May 30 game against the Kansas City Royals, for June 2 vs. the
Oakland Athletics, and Aug. 19 vs. the Los Angeles Angels, with prices ranging
from $50 to $70. Residents can order as many tickets as they like, and
transportation between Medway Middle School and Fenway Park is included in the
price. For more details, call 508-533-3222 ext. 2200 or visit
www.medwayschools.org and click on ``Community Ed.'' - Rachel Lebeaux

   MILFORD

   WALDEN WOODS CHANGE - Selectmen have agreed to endorse Eastland
Partners/Stoneridge LLC's bid to change the age restriction for Walden Woods, a
165-unit residential development off Cedar Street. Stoneridge had originally
received a special permit that included a restriction limiting sales to those 55
and older. At the Dec. 14 selectmen's meeting, Joseph Antonellis, a lawyer
representing the developers, said his clients want to remove the age restriction
from the special permit to promote speedier sale of the units. To compensate for
the change, the developers proposed building new athletic fields on town-owned
land on Cedar Street. The selectmen's approval provides some support for the
developers' to application to the Planning Board to amend the special permit.

   - Kathleen E. Moore

   MILFORD

   ANOTHER TRY TO REVAMP FIRE STATION - The Board of Selectmen has decided to
renew its efforts to convert an abandoned fire station at 3 South Main St. into
a private residence, despite rejection of the proposal last month by the town's
Zoning Board of Appeals. Selectmen voted Dec. 14 to resubmit a variance
application to the Planning Board as well as the zoning panel, hoping to gain
one more vote from the appeals board next time around. According to Town Counsel
Gerry Moody, converting the property into a residential unit requires a formal
variance, since the lot does not meet square footage standards. The previous bid
was struck down last month when it failed to garner the four votes from the
Zoning Board of Appeals required for a variance, Moody said. The tally was three
in favor to one opposed, with the fifth member abstaining. The application seeks
to allow a private developer, Seaside Builders Inc., to move forward with the
conversion. Moody said he expects the Planning Board to hold a public hearing
next month, while the zoning board's hearing is likely to take place in
February. - Kathleen E. Moore

   MILLIS

   THEFTS AT FAMILY BUSINESS - A local police detective and members of a
regional law enforcement consortium, the Norfolk County Police Anti-Crime Task
Force, on Dec. 18 arrested the son and grandson of Collt Manufacturing Inc.
owner Lottie Ward on charges they had stolen company equipment. Ward contacted
the Millis officer, Detective Domenic Tiberi, a few months after determining
that one of the company's dies, a tool weighing hundreds of pounds and worth
tens of thousands of dollars, was missing. Tiberi said Ward suspected that her
son, Thomas Cordell Sr., 56, and grandson Thomas Jr., 26, had stolen the tool
after leaving their jobs at the company's Main Street factory several months
ago. Tiberi obtained a search warrant to enter an Attleboro manufacturing
facility and allegedly found the die as well as hundreds of thousands of the
shoelace loops that it produces. The loops, which include versions used on
military boots, make up the bulk of Collt's business. In addition, police
searched a business the Cordell father and son had recently started in
Woonsocket, R.I., and allegedly found another large quantity of the boot loops.
Tiberi said he believes the Cordells were going into competition with the family
operation. The two men were arraigned on Dec. 18 on multiple charges, including
conspiracy, larceny of trade secrets, and larceny over $250. Tiberi reported
that Ward ``was thrilled'' at the outcome of his investigation. ``She's just
glad to get that die back.''

   - Megan McKee

   NATICK

   AMBULANCE CHANGES OPPOSED - Monday's Board of Selectmen meeting was standing
room only when almost 40 Natick firefighters turned out to show their opposition
to the possible privatization of the town's ambulance service, which is now run
by the Fire Department. The assistant town administrator has been studying both
privatization and regionalization of the service since March at the behest of
the Board of Selectmen, though the report has not been finalized. ``We have more
people asking questions than we have people to answer them,'' Selectman Joshua
Ostroff said after the meeting. Still, he said, ``keeping things status quo
sometimes requires as much research as changing things.'' A clearer picture
should be ready for discussion at the Jan. 25 selectmen's meeting, Ostroff said.
While some officials believe that privatizing the ambulance service could save
the town money, the firefighters contend that the service actually adds money to
the town's coffers, since ambulance runs are billable. Furthermore, they say,
the medical care provided by firefighters with years of experience and training
cannot be matched by employees of private companies.

   - Megan McKee

   NORFOLK

   BUDGET SHORTFALL ON WARRANT - A Special Town Meeting, tentatively planned for
Jan. 12, will ask residents to shift $75,000 from some municipal accounts to
cover an unexpected shortfall that occurred when the state recently cut prison
mitigation funds. Norfolk was allotted $380,000 in past years as payment for
hosting three correction facilities, and providing public safety services for
them. Last year, the amount was cut in half, and the payment for this fiscal
year was eliminated last month. The town has already spent some of the money it
was expecting in reimbursement, selectmen have said. Norfolk hosts the state's
largest prison, MCI-Norfolk, and two smaller Department of Correction
facilities.

   - Michele Morgan Bolton

   PLAINVILLE

   HELP KEEP HYDRANTS CLEAR - As they concluded business for the year last week,
selectmen issued a reminder about the importance of keeping fire hydrants free
of snow so public safety personnel can reach them quickly, if needed. Officials
asked residents to help by shoveling snow from the hydrants near their homes.
Residents are also reminded that Plainville's winter overnight parking ban is in
effect from 1 a.m. to 5 a.m. through May.

   - Michele Morgan Bolton

   UPTON

   MAILBOXES STAYING PUT - The Board of Selectmen has opted not to take up the
town postmaster's recommendation that freestanding mailboxes along a stretch of
Main Street be replaced by permanent posts set in the sidewalks. The boxes were
the subject of a proposed ban this spring, when Kenneth Glowacki, the town's
treasurer and tax collector, suggested that the current boxes, typically on
posts sunk into buckets of cement, were not only eyesores but a hindrance to
handicapped accessibility, and a problem during wintertime plowing. Town Meeting
members voted down the ban on May 7. Kenneth Picard, chairman of the Board of
Selectmen, said Postmaster Jonathan Graves's recommendation this month raised
the possibility the town would have to dig up and cement the boxes in place
again if they are damaged by plows during the winter. Mail carrier delivery,
instead of mailboxes, is not an option, Picard said, because the stretch of Main
Street is too small to warrant its own route. One possible solution, Picard
said, would be a community mailbox instead of individual units. ``There will
have to be more discussion,'' Picard said. - James O'Brien

   WRENTHAM

   SCOUTS TO COLLECT TREES - Boy Scout Troop 131 will conduct its annual
Christmas tree recycling drive as a service project again this year. To
participate, place a $10 donation in a sealed envelope and attach it to the
bottom of the tree with a rubber band; if paying by check, make it payable to
Troop 131. The collection date is Jan. 9, when trees must be placed on the curb
near the street before 8 a.m. The rain date is Jan. 10. For safety reasons,
scouts cannot accept trees with tinsel, flocked trees, trees with nails,
artificial trees, wreaths with metal shape wires, or trees with any other metal
attached. For more information or questions, call Alan Plantamura at
508-384-0457 or e-mail him at Alan.Plantamura@verizon.net

   - Michele Morgan Bolton

   Around the Region

   Arlington

   TALKING TO PARENTS - A Cambridge-based clinical psychologist, Katy Aisenberg,
will speak on ``Perfectionism and Parenting'' during a public presentation at 7
p.m. Jan. 13 at Lesley Ellis School, a private elementary school at 41 Foster
St. For more information, call 781-641-5987 or visit www.lesleyellis.org.

   - Brock Parker

   Derry, N.H.

   SAY GOODBYE TO AL - Squeaky-voiced meteorologist Al Kaprielian, a fixture on
the local airwaves for 26 years, will deliver his last forecast on MyTV on
Thursday. The exuberant, 48-year-old native of Natick, Mass., who has earned a
devoted following with his quirky forecasts, lost his job because of staff
cutbacks at the Derry station. Kaprielian, now a Merrimack resident, said he
hopes to catch on with another local station. - Tom Long

   Lexington

   THE ART OF MEDICINE - An author and clinical professor of surgery at Yale
University, Dr. Sherwin Nuland, will be speaking in town on Jan. 10. Nuland is
the author of ``How We Die: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter,'' which won the
National Book Award and spent 34 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list.
His talk, ``The Art & Science of Medicine: Today and Tomorrow,'' will begin at 2
p.m. in Cary Hall, 1605 Massachusetts Ave., as part of a Cary Memorial Library
health and wellness series funded by a gift from Shire Human Genetic Therapies.

   - Brock Parker

   LINCOLN

   CAUTIONARY TALE FOR ELDERS - Local seniors are being warned to take extra
precautions with their money following the exploitation of a Lincoln couple.
Lettie McLeod, of Tewksbury, pleaded guilty last week to stealing more than
$10,000 from a Lincoln couple who had employed her for several years. The
couple, who were not identified by the Middlesex district attorney's office,
hired McLeod as a personal assistant. When their health began to decline, they
moved into an assisted-living facility and McLeod began to use their ATM card
for personal purchases. Lincoln and Concord police collected surveillance
footage of McLeod using the couple's ATM card in May 2008 and arrested her
several months later. McLeod was ordered to pay $10,000 in restitution, and was
sentenced to one year in prison, with the sentence suspended for two years. -
Adam J.V. Sell

   NEEDHAM

   PRIVATE DETECTIVE HIRED - Frustrated by the pace of the official
investigation into Nicholas Burdett's death last spring in Miami Beach, his
parents have hired a former head of the Massachusetts State Police Crime Lab to
evaluate the evidence. The Needham resident was fatally shot March 16 by an
off-duty sheriff's deputy, who told police he was walking on the beach with his
girlfriend when Burdett tried to rob them at knifepoint. Burdett had arrived in
Florida earlier that day with his girlfriend to celebrate his 25th birthday, his
family said. Abbe Rifkin, the local prosecutor handling the case, said she hopes
to have the inquiry wrapped up by next month. ``The timing is commensurate with
the thoroughness of the investigation, and I am not going to complete this
investigation until I have absolutely every piece of information to make my
determination,'' she said. The family's request to preserve evidence for
independent evaluation is not unusual, she said, adding that her investigators
will accommodate the request as best they can. - Lisa Kocian

   NEWTON

   NEW LEASH ON LIFE - The city's Parks and Recreation Commission has voted to
allow dogs to run off-leash in a portion of Cold Spring Park for another three
months. The pilot program's extension, which passed by a 5-3 vote at the board's
meeting Monday night, will keep Newton's only off-leash dog area open through at
least March 31. Some residents have complained about letting dogs run loose in
the park, citing uncollected droppings and the risk of attack by out-of-control
animals. Advocates for the arrangement say they hope to work with the incoming
mayor early next year to establish a permanent policy allowing dogs to run
off-leash on some public parklands.

   - Erica Noonan

   SOUTHBOROUGH

   SKATING RINK ALMOST READY - After years of planning and fund-raising, the
town's Recreation Department and the Friends of Southborough Recreation are
hoping to announce the official opening of the new skating area this week, at
the Fayville Fields property on Center Street. Recreation director Doreen
Ferguson has spearheaded the project, working with the Friends group to raise
money to help cover the $3,000 estimated cost of materials. The sheet of ice
measures 50 feet by 100 feet. Both Recreation Department and Department of
Public Works officials said the Fayville Field rink will be a safer alternative
to the Neary Pond public skating site used in recent years, which the town has
faced difficulty maintaining and making smooth enough for skaters. The
Recreation Department will use its page on the municipal website,
www.southboroughtown.com, to announce the official opening date and a schedule
for the rink. A grand opening event is being planned for Jan. 9, featuring hot
chocolate, food, and skating for local residents. - Jennifer Roach

   WALTHAM

   A WALK IN THE DARK - If you're looking for something to do on a cold winter's
night, try ``Living in the Dark: A Full Moon Tour,'' 7 p.m. Wednesday at Gore
Place, 52 Gore St. The tour, led by a guide in early 19th-century costume, looks
at life in the days before electric lights, according to the historical
property's description. Admission is $12, $8 for children ages 6 to 12; the tour
is not recommended for younger children. The fee includes light refreshments,
and parking is free. For reservations, call 781-894-2798; more details are
available at www.goreplace.org.

   - Lisa Kocian

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2009


                              149 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            December 25, 2009 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 863 words

HEADLINE: Some state tax credits go to prospering firms

BYLINE: By Bruce Mohl, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   More than half the $25 million in tax credits doled out to 28 firms earlier
this week by the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center went to three that were
already prospering without extra help from the government - Genzyme Corp., Shire
Human Genetic Therapies, and Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Giving breaks to private corporations when the state is being forced to slash
budgets and eliminate programs might strike some as an unwise expenditure. But
officials say the incentives - built into a $1 billion life science initiative
signed into law by Governor Deval Patrick in 2008 - will eventually pay off.

   Top officials in the Patrick administration said the 28 companies' tax
credits, which can reduce corporate tax bills or even be sold back to the state
for cash, will help create 918 jobs in Massachusetts over the coming year. And
within five years, officials say, income taxes generated by the new jobs should
cover the cost of the credits given to the businesses.

   ``Even in a time of constrained resources, this is the type of thing we need
to continue to do,'' said Jay Gonzalez, Patrick's administration and finance
secretary.

   Shire PLC, whose Human Genetic Therapies unit is in Lexington, reported $317
million in profit through the first nine months of this year and received nearly
$6.3 million in tax credits. Cambridge's Genzyme, with $399 million in profit
over the first nine months, received $6 million in tax credits. Lexington's
Cubist, with profit of $25 million through the first nine months, won $1.74
million in tax credits.

   None of the companies could be reached for comment yesterday.

   Greg Bialecki, Patrick's economic development chief who chairs the
Massachusetts Life Sciences Center board with Gonzalez, said the tax credits
handed out this week were targeted at some of the state's biggest life science
companies because those companies were pledging to create the most jobs in the
coming year. Many of the companies are already receiving significant state aid.

   There is growing concern within the Patrick administration and the
Legislature about the rising cost of state tax credits and whether they are
being handed out in a consistent manner. A legislative subcommittee is currently
analyzing the panoply of state tax credits, and Bialecki says the administration
is conducting its own review. Officials say some changes could be proposed
during the budget process next year.

   Tax credits have been enacted piecemeal in Massachusetts industry by
industry, and they can vary quite dramatically. For example, the tax credits
awarded to life science companies this week are very different from the tax
breaks awarded to producers who come to Massachusetts to film movies.

   The life science law, designed to keep one of the state's strongest economic
sectors growing, authorized the issuance of $25 million in annual tax credits
for 10 years. Demand for the inaugural round of tax credits was far greater than
$25 million. The Life Sciences Center received 88 applications for tax credits
from companies seeking a total of $241 million in tax breaks.

   The award process for life science tax credits lasted eight months.
Applications were scrutinized and credits were steered to companies that pledged
to generate jobs in 2010. Officials say companies that fail to live up to their
job commitments will be subject to so-called clawback provisions, effectively
the withdrawal of the tax credits. The life science tax credits can be used by
recipients to reduce dollar-for-dollar their state tax bill or can be sold back
to the state.

   The film tax credit, by contrast, is far more open-ended. Any movie producer
who shoots a film or commercial in Massachusetts is entitled to a credit equal
to 25 percent of whatever they spend. The credit can be used to offset taxes
owed or it can be sold to third parties or to the state to generate cash. Film
tax credit recipients face no job-creation requirements and their identity or
how many credits they are receiving is not revealed.

   The high-wattage Tom Cruise-Cameron Diaz film ``Knight & Day,'' which filmed
in Massachusetts during the summer and fall, is widely believed to be the most
expensive movie shot here to date. If the budget in Massachusetts reached $100
million, the film's producers could receive a credit of $25 million, the same
amount of tax credits that the state set aside this year for the entire life
science industry.

   Bialecki said the film and life science tax credits are different because
their purpose is different. He said life science is already a well-established
industry in Massachusetts so tax credits are needed to help businesses grow. He
said tax credits also supplement other support programs for the industry.

   The movie business, in contrast, is an industry being grown from scratch in
Massachusetts and needs tax credits generous enough to lure movie producers
here, he said.

   ``It's a different strategy,'' Bialecki said. ``I know Tom Cruise wasn't here
three years ago.''

   Bruce Mohl is editor of CommonWealth, a public policy magazine published by
MassINC and available online at CWunbound.org. He can be reached at
bmohl@massinc.org Todd Wallack of the Globe staff contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2009


                              150 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                          December 23, 2009 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: Shire seeks to market Fabry drug

BYLINE: Robert Weisman,

BODY:

   The British drug maker Shire PLC is seeking Food and Drug Administration
approval for Replagal, its treatment for Fabry disease, a rare enzyme
deficiency. Replagal would compete with Fabrazyme, a drug produced by Genzyme
Corp. of Cambridge. Replagal currently is approved for use in 45 countries.

   Shire's drug, though not fully approved in the United States, is available to
Fabry patients under an FDA-approved treatment protocol. Shire, whose human
genetic therapies division is in Lexington, worked with the FDA to set up an
early-access program for Replagal earlier this year, in response to shortages of
Fabrazyme.

   The shortages were caused by the temporary shutdown of Genzyme's Allston
Landing plant, where the company in June discovered a virus in a bioreactor used
to make the drug.

   Shire has also asked the FDA to approve another drug, velaglucerase alfa. It
would compete with Cerezyme, Genzyme's treatment for Gaucher disease, another
enzyme-deficiency disorder.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 2009


                              151 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            December 7, 2009 Monday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Hepatitis C drug shows promise in chimpanzees Primates in San Antonio
used in experiment

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH ALLEN, SAN ANTONIO EXPRESS-NEWS

BODY:

   A Danish drug tested on San Antonio chimpanzees is showing promise as a new
gene-based therapy that fights hepatitis C and potentially other diseases.

   The drug, developed by biopharmaceutical firm Santaris Pharma, doesn't
directly fight the virus, which is quick to develop drug resistance.

   Instead, it targets and locks down a gene in the liver that the virus needs
in order to replicate, said Robert Lanford of the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research.

   "The high barrier to resistance makes it one of the most attractive drugs
we've seen," said Lanford, lead author on the study that appeared in the Dec. 3
issue of Science Express.

   An estimated 3.2 million people in the United States have hepatitis C, or
HCV, and many don't know it, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. It can range from a mild illness lasting a few weeks to a lifelong
disease that may not become apparent for years, and can lead to cirrhosis or
liver cancer.

   Santaris' "locked nucleic acid" or LNA technology uses a DNA-based drug
called SPC3649. It was given to four chimpanzees at the Southwest Foundation
that were infected with chronic hepatitis C virus.

   Huge drop in viral levels

   The two chimpanzees that received higher doses of SPC3649 had a 350-fold drop
in the viral levels in the blood and liver, Lanford said. The animals, which are
the only other creatures besides humans that can be infected with HCV, were
given one dose a week for 12 weeks. Not only did they not develop resistance to
the drug, which usually happens with days, Lanford said, but the virus stayed
suppressed for several months after researchers stopped the therapy.

   "Not only did we knock down the virus, but we saw an improvement in the liver
itself because we could keep the virus down so long," he said.

   It's also a promising platform for gene therapy, a technology that has been
frustrating scientists for some time, Lanford said.

   Normally, DNA-based drugs are not stable in the body, he said.

   "They get degraded in the body, and they just don't bind as well" to the gene
involved.

   Releasing the drug is still several years off. It has moved into Phase I
trials in healthy humans to see if there are adverse effects, Lanford said, and
then must go through two more phases of extensive testing in humans.

   Santaris contracted with Southwest Foundation for the preclinical trial
because "we're one of the few places that has chimpanzees," Lanford said.

   eallen@express-news.net

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2009


                              152 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           December 5, 2009 Saturday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: $1M INVEST SUIT VS. ERECTILE-DYSFUNCTION DOC FALLS FLAT

BYLINE: BY THOMAS ZAMBITO and KATIE NELSON DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   SOMETHING MIGHT be up, but it's not John Otto's bank account.

   The former patient of Dr. Arnold Melman, a world-renowned erectile
dysfunction expert, says he lost $1 million investing in a gene therapy company
recommended by the man-doc.

   Fortunately for Melman, Queens Supreme Court Justice Charles Markey tossed
out Otto's suit, saying the doctor can't be responsible for dispensing lousy
financial advice.

   Melman is regarded as a trusted source in his field: He's chairman of the
urology departments at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx and the Albert
Einstein College of Medicine.

   Otto, a science teacher and gem importer, started going to Melman in 1996 for
medical services of a "highly special nature" court documents said.

   During medical appointments, Melman reportedly advocated buying into a new
drug development company he started, called Ion Channel Innovations.

   Over time, Otto invested $1 million and bought shares in six separate
installments over three years, the last in January 2004.

   Melman didn't return calls. His lawyer, David Hammer, declined comment.

   Court documents show Hammer told the court that it's too early to tell if
Otto will get a return on his investment.

   "Dr. Melman is also an investor in Ion Channel, and he, too, has yet to
receive a return on his investment," Hammer wrote in court papers. "That is the
nature of investing in a startup biotech company."

   Otto, of Little Neck, still contends the doctor abused his position of power.

   "I guess we'll take an appeal," he said yesterday, referring further
questions to his lawyer Abbey Goldstein, who didn't return calls.

   knelson@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2009


                              153 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 San Antonio Express-News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            San Antonio Express-News

                            December 4, 2009 Friday
                              STATE&METRO Edition

SECTION: METRO AND STATE NEWS; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: Hopes are raised in battle against hepatitis C

BYLINE: Elizabeth Allen, STAFF

BODY:

   A Danish drug tested in San Antonio chimpanzees is showing promise as a new
gene-based therapy that fights hepatitis C and potentially other diseases.

   The drug, developed by biopharmaceutical firm Santaris Pharma A/S, doesn't
directly fight the virus, which is quick to develop drug resistance.

   Instead, it targets and locks down a gene in the liver that the virus needs
in order to replicate, said Robert Lanford of the Southwest Foundation for
Biomedical Research.

   "The high barrier to resistance makes it one of the most attractive drugs
we've seen," said Lanford, lead author on the study, which appears in Thursday's
issue of Science Express.

   An estimated 3.2 million people in the United States have hepatitis C, or
HCV, and many don't know it, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. It can range from a mild illness lasting a few weeks to a lifelong
disease that may not become apparent for years, and can lead to cirrhosis or
liver cancer.

   Santaris' "locked nucleic acid" technology uses a DNA-based drug called
SPC3649. It was given to four chimpanzees at the Southwest Foundation that were
infected with chronic hepatitis C virus.

   The two chimpanzees that received higher doses of SPC3649 had a 350-fold drop
in the viral levels in the blood and liver, Lanford said.

   The animals, the only other creatures besides humans that can be infected
with HCV, were given one dose a week for 12 weeks. Not only did they not develop
resistance to the drug, which usually happens within days, Lanford said, but the
virus stayed suppressed for several months after researchers stopped the
therapy.

   "Not only did we knock down the virus, but we saw an improvement in the liver
itself, because we could keep the virus down so long," he said.

   It's also a promising platform for gene therapy, a technology that has been
frustrating scientists for some time, Lanford said.

   Normally, DNA-based drugs are not stable in the body, he said. "They get
degraded in the body and they just don't bind as well" to the gene involved.

   Releasing the drug is still several years off. It has moved into Phase I
trials in healthy humans to see if there are other adverse effects, Lanford
said, and then must go through two more phases of extensive testing in humans
before it is approved.

   Santaris contracted with Southwest Foundation for the preclinical trial
because "we're one of the few places that has chimpanzees," Lanford said.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2009


                              154 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2009 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                           December 2, 2009 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Understanding Fragile X syndrome

BYLINE: Dr. Mitchell Hecht; For the AJC

BODY:

   Q: What can you tell me about "Fragile X syndrome"? --- Anonymous, Dublin

   A: Fragile X syndrome may be the most common cause of genetically inherited
mental retardation you've never heard of. One in every 2,000 males and 1 in
every 4,000 females are born with it. Surprisingly, 1 in 259 women in the
general population carry the Fragile X gene.

   It's a bit tricky, because there are some who have the genetic defect and are
normal by all appearances and IQ tests --- and then there are those at the other
end of the spectrum with severe mental retardation; specific physical
appearances (long face and large ears and mitral valve prolapse and
double-jointed fingers); and behavioral problems like autism or
attention-deficit (hyperactivity) disorder. Those with Fragile X syndrome may
have symptoms that fall anywhere in this spectrum.

   This is a genetically inherited disorder, and not everyone with large ears or
hyperactivity has it.

   What goes wrong in Fragile X syndrome? Every gene is made up of many units of
DNA sequences. In Fragile X, there seems to be a stuttering-like repeat of the
same DNA sequence. Normally, there's supposed to be some repeating of this DNA
sequence --- about six to 45 copies. But in Fragile X, there are 200 or more
copies of this DNA sequence. This stuttering gene defect results in the shutting
off a certain protein called "FMR-1", and the signs and symptoms of Fragile X
syndrome.

   Unfortunately, there's no cure for Fragile X syndrome.

   Treatment includes special educational instruction; speech therapy; physical
and occupational therapy; and medication to deal with attention-deficit
disorder, hyperactivity, aggression and depression. Future treatments may
involve gene therapy where the sequential repetition of DNA that seems to shut
down FMR-1 production and bring about Fragile X syndrome is repaired.

   For more information, check out the National Fragile X Foundation at
www.fragilex.org.

   Dr. Mitchell Hecht is a physician specializing in internal medicine. Send
questions to him at: "Ask Dr. H," P.O. Box 767787, Roswell, GA30076. Because of
the large volume of mail received, personal replies are not possible.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                              155 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            November 30, 2009 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 977 words

HEADLINE: Narcolepsy research triggers myriad brain studies

BYLINE: By Carolyn Y. Johnson, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Research into an unusual sleep disorder is unraveling what goes awry in the
brains of people who fall prey to daytime sleep attacks - and shedding light on
everything from addiction to appetite.

   Work that began in sleepy dogs and mice has led to a significant advance in
understanding narcolepsy, providing new insight into the ways in which sleep and
wakefulness, eating, and addictive behaviors are linked. The work is pointing to
potential therapies not only for people who are chronically sleepy, but also for
the much larger numbers who have trouble sleeping at all.

   At the root of this work is a fundamental brain chemical called orexin.
Research over the past decade has shown that narcolepsy is caused by the loss of
a type of brain cell that produces orexin. Scientists have found that the
chemical also helps determine when we are asleep and awake and plays a role in
regulating appetite and addiction.

   Orexin ``was only discovered in 1998,'' said Dr. Tom Scammell, a neurologist
at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. ``A lot of the work is related to
sleep, but it's also opened up these other areas.''

   His lab teases out the nuances of narcolepsy with some unconventional
techniques - including tickling sleepy mice to keep them awake and feeding them
Froot Loops. The anticipation of the sugary cereal triggers one of the most
striking symptoms of the disease: a temporary loss of muscle control called
cataplexy, causing mice to drop in their tracks. Using gene therapy, he restored
orexin to the brains of mice who lacked it and found that it improves their
ability to stay awake and reduces cataplexy.

   ``If we could get orexin into the brains of people with narcolepsy - and get
it to the right places at the right times - we could, I think, completely cure
this disease,'' Scammell said. ``It would be like giving insulin to diabetics.''

   But beyond narcolepsy, orexin has become a topic of interest for the
multifaceted role it plays in the brain.

   Two years ago, a study in the Journal of Neuroscience found that when a form
of the chemical was given to sleep-deprived rhesus monkeys, it restored their
brain activity and improved their performance on a cognitive task.

   Pharmaceutical companies are looking at whether a drug could be developed to
treat the opposite problem, insomnia, by blocking the activity of orexin in the
brain. Last year, GlaxoSmithKline paid an initial $150 million for a
collaboration with Actelion, a Swiss company developing such a drug, as part of
a larger agreement to pay as much as $2.7 billion - depending on whether the
drug meets certain milestones. Merck is also developing such a drug, now in
clinical trials.

   Other research has pointed to the potential role orexin could play in
addiction: Research has found that blocking orexin in mice decreases their
drug-seeking behavior.

   Finally, a study published in Cell Metabolism this year found that giving
mice more orexin helped them resist obesity when given a high-fat diet, by
reducing how much they ate and raising their energy expenditure.

   The work that revealed the critical role that orexin plays in narcolepsy
began almost by chance. Two groups independently discovered it in 1998.

   Dr. Masashi Yanagisawa, a professor at the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, decided to test what would happen to mice that lacked orexin.
(Orexin comes from the Greek word for appetite, ``orexis''.)

   At first glance, the experiment was disappointing - there was no significant
difference in the eating and weight of the mice. Then, he asked a researcher to
watch the mice at night.

   ``Accidentally, we instead found out these mice just go around and suddenly
they stop and they fall to the side, and suddenly are completely immobile for a
minute, and then really it looks as if they're dead,'' Yanagisawa said. ``Then
suddenly, as if nothing has happened, they wake up. We were every surprised.''

   Simultaneously, Stanford University researchers studying narcoleptic dogs
that would fall down when they ate - their muscles giving out when they were
excited - found that a genetic defect in the orexin system was responsible.

   Research confirmed that human narcoleptics also lack orexin, and scientists
discovered that narcoleptics aren't born lacking the cells that produce orexin;
they die off over time. Researchers are still trying to understand what causes
those cells to die, often causing the disease to affect patients as young
adults.

   That was the case for Julie Flygare, one of Scammell's patients. In college,
the varsity squash player blamed her exhaustion on her rigorous workout. Later,
in law school, she assumed she couldn't stay awake because she found a topic
boring.

   Flygare compares it to a person whose eyesight starts to decline, but doesn't
realize it because she doesn't know how everyone else sees.

   Around the same time, she began to notice that when she was about to tell a
joke or laugh, she would sometimes feel her jaw freeze or her knees give out.
Eventually, she got a diagnosis that made sense, and takes medications four
times a day.

   The drugs help, but there is no cure, and she still has to nap twice a day.
She tries not to let the disease control her life, but Flygare has to be
cautious about things like swimming, because her cataplexy could cause her to
drown. And she is coming to terms with the realization that a career in law,
requiring young attorneys to work intense hours, may not be in the cards.

   ``I assumed there was going to be great medications and they would make me
better,'' said Flygare.

   Current therapies ``don't completely normalize you by any means,'' she said.
``That was weird for me. . . . I used to pride myself on being the person who
can stay up until two in the morning and get a lot done.''

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

   FEELING SLEEPY

   See a video of narcoleptic mice at www.boston.com

   /globe.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2009


                              156 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                           November 28, 2009 Saturday
                                 no-dot Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. A10

LENGTH: 1673 words

HEADLINE: 2009 and beyond

BYLINE: By, Lawrence B. Johnson

BODY:

   Special to The Detroit News

   Twenty-five years ago, making a call away from home meant finding a pay
phone. The cell phone was virtually unknown. So was the Internet. Now life would
be unthinkable without them.

   And that's what makes futurism so intriguing. What will spur the next big
thing, the staggering new technology not yet within our grasp?

   Take something as apparently imperishable as the book. It seems Kindle and
other e-readers have been putting a sci-fi spin on all print. Then there's
Intel's Reader for the blind. That's the future for you. It's just around the
next curve, looming into view, even right in front of your face.

   The biggest surprise may be the thought that we all play a role in finding
that new thing. Sheryl Connelly, global consumer trends and futuring manager at
Ford Motor Co., analyzes consumer behavioral trends to help Ford's designers
plot their research. It seems the parents of invention are both necessity and
desire.

   "We don't try to predict the future," Connelly says. "No one has that
ability. To move forward, you just need to have a pretty good idea of where
we're heading. The hope is to come up with a range of solutions that work."

   Here's a look at four categories of evolving technology central to our lives,
and how futurists see us moving forward.

   VIDEO GAMES

   We have seen the future of electronic gaming, and it is immersive, physical
and radically social.

   The writing on the wall at Microsoft, maker of the Xbox 360, promises a
kinetic new world of full-body gaming control that builds on the Wii model of
motional interactivity. But Microsoft's research team is pushing the envelope by
trying to eliminate the controller altogether. Your entire body becomes the
controller for some pretty wild action play.

   Instead of using your thumbs to guide a sports car through turns on a screen,
you become the driver, manipulating an imaginary steering wheel. It's like
playing air-guitar. Just put your hands in a steering position and the on-screen
car you're driving responds to your movements.

   Or how about a workout with a skateboard - your own. Hold your board up to
the TV to have it scanned into the game, then zoom yourself and your skateboard
into "action." As an obstacle looms up on the screen course, you jump and the
screen version of you on your board replicates your maneuver. You clear the
object and push on down the "street."

   "The use of motion-sensing technologies is really going to increase gamers'
involvement," says Steve Koenig, director of industry analysis for the Consumer
Electronics Association in Arlington, Va. "This is going to take us far beyond
gaming as entertainment to unprecedented levels of fitness training and
competitive sports."

   Central to the immersive nature of future gaming is what Koenig calls
"augmented reality," in which you're surrounded by computer-generated images,
perhaps a holographic environment. Think of the programmable break room for the
crew on "Star Trek: The Next Generation."

   But there's another component of augmented reality that's a bit creepy.

   "In a shooting game with several friends, instead of just pulling the trigger
and seeing the result onscreen, you'll feel the thump of impact when you're
hit," says Koenig. "Or if you playing football or baseball - in 3-D, of course -
you'll feel the weight of a ball in your hands. It's going to make for a much
more realistic experience."

   All of those examples fit the model of Microsoft's new gaming world.

   The other trend that's likely to explode in the coming years, says Koenig, is
"massive multiplayer online" (MMO) gaming.

   "The promise of MMO is congruent with the increasing popularity of social
networking," he says. "Even 10 years ago, it would have been hard to imagine
playing a game with 50 different people from all around the world, but now it
happens every day. We're going to see a huge development in social gaming."

   Koenig sees the gaming industry shifting its focus from hardware to "cloud"
applications - pay as you play, with more games residing on the Internet, not on
your shelf at home. And the device you play on will probably be your phone, not
your laptop.

   TRAVEL

   How will we get around town, or across the country, in a decade or two? Will
we strap on a jetpack, hop into our flying automobile or just beam ourselves
over?

   First, let's rev up the flying car - or aerocar, as its visionaries prefer to
call it. That technology will be available relatively soon.

   Dick Knapinski, spokesman for the Experimental Aircraft Association, says
each summer's EAA air show in Oshkosh, Wis., brings a more promising version of
the aerocar. "An airplane you could drive on the road has been a dream ever
since there were cars and airplanes," says Knapinski. "The early designs, back
in the late 1940s and '50s, looked like a VW with wings."

   But that would hardly describe the flying sport craft from Terrafugia in
Woburn, Mass. When its wings are unfolded, which takes about 60 seconds, the
road-worthy vehicle dubbed the Transition turns into a flying machine with an
airborne range of 450 miles at a top speed of 115 mph.

   The sleek flying car that the makers call a street-legal airplane uses
regular gasoline in either driving or flying mode. Terrafugia actually expects
to offer a consumer model for sale sometime in 2011 at price of $194,000 - just
a few thousand dollars less than a Lamborghini. Of course, along with the cash
you'll also need a runway. Then there is the matter of licensing and training.
In such a hybrid future, the goal of driver's education may be a pilot's
license.

   As for the jet pack, Knapinski says the "Jetsons" cartoon concept of zooming
around town may not be that far from achieving reality. "We're seeing personal
flight systems that can keep a 200-pound person aloft for 20-25 minutes at a
speed of 25 miles an hour," he says.

   But don't expect to zip about like Iron Man at supersonic speeds. "The torque
would be too great for the human body," says Knapinski.

   Last year, Martin Aircraft Co. in New Zealand boasted it would have a viable,
200-horsepower, gasoline-fueled jet pack, called Martin Jetpack, hit the market
sometime in late 2009 or early 2010 for about $100,000. Makers have said it
personal aircraft can go 60 miles per hour at an altitude of 8,000 feet for
about 30 minutes.

   HEALTH CARE

   The future of medical care will be writ in sub-molecular language,
researchers say.

   Nanotechnology, which deals in infinitesimally small structures and pathways,
will provide the maps and means for treatment in the decades ahead. And central
to such minimalism will be finding the least invasive methods of treating
diseases.

   Dr. Hans Stricker, a urologist and chief of surgery at Henry Ford Hospital in
West Bloomfield, says microscopic research is already well along in gene therapy
for treating prostate cancer. At the core of that investigation is gene therapy
- a super high-tech method of designing viruses that can be injected into a
patient to attack rogue cells.

   "When I lie awake at night and think about how I would want my own treatment
to go in 20 years," says Stricker, 47, "I see a guy who gets a cancer diagnosis,
comes in, we inject him with the virus and he's on his way. He has flulike
symptoms for a couple of days and that's it. The cancer is killed."

   Stricker says his scenario is not a mere dream. "Is it really possible? A
couple of years ago, I would have said no," he says. "But today, I can see a
combination of radiation and gene therapy 10 years from now - and five years
after that, gene therapy alone."

   The ideal of minimal invasiveness extends to general screenings, says
Stricker. He sees a day when you can just have a body scan to check for health
problems instead of submitting to a lot of annoying probes. "The real upside is
that we'd have a lot more people signing up," says Stricker. "The problem is
cost. One of the key challenges will be to figure out how to do noninvasive
screening that is inexpensive."

   Another goal of nanotechnology is the development of "intelligent
biomaterials," artificial tissue that can be inserted where damaged tissue needs
to be restored. A prime application would be the repair of damaged organs.

   The hurdle, and researchers acknowledge it's a fairly high one, is a better
understanding of how the body activates cells to begin natural repairs.

   Researchers hope to discover the codes that spur tissue growth, then come up
with schemes to mimic those signals.

   TV-NET CONVERGENCE

   If industry prognosticators are correct, home entertainment soon is headed
for a radical makeover that will redefine the word cool. Cable companies might
not love it - they may be out of the picture - but consumers will have it all,
everything from YouTube videos to any movie on demand in a grand convergence of
the Internet and their television sets.

   There's nothing really wild about the long-discussed merger of the Internet
and TV. It's just a matter of figuring out just what translates from the laptop
to the living room screen, and what's better left small. Do we really need eBay
items displayed on a 60-inch television?

   According to the Yankee Group, which specializes in market analysis, 50
million U.S. households will acquire Internet-connected HDTVs by 2013 - a
significantly greater number than the 30 million expected to purchase Blu-ray
players in the same period.

   "The television is the modern-day family hearth," says Peter Fannon, vice
president of corporate and government affairs for Panasonic Corp. of North
America. "At the same time, the Internet is a powerful potential source of video
information and entertainment, so it's just natural to assume that television
will ultimately become a versatile medium for displaying everything on the
Internet from personal messages to entertainment of all kinds."

   The clincher in television viewing, says Fannon, will be the proliferation of
3-D TV and its ability to bring every kind of video experience right into your
lap.

   Sony plans to make its 3-D film "Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs" available
on Internet-enabled TVs before it's released on DVD.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2009


                              157 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            November 23, 2009 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 943 words

HEADLINE: Shedding light on how the brain works;
Emerging optogenetics field could explain things like memory, mental illness

BODY:

   M ore than two centuries ago, the Italian scientist Luigi Galvani found that
electricity could make a dead frog's leg kick, as if it were alive. Today, using
the same basic principle but new tools, scientists are employing light to
trigger brain cells - looking not for a kick, but for the origins of emotions,
behaviors, and diseases in the brain.

   Advanced imaging technologies have given neuroscientists new ways to peer
into the working mind, but a precise understanding of how 100 billion brain
cells create everything from memories to mental illness has remained elusive.

   Now, by using gene therapy to insert light-sensitive proteins from algae and
other organisms into brain cells, scientists are able to control specific brain
circuits with light, and then watch what happens.

   It's a big shift, said Dr. Karl Deisseroth, a neuroscientist and psychiatrist
at Stanford University, who compares the difference between imaging the brain
and triggering individual cells to learning the rules of football by watching
the game on a high-end TV or by controlling players.

   ``It wouldn't matter how good your video camera was or your TV was; it would
still be very mysterious, and that's imaging,'' Deisseroth said. The new
technology, on the other hand, ``allows you to play the role of coach and
understand things.''

   Scientists start with algae, ancient forms of bacteria, and other organisms
that contain proteins sensitive to light. They isolate the genes containing the
instructions for making those proteins, insert the genes into a virus, and
``infect'' specific brain cells with the virus. The brain cells then start
making the light-sensitive protein - essentially creating a switch that can turn
a cell on or off when exposed to light. That's earned the field the name
optogenetics.

   Scientists were not sure what to expect when they first did the experiment in
mice. There were three possibilities when they flipped on the light: Nothing
would happen, the animals might have seizures or other problems, or they would
start seeing a measurable behavior.

   But it worked. When the researchers threaded a fiber-optic cable into the
brain of one of these mice and flashed a blue light, the animal ran in a circle.
Other researchers found that fruit flies that had been genetically modified to
carry a light-sensitive trigger in brain cells would jump up and fly away when
they were hit with a laser beam.

   Those experiments proved the concept would work, and the emerging field is
now offering neuroscience the tantalizing possibility of being able to probe
things like emotion and disease in a systematic way, said Ed Boyden, head of the
synthetic neurobiology group at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Media
Lab.

   ``Typically in neuroscience, most of us focus on one region or pathway or one
circuit or one part of the brain,'' Boyden said. ``But except for fairly slow
imaging technologies, we can't get a global picture of the brain yet - we can't
see how the whole thing works.'' Optogenetics, he added, raises the prospect of
mapping the brain.

   Scientists have begun to use the technique to investigate complex behaviors
and disease. This year, Deisseroth's group published the results of an
investigation into a rodent model of Parkinson's disease that found it could
reduce symptoms by using light to stimulate nerve cells that connect to a part
of the brain called the subthalamic nucleus.

   Last month, at the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, Herbert
Covington, a postdoctoral researcher at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New
York, presented data showing that using light to stimulate cells in the
prefrontal cortex relieved symptoms of depression in mice.

   ``In a brain area, you have this heterogenous population of cells, and it's
hard to imagine which ones are really important and which ones are not,''
Covington said. The strength of the new technique is that it can be used to see
what specific cells do, providing hints at the neural basis of a disease or
behavior.

   Earlier this year, Boyden published the results of experiments in a nonhuman
primate, a first step to showing that the technique would work outside the
mouse. The study found that genes carrying instructions for light-sensitive
proteins could be activated in brains of rhesus macaque monkeys, with no safety
issues over many months.

   Boyden has cofounded a start-up company, called Eos, that is developing a
potential therapy for vision loss. One of the reasons people lose their sight is
because of the death of photoreceptor cells, which are sensitive to light.
Boyden's company is working on using some of the fundamentals of optogenetics to
make other cells in the eye sensitive to light to potentially restore vision.

   While it is possible that light therapy could one day be used on people, the
biggest near-term opportunity will be in better understanding the brain.

   ``If you identify the neurons that control appetite, you have a drug target;
if you identify the neurons that regulate fear, you have a drug target,'' said
Gero Miesenböck, a professor at the University of Oxford who did pioneering work
on fruit flies.

   Mice and flies may seem a far cry from people, but the idea is that
understanding these basic functions in other organisms might give scientists new
ideas about how the human brain works, and where to focus in people when
designing a drug or other therapy.

   ``There's a very fertile intermediate ground here,'' Deisseroth said. ``You
can take the insight from the animals and design better treatments for people,
without actually going to the level of directly putting light into human
brains.''

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2009


                              158 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            November 22, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1P

LENGTH: 1401 words

HEADLINE: MEET THE SISTERS ON A LIFE MISSION

BYLINE: RICHARD KOENIG

BODY:

   They have been three moms on a mission, a tireless force behind news reports
this month of a promising gene therapy for boys with a brain-ravaging disorder.

   The moms are sisters: Rachel Salzman of Delray Beach; Amber Salzman of Merion
Station, Pa.; and Eve Salzman Lapin of Houston. During an unimaginably grim week
in December 2000, they discovered that three boys in their extended family had
adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD). The genetic anomaly passes silently from generation
to generation until it reveals itself as this disorder, which strips away the
insulating sheath around nerve fibers. Without therapy, ALD is always fatal.
Perhaps you have seen the film Lorenzo's Oil - the affliction it highlights is
the nightmare I refer to.

   What to do? The Salzman sisters and the rest of their family rallied. They
established the Stop ALD Foundation to raise money for research. They consoled
other families, pored over the literature, dropped in on medical meetings and
convened researchers who might assist one another. In time they saw gene therapy
as their best hope.

   "Everybody can do something," Eve has said since. "It's sometimes hard when
you get that kind of shocking, tragic news. You can be paralyzed. But also you
can be moved to action."

   This month, then, came the newsmaking report in the journal Science.
Investigators in Paris had treated two Spanish boys by using a disabled virus to
ferry a therapeutic gene into cells carrying the ALD defect. The disorder
stopped worsening, and the boys remain in good condition today, two years after
the treatment. The investigators are saying they have arrested ALD, not cured
it, yet the duration of effect encourages optimism. The two boys are getting on
with their lives.

   And so we come back to the Salzman sisters.

   "Without them, this would not have been possible," says Patrick Aubourg, a
pediatrician at University Paris-Descartes, a pioneer in unraveling the genetics
of ALD, and the lead author on the Science paper.

   The pathology

   Here I need to make a disclosure: I have known Amber Salzman for years, once
acted as a paid consultant to her business, and occasionally work pro bono for
the Stop ALD Foundation. I need also, personally, to tell something of what she,
Rachel and Eve have accomplished.

   To understand the frightfulness of ALD, it helps to know a bit of the
pathology. The sheath around nerve fibers in the brain consists of a fatty
substance called myelin. It is this sheath that facilitates conduction of
electrical impulses. The initial signal of ALD - the signal that this sheath is
breaking down - may be as faint as some difficulty in concentrating. It is
easily misdiagnosed, sometimes as attention deficit disorder.

   Without effective therapy, though, the decline is inexorable: loss of muscle
control, deafness, blindness, dementia. Death comes within a few years of
diagnosis. Stem-cell transplantation, if done quickly enough, can save lives but
carries high risks. For boys without good donor matches, like the two Spanish
boys, it is an especially poor option, if any option at all. Everybody wants
more choices in therapy.

   In pushing for gene therapy, it helped the Salzman sisters that they had
means and connections. Amber, for instance, is a Ph.D. mathematician and
business executive. An early counselor was Tachi Yamada, then her boss and the
R&D chairman at Glaxo-SmithKline, one of the world's largest drug companies.
(Dr. Yamada today is president of the Global Health Program at the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation.)

   But the family also had the unrelenting, unflagging resolve they took from
their torment.

   Jump back to 2001, just after the family has been told that three of their
boys have ALD: Amber's son, age 1, and two of Eve's three sons, ages 8 and 6.
Rachel's son does not.

   Amber and Rachel, learning of the work of Aubourg, fly to Paris to see him.
He envisions what might be called self-transplants. Remove stem cells from bone
marrow; destroy the remaining, defective cells still within the marrow; put a
therapeutic gene into the removed cells and infuse them back into the body so
they repopulate the marrow and then give rise to specialized cells that migrate
to the brain and halt progression of brain lesions. Yet the French group needs
help with the viral "vector" - an innocuous virus that effectively infects cells
with genes.

   Soon afterward, scouting for information at a Food and Drug Administration
meeting, the two sisters meet Gabor Veres, a geneticist and virologist working
to make a vector of an AIDS virus rendered harmless. There are reasons to
believe a gene carried by such a vector will have a stable effect. Veres agrees
to talk more someday, but he must rush off to his native Hungary.

   Amber tracks down his flight number. As he boards the plane, a flight
attendant hands him a message. When he gets to the home of his Hungarian mother,
he finds the same message. Amber has managed to come up with her phone number
and an interpreter to help with the call. She also reaches Aubourg, then on a
family vacation.

   For both men the message is the same: You two must meet. Now! Please! Amber
sets out agenda items: nonhuman primate data, small-batch vector production, and
on and on.

   Rachel, meanwhile, is catching a plane to Budapest. The meeting comes off
there the day after her arrival, with Rachel managing the introductions.

   There isn't an R&D chief in the world who isn't trying to get his people to
work with such urgency.

   Help for others

   Over nearly a decade, the sisters have never let up - not even after it
became clear that gene therapy would not come fast enough for their own family.
Today, Eve's son Oliver is gone. His brain lesions had quickly spread. Her son
Elliott, running short on time, went through a transplant performed without gene
therapy. Owing to the graft-versus-host disease that sometimes follows a
transplant, he goes about today in a wheelchair. (But then he is a young man who
is going places - he competes in quiz-bowl tournaments and statewide Latin
contests.) After a similar transplant, and months in a hospital, Amber's son,
Spencer, is doing fine.

   Today the results of the gene therapy for the two Spanish boys are being
compared to what would be expected after a successful bone-marrow transplant
with a good donor match. It is for the French researchers and other medical
authorities to comment on how broadly gene therapy might now be used in other
ALD cases. But the implications of this investigation go well beyond ALD.

   Clinical setbacks at the start of this decade quickly dulled the once heady
enthusiasm over gene therapy in general. Following the ALD work and a couple
other recent successes for different disorders, that disillusionment is
beginning to lift. "A Comeback for Gene Therapy," said a commentary accompanying
the Science paper.

   Indeed, the day after the paper came out, a gene-therapy company in
Cambridge, Mass., Genetix Pharmaceuticals Inc., announced that it will
collaborate with Aubourg and bring trials to the United States. Geert-Jan
Mulder, the Genetix board chairman, plans soon to meet Amber for the first time
and discuss the next steps. Of the Salzman sisters Mulder observes, "They have
really helped to bring the technology to where it is now."

   A mission continues

   In many respects, the Salzman sisters exemplify the way so many families
emerge from the shock of a dreadful diagnosis to try to save their own and lift
the burden of others. A look at the Web site of the National Organization of
Rare Disorders finds hundreds of patient-advocacy groups, many with their
origins in these families. Their goals, command of scientific detail and access
to money will vary. Yet their stories are often similar, these stories of pain,
stupendous effort and charity of purpose.

   As for the sisters, their mission continues.

   This week Amber is off to a gene-therapy conference in Germany. Next week
Rachel goes to another FDA meeting. Considering all the hopeful news of late, I
recently dared to suggest that the sisterhood may be able to slow their pace.
Ease off just a little?

   Rachel shot back with word of a family who had just written to her. They have
had two boys with ALD. One has died. The other is blind.

   "Unfortunately," she said, gently reproaching me, "there is still plenty more
to do."

   Richard Koenig, a former St. Petersburg Times reporter, is president of
Biosyntax LLC, a communications consultancy to life-sciences companies.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO - Photo courtesy of the Salzman family: Eve Salzman Lapin, left,
Rachel Salzman and Amber Salzman are the three moms who have been on a mission
to fight ALD, turning personal tragedy into a public good.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2009


                              159 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                          November 18, 2009 Wednesday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: OBITUARIES; P-com Obituaries; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: Jane Mills Glick, 65, biochemist

BYLINE: By Sally A. Downey; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Jane Mills Glick, 65, of Swarthmore, a biochemist, died Sunday at the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania of head trauma from a fall in her
home.

   From 2002 until she retired in May 2008, Dr. Glick was faculty administrator
of the Cell and Molecular Biology (CAMB) graduate program at the University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine. Previously, she was director of education in
the gene-therapy program at Penn for eight years, and also associate professor
in cell and molecular biology.

   When Dr. Glick was nominated for a Lindback Award for Distinguished Teaching
in 2003, Glen Gaulton, chief scientific officer at the medical school, wrote in
the nominating letter: "Jane is the rock that binds CAMB together; she is our
conscience and guide as we seek to improve the lives of our students and our
colleagues."

   In 1985, Dr. Glick won a Lindback Award when she was associate professor of
physiology and biochemistry at the former Medical College of Pennsylvania. She
later was professor of biochemistry at the school.

   Dr. Glick published 60 papers in top peer-review journals on lipid
metabolism, focusing on the biochemical controls of cholesterol accumulation.

   "Jane's positive impact on students and colleagues was born of a quiet
intensity about science and the good it can do that never wavered," said Arthur
H. Rubenstein, dean of the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.

   Dr. Glick's husband of 41 years, John H. Glick, a physician, is president of
the Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute at the University of Pennsylvania.
He helped launch the cancer program at Penn in the 1970s, and from 1985 to 2005,
he directed the Abramson Cancer Center, which grew to more than 300 faculty
members, attracting $180 million in grants a year.

   "She was totally supportive. All that I am in life is because of her," John
Glick said.

   Attorney Richard Sprague, a longtime friend of the Glicks', said that "Jane
was a great, great partner to John." She was "an original thinker" who could
converse on astronomy, literature, and opera, Sprague said. She was unassuming
about her own achievements, preferring to stay in the background, he said.

   Two years ago, Dr. Glick survived a ruptured cerebral aneurysm. "She made a
100 percent recovery her doctors called miraculous," her husband said. "Every
day we were thankful for the extra time we had together."

   Dr. Glick grew up in Columbus, Ohio. She earned a bachelor's degree from
Randolph-Macon College in Ashland, Va. After graduating Phi Beta Kappa, she
earned a doctorate in biochemistry from Columbia University, where she met her
husband, who was a medical student.

   She completed postdoctoral fellowships at the National Institutes of Health
in Bethesda, Md., and at Stanford University.

   Dr. Glick served on the executive committee of the Philadelphia Antiques
Show, which benefits the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, and on the
board of Swarthmore Presbyterian Church.

   She enjoyed golfing, canoeing, picking blueberries, walking in the woods, and
watching her grandchildren play by the lake at her summer home in the Poconos,
John Glick said.

   In addition to her husband, Dr. Glick is survived by daughters Katherine Cox
and Sarah Johnson; a brother; and four grandchildren.

   A memorial service will be at 1 p.m. Saturday at Swarthmore Presbyterian
Church, 727 Harvard Ave. Donations may be made to the Jane M. Glick Graduate
Student Teaching Award, University of Pennsylvania Development Office, 3535
Market St., Philadelphia 19104.

   Contact staff writer Sally A. Downey at 215-854-2913 or
sdowney@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2009


                              160 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Philadelphia Daily News

                          November 18, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: LOCAL; P-com Obituaries; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Jane M. Glick, Ph.D, put family first

BYLINE: By JOHN F. MORRISON; morrisj@phillynews.com 215-854-5573

BODY:

   IF YOU SPENT time with Jane M. Glick and didn't know much about her, you were
unlikely to find out from her about her distinguished career as a scientist and
teacher.

   She was self-effacing in the extreme. She would probably tell you how proud
she was of her husband, John H. Glick, one of the nation's premier cancer
specialists, her two daughters and four grandchildren.

   Or she might talk about opera, her golf scores or her latest reading on her
beloved Kindle, a biography of Robert Oppenheimer.

   But you'd be unlikely to find out from her that she was a revered teacher,
researcher and administrator at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School
who made important contributions to the study of cholesterol in the human blood
stream, a major cause of heart attacks.

   Jane Glick, who was also active in church and civic affairs, died Sunday of
complications of a fall in her home in Swarthmore. She was 63.

   "She was one of the most beloved people in Philadelphia," said her husband,
professor of medicine and president of the Abramson Family Cancer Research
Institute at Penn.

   "She was kind, unassuming, selfless," he said. "She had an incredible circle
of friends. She was the perfect wife. Everything I have attained in my career, I
owe to her.

   "She always put her family above her career. We had a storybook marriage."

   "She was one of the city's unsung heroes," said prominent Philadelphia lawyer
Richard A. Sprague, a longtime friend. "She was one of the people who make a
city click."

   "She had a beautiful personality," said Dr. Arthur Rubenstein, dean of the
Penn Medical School and executive vice president of the HUP Health System. "She
made people around her feel good."

   Jane joined the Penn faculty in 1975 as a research assistant professor in the
dental school. She moved to the medical college, where she remained until 1994,
rising to professor of biochemistry.

   During that time, she published 35 papers on lipid metabolism for scientific
journals, focusing on the biochemical controls of cholesterol accumulation in
the blood stream.

   In 1994, she became senior research investigator at Penn Medicine and later
adjunct associate professor in cell and molecular biology. She was director of
education in the Gene Therapy Program, then faculty administrator of the Cell
and Molecular Biology Graduate Program (CAMB).

   She was honored with the Linback Teaching Award. In her nomination for the
award, Dr. Glen Gaulton, executive vice dean of the medical school, noted: "Jane
is the rock that binds CAMB together; she is our conscience and guide as we seek
to improve the lives of our students and our colleagues."

   Her colleagues wrote in an obituary: "Throughout her good and remarkable
life, Jane reminded everyone of the importance of retaining the wonder and joy
in science, and perhaps more importantly, of treating each other with respect
and affection."

   "She was an excellent teacher," Dr. Rubenstein said. "She had a quiet way
that attracted students. She always covered over their weaknesses so they could
do better. She was never critical and dealt with them in a quiet supportive
way."

   "She was a wonderful person to be with," Sprague said. "When she talked about
a subject, she expressed her own ideas. She didn't just repeat what others said.
She was a great, great person."

   Joseph R. Daughen, retired Daily News reporter and longtime friend of the
Glicks, marveled at the success of their marriage.

   "It was a joy to watch Jane and John, two distinguished, world-class
scientists, walk along hand-in-hand like a couple of kids in love after 41 years
of marriage.

   "You could see in their faces how lucky they felt to have found each other."

   The former Jane Mills was born in Memphis and raised in Columbus, Ohio. She
graduated from Randolph-Macon Women's College in 1965, and completed her Ph.D.
in biochemistry at Columbia University in 1971.

   She and her husband were married in 1968.

   She was chair of the board of Swarthmore Presbyterian Church, the board of
Episcopal Academy and the Philadelphia Antiques Show, which benefits the
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.

   She played golf at the Springhaven Country Club in Wallingford, enjoyed
crossword and sudoku puzzles and catching the opera at the Metropolitan Opera in
New York.

   Besides her husband, she is survived by two daughters, Katherine Anne Cox and
Sarah Glick Johnson; a brother, Albert Mills III, and four grandchildren.

   Services: Memorial service 1 p.m. Saturday at Swarthmore Presbyterian Church,
727 Harvard Ave., Swarthmore.

   Donations may be made to the Jane M. Glick Graduate Student Teaching Award,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, c/o the Development Office, 3535
Market St., Suite 750, Philadelphia 19104.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2009


                              161 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           November 12, 2009 Thursday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 485 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy offers hope for diseases such as MD

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   A gene-therapy experiment in monkeys has shown the ability to boost muscle
size and strength, giving hope to those looking for treatments for muscular
dystrophy and other diseases that cause muscle loss and weakness.

   The study was led by Brian Kaspar and neurologist Dr. Jerry Mendell, both
researchers at Nationwide Children's Hospital.

   Previous studies in mice with muscular dystrophy had shown promise, but tests
in an animal more closely related to humans were important before trials in
people begin, said Mendell, who heads the Center for Gene Therapy at the
hospital's research institute.

   "If it works in monkeys, we hope that it will work in man," he said.

   The researchers published their results yesterday in the journal Science
Translational Medicine.

   Based on the lasting and significant improvements -- and no documented
negative side effects -- seen in the study of six macaque monkeys, Mendell said
he expects a human study to begin by next fall.

   The monkeys each received injections of genes for a protein called
follistatin into one of their upper leg muscles. In all cases, the injected legs
became stronger and more muscular.

   The theory behind the therapy is that follistatin stops a protein called
myostatin from turning off muscle growth, allowing diseased muscle to become
stronger and larger.

   One limitation of the experiment is that the animals were healthy, and
therefore had healthy muscle. Previous research in mice showed that results were
sustainable in animals that were sick.

   It's also impossible to know how long the results would have lasted because
the monkeys were euthanized, two of them after five months and four of them
after 15 months. Researchers examined their bodies for any damage related to the
therapy and found none.

   "It's a very unequivocal result," said Sharon Hesterlee, the Muscular
Dystrophy Association's senior vice president for MDA Venture Philanthropy, the
organization's drug-development arm.

   "This is the first time we have real evidence in an animal that is very
similar to humans that you can make muscles bigger and stronger."

   The only current treatment for muscular dystrophy is steroids, and they
provide limited benefit, Hesterlee said.

   Approval for routine use in patients with neuromuscular disorders depends on
successful human trials and approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
That will take several years, Mendell said. The current plan is to test the
therapy in people by injecting follistatin into both thighs, Mendell said.

   Neither he nor Hesterlee could provide an estimate of what the therapy might
cost should it succeed.

   The nonprofit Myositis Association has funded the research so far and is
especially interested in how the therapy might help in the treatment of a
debilitating disease called inclusion-body myositis, Mendell said. The
inflammatory muscle disease causes loss of muscle, including in the quadriceps.

   mcrane@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2009


                              162 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            November 8, 2009 Sunday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. A15

LENGTH: 636 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH AND SCIENCE REVIEW

BYLINE: By, Compiled by Dan Kincaid from reports by reporter Anne Ryman and wire
services.

BODY:

   Here's a recap of recent health, science, technology and environmental news.

   MERCURY UPDATE: New data captured by a tiny spacecraft that flew by Mercury
are forcing scientists to rewrite the planet's history.

   For years, scientists believed the planet closest to the sun had a low
concentration of iron on its surface despite having a large iron core that made
up more than half of its mass.

   One popular theory is that a large object struck Mercury billions of years
ago, stripping away the exterior and leaving a thin shell and iron-rich core
behind.

   Now, the Messenger spacecraft, which has researchers from Arizona on its
science team, has discovered an abundance of iron on Mercury's surface.

   The finding, revealed Tuesday by NASA, adds intrigue to how the smallest
planet in our solar system evolved.

   CANCER-OBESITY LINK: About 100,500 new cases of cancer are caused by obesity
every year, according to the most comprehensive attempt ever to estimate the
cancers linked to extra weight.

   The analysis, released Thursday by the American Institute for Cancer
Research, is based on updated cancer data and a report released earlier this
year by a panel of experts. Among the types of cancer most strongly linked to
excess body fat:

   * Breast, 33,000 cases a year.

   * Endometrial, 20,700 cases a year.

   * Kidney, 13,900 cases.

   * Colorectal, 13,200 cases.

   * Pancreas, 11,900.

   * Esophagus, 5,800.

   * Gallbladder, 2,000.

   HEART BYPASS: It seemed like a great idea -- doing bypass surgery while the
heart is still beating, sparing patients the complications that can come from
going on a heart-lung machine. Now the first big test of this method has
produced a surprise: Bypass has fewer problems and is more successful done the
old way.

   Most surprisingly, there were no signs of mental decline in those on the
machines. Avoiding this problem was thought be one of the benefits of
"off-pump" surgery without a machine.

   "For the vast majority, there's no advantage to doing it off-pump, and there
may be some disadvantages," said Dr. Frederick Grover of the University of
Colorado-Denver, one of the leaders of the study.

   GENE THERAPY: French scientists mixed gene therapy and bone-marrow
transplants in two boys to seemingly halt a brain disease that can kill by
adolescence, it was reported last week.

   The surprise ingredient: They disabled the HIV virus so it couldn't cause
AIDS and then used it to carry in the healthy new gene.

   The experiment marks the first time researchers have tried that step in
people and the first effective gene therapy against a severe brain disease, said
lead researcher Dr. Patrick Aubourg of the Universite Paris-Descartes.

   Best known from the movie "Lorenzo's Oil," adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD, is a
rare genetic disease that, in its most devastating form, destroys the coating of
nerve fibers in boys' brains.

   SPACE ELEVATOR: A Seattle team has collected a $900,000 prize in a
NASA-backed competition to develop the concept of an elevator to space, an idea
spurred by science-fiction novels. The team's robotic machine raced up more than
2,950 feet of cable dangling from a helicopter.

   Powered by a ground-based laser pointed up at the robot's photovoltaic cells
that converted the light into electricity, the LaserMotive machine completed one
of its climbs last week in about 3 minutes and 48 seconds, good for second-place
money.

   Space elevators are envisioned as a way to reach space without the risk and
expense of rockets. Instead, electrically powered vehicles would run up and down
a cable anchored to a ground structure and extending thousands of miles up to a
mass in geosynchronous orbit .

   LaserMotive LLC was presented the check Friday by Andy Petro, program manager
of NASA's Centennial Challenges, in a ceremony at Dryden Flight Research
Facility on Edwards Air Force Base in California's Mojave Desert.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2009


                              163 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            November 8, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: REGIONAL; West; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1124 words

HEADLINE: Two biotech plans seeking approval at Town Meeting

BYLINE: By Brock Parker, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   Two large development proposals that could boost Lexington's growing
reputation as a home for biotechnology are about to come up for a vote.

   In separate proposals, Lexington Technology Park developers Patriot Partners
and Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. are seeking to build a total of about 500,000
square feet in research and office space that could generate almost $3 million
in tax revenue for the town each year.

   In the midst of a tough economy that has strained state and local budgets,
the Board of Selectmen's chairman, Norman Cohen, said the development proposals
offer an important opportunity to create new revenue.

   ``To have the prospect of increased revenue at this time would mean a great
deal,'' Cohen said.

   But both proposals are on the warrant seeking approval from Special Town
Meeting tomorrow night, and some neighbors say they still have concerns about
Patriot Partners proposal to build two new buildings at Lexington Technology
Park.

   The park, the former home of defense contractor Raytheon Co., now houses the
genetic therapies di vision of British drug-maker Shire Pharmaceuticals.

   Patrick Morin, who lives on Shade Street next to the technology park, said he
has concerns about noise and traffic spilling over onto his street, even though
he is hoping revenue created by the new construction could help to keep his
property taxes down.

   ``I think it's good for the town; I think it's great for the state because
it's high-paying jobs'' that would be created, Morin said. ``We just want to
make sure that our quality of life doesn't get desecrated.''

   Town Meeting member Thomas Fenn, who also lives next to the technology park,
said he has supported multiple buildings Patriot Partners has already developed
along Patriot Way since Raytheon moved out.

   But Fenn said some of that development has created horrible noise he can hear
in the neighborhood when he walks his dog. Fenn said he will not vote in support
of the Patriot Partners proposal at Town Meeting.

   ``I'm not going to support their additional construction,'' Fenn said. ``It's
developed enough for me.''

   Patriot Partners has already completed several new construction or renovation
projects in the 95-acre commercial complex, including buildings at 300 and 400
Patriot Way. It has also obtained approval for a 160,000-square-foot building at
200 Patriot Way slated to break ground in March and be occupied by Shire by
2012.

   Patriot Partners principal Stephen Rice said neighbors have raised concerns
about noise created by mechanical equipment on the roof of 300 Patriot Way, a
building that Patriot Partners reconstructed and is now occupied by Shire.

   Rice said Patriot Partners and Shire hired sound engineers to monitor the
noise and will make a significant investment to reduce the sound. But Rice said
the noise created by the equipment does not violate the town's noise ordinance.

   Selectwoman Jeanne Krieger said noise levels, and how noise will be
monitored, at the new buildings proposed by Patriot Partners remain an issue.

   She also said that the developer and Shire have both shown a good faith
effort to reduce the noise, and she supports the project.

   Patriot Partners' proposal would create an additional 380,000 square feet of
research or office space at 100 and 600 Patriot Way, as well as parking garages
with up to 743 additional spaces. Patriot Partners estimates the project would
create $2.2 million in net tax revenue for Lexington annually.

   Joe Zink, a principal of Patriot Partners and chief executive of a
Framingham-based real estate investment company, Atlantic Management, said that
if the project gets the go-ahead the construction would be completed in five to
seven years.

   The technology park, and the proposed development by Cubist Pharmaceuticals
at its headquarters at 45, 55, and 65 Hayden Ave. in Lexington, both sit close
to routes 2 and 128.

   Cubist is seeking approval to build 110,000 square feet of additional
research and office space, as well as a five-and-a-half-floor parking garage for
about 300 vehicles, said Robert Buckley, a lawyer representing the company.

   Unlike Lexington Technology Park, however, Cubist's property has no
neighboring homes. The company's land sits next to the Hayden Woods conservation
area.

   Cubist estimates its additions would generate an extra $500,000 in tax
revenue for Lexington annually, and Buckley said if the proposal is approved
construction could be underway at this time next year. Cubist needs the space to
accommodate about 100 new employees, he said.

   Buckley, who also represents Patriot Partners, said Lexington has recognized
the benefits of hosting biotechnology companies and has created regulations to
help the town capture the market.

   ``It's almost as if Lexington has hit the home run and everybody else is
trying to figure out how to run around the bases,'' he said.

   Zink said life-science companies are the ideal commercial neighbors because
they bring in high-paying jobs, and the additional space needed for research
labs also means there are fewer employees per square foot of development. As a
result, the amount of traffic created by such operations is reduced, Zink said.

   Lexington planning director Maryann McCall-Taylor said the town was not
always known for encouraging economic development, but biotechnology companies
have presented an opportunity that some believe could help support the town's
financial future.

   ``We went out and we thought biotech and we succeeded,'' McCall-Taylor said.

   While the potential revenue from the new development is important,
McCall-Taylor said, the town is also attempting to protect itself if the space
Patriot Partners is proposing to build is used as traditional office space
instead for biotechnology.

   While no tenants have signed on for the space, Zink said, Patriot Partners is
hoping another life science company will move in, with Shire holding the right
of first refusal for occupying the buildings.

   The town is working with Patriot Partners to reduce the potential traffic at
the technology park by encouraging shuttles to the Alewife MBTA stop,
McCall-Taylor said.

   Patriot Partners is also agreeing to pay the town up to about $1.4 million,
depending on how many of the 743 proposed parking spaces are built.

   Vicki Blier, a Town Meeting member and technology park neighbor, said that
she continues to have concerns about the Patriot Partners proposal, but because
she's still reviewing recent submissions by the developer, she couldn't say last
week whether she will vote in favor of it tomorrow night.

   Blier said she wants to make sure that the town sets a very high standard
about the noise that can be created by the new buildings.

   ``I really want to support it,'' Blier said. ``But it does raise neighborhood
problems that are difficult to solve.''

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2009


                              164 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            November 8, 2009 Sunday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; ON BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1939 words

HEADLINE: THE TWO SIDES OF UNEMPLOYMENT

BYLINE: ROBERT TRIGAUX

BODY:

   On the surface, Liberty County in Florida's Panhandle and Hendry County in
South Florida have plenty in common. They are rural with small populations. But
Liberty's unemployment rate is 5.3 percent while Hendry's is 16.8 percent - 11.5
percentage points higher.

   Why the astounding difference?

   To answer that question, we looked at the five Florida counties with the
lowest jobless rates and the five with the highest. They stretch from Destin to
Key West. What emerges are snapshots of an enormously challenged but resilient
Florida and perhaps some important lessons for the entire state.

   First, riding the real estate and construction boom while failing to
diversify is a sure ticket to desperate times. Second, agriculture products from
oysters, shrimp and citrus to potatoes, sugar and vegetables remain a hugely
important slice of the state economy. Third, alternative energy and biomass
plants are cropping up surprisingly often across the state though their sources
of fuel vary widely.

   And fourth, every last person I interviewed demonstrated a "we shall get
through this downturn and we shall prosper" attitude that speaks well for
Floridians and should bolster the confidence in our state economy - including
Tampa Bay, which is wrestling with its own 11.7 jobless rate.

   Turn to Page 6D to see how 10 very different counties are coping in this
economy.

   Robert Trigaux can be reached at trigaux@sptimes.com

   * * *

   Florida's unemployment extremes share a common goal

   Counties with highest unemployment:

   HENDRY

   The highest unemployment rate (16.8 percent) among Florida's 67 counties is
one bragging right that interim county economic development director Ron
Zimmerly would gladly skip. Hendry is seriously dependent on agriculture, from
citrus and sugar cane to cattle and row crops. Citrus is fighting two attacks -
canker and greening - while the sugar business was upended by the on-again,
off-again deal by the South Florida Water Management District to buy a vast land
tract from U.S. Sugar in Clewiston.

   If the deal goes through, look at 1,100 more lost jobs and the end of as many
as 20,000 indirect jobs, Zimmerly said. But Hendry's got some options.
Alternative energy firm Southeast Renewables signed a deal to produce ethanol
from sweet sorghum to generate electricity for Tampa's Seminole Electric
Cooperative. And Hendry is competing to build an intermodal/logistics center
that would service the Port of Palm Beach.

   "That could possibly be a perfect replacement for our lost U.S. Sugar jobs,"
reasons Zimmerly. He puts Hendry's chances at "better than 50-50."

   FLAGLER

   Doug Baxter's friendly Australian accent can take only so much of the rough
edge off a 16.2 percent unemployment rate. That's 5,068 lost jobs. The county
chamber of commerce chief has close ties to New York and New Jersey folks who
want to retire to Flagler but can't sell their homes up North. Flagler's biggest
town, 75,000-strong Palm Coast, is only 10 years old and focused much of its
retiree marketing on those two Northeast states way up Interstate 95.

   "We put all our eggs in one basket - housing," Baxter says. The "good news"
is Flagler home prices have dropped so much that some folks up North can now
afford them without first selling their first homes.

   Go west in Flagler, away from the Atlantic beaches (where Flagler tourism is
down 18 percent), for an agriculture surprise. Flagler's got big potato farms,
with almost all the harvest going to Lay's for potato chips. Mother Nature
mashed this year's potato crop with close to 30 inches of rain. Says Baxter:
"We're resilient."

   ST. LUCIE

   It boomed in the post-2004 clean-up of Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne but
became addicted to construction jobs; bad news when housing tanked, sending the
county unemployment rate to 15.3 percent. But Linda Cox, county chamber of
commerce CEO, has a new mantra: diversify. And she has proof it's working.

   "Biotech cluster." If there are two words more alluring to modern Florida
economic developers, I have yet to hear them. Just as Scripps Research put its
much touted Florida facility in Palm Beach County to the south, St. Lucie lured
Torrey Pines Institute, which begat the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute which
begat the Mann Foundation building a biotech facility just to capture the likely
spinoffs from the first two research firms.

   Add in call centers for QVC and Liberty Medial, and St. Lucie counts 2,500
jobs in its pipeline in the coming years. Just don't ask about construction.
"Nobody's building much of anything right now," Cox says. "I don't know if we've
hit bottom, but I hope what we see now is it."

   INDIAN RIVER

   Economic development director Helene Caseltine explains a daunting 15.2
percent jobless rate by saying citrus, tourism, construction and real estate are
no longer enough horsepower.

   Like St. Lucie County to the south on I-95, Indian River is keen on grabbing
a piece of the biotech promise. When Scripps Research first came to the state
five years ago searching for locations, the quartet of St. Lucie, Indian River,
Martin and Okeechobee counties united to brand themselves the "Research Coast."
St. Lucie's a big winner so far, but Caseltine hopes Indian River can attract
spinoffs. The county's big win recently is defensive. After decades in Vero
Beach, Piper Aircraft, the county's biggest private employer, considered
relocation. A full-court press kept it happy where it is. Ahead, the most
promising project may be a biomass plant that will burn trash, due by early
2010.

   Economic development, she says, is extremely competitive. "We're not
competing with Alachua or Escambia counties but Ireland and Vietnam."

   LEE COUNTY

   The largest among the 10 counties considered in this economic series and the
home of Fort Myers and housing-ravaged Cape Coral, Lee is bracing for a
long-term recovery. The county's unemployment rate of 13.9 percent is well below
Hendry and Flagler, but because this is a higher-population county, those who
are without jobs make up a big number.

   Gary Jackson, Florida Gulf Coast University economics professor and director
of the Regional Economic Research Institute in Fort Myers, closely tracks Lee
County economic trends. The intensity of southwest Florida's boom times - no
other part of Florida roared so hot - contributed to the severity of
overabundant housing, foreclosures and short sales. Tourism is down, too, though
the coming winter season should give a seasonal boost to the area at least until
the snowbirds leave.

   "Right now people understand the recession is over, but it will be a long and
gradual recovery," Jackson says. "That is a concern to folks."

   * * *

   Counties with lowest unemployment:

   LIBERTY

   How can such a rural county southwest of Tallahassee boast a 5.3 percent
unemployment rate - less than a third that of Hendry or Flagler counties - in
such a recession? Mother Nature provides. Apalachicola National Forest covers
half of Liberty and "wood" drives much of its economy. That ranges from a
Georgia Pacific mill making a plywood substitute called "oriented strand board"
to a biomass plant that generates 14 megawatts of electricity and promises more
to come. Liberty's big employer, though, is a state prison.

   A born-and-bred Liberty man, 77-year-old Johnny Eubanks is both chamber chief
and publisher of the Calhoun Liberty Journal. The weekly newspaper's unusual
challenge is reporting on Liberty, in the eastern time zone, and Calhoun County
next door in the central time zone.

   "Nearly everyone in Liberty that wants a job has a job," Eubanks says. "There
may be a few that want a better job. But if they want to go to work, they can
find themselves a job."

   WALTON

   Bill Arnett used to pitch business on struggling eastern Ohio. So he's in
heaven now that he's spent the last four months directing this Panhandle
county's economic development alliance. With only 6.8 percent unemployed - more
than 4 percentage points below Florida's state average - Walton is a huge
beneficiary of the defense industry. Eglin Air Force Base in nearby Okaloosa
County was a winner in the Defense Department's "BRAC" (Base Realignment and
Closure) commission recommendations because the 7th Special Forces, now at Fort
Bragg, will relocate to Eglin in 2011.

   "It's a big deal," Arnett says. Economic ripples will boost Walton as defense
companies cluster near Eglin and more services handle a growing military
population.

   Tourism's big, too. Arnett says the coming Bay County airport nearby will
bring more people. But the Midwest transplant winces when he hears of Hendry
County's 16.8 percent jobless rate - the state's highest. Says Arnett: "That
sounds like Ohio."

   MONROE

   If there's a ground zero for tourism, Monroe is it. And tourist-wise, Monroe
has been on a good roll, enjoying hotel occupancy rates north of 80 percent and
well above the state average. Add that to the county's relatively low 7 percent
unemployment rate and what's not to like?

   Not all is quite what it seems, says Monroe County administrator Roman
Gastesi. People are leaving Monroe after the real estate decline, because there
are few construction jobs and, Gastesi notes, "this is an expensive county to
live in." That exodus helps the jobless rate look better, but it does not make
the economy more vibrant.

   Housing prices are down on average from $400,000 to $300,000, though the
volume of home sales has started to pick up. Fishing-related business is down.
Take lobsters. Last year, they retailed at $12.99 a pound. Now they're $4.99 a
pound as people tighten their belts.

   Monroe's tourism win? Committing an extra penny to advertising, which Gastesi
says prompted lots of people to "rediscover" the Keys. "So we are okay," he
says, "but the gravy is gone."

   FRANKLIN

   "We farm oysters here," says Anita Grove, who heads the Apalachicola Bay
Chamber of Commerce in Franklin County. The county's modest 4,600-person work
force has a 7.1 percent jobless rate with county government and an area hospital
among the larger employers. Nearly 89 percent of the county's land is owned by
the state or federal government. But oystering and shrimping are the life and
soul of this county on the bay.

   There's just one catch. The federal Food and Drug Administration is pushing
for a ban on the sale of raw oysters from May to September to reduce the threat
of serious illness to people with weak immune systems. With raw oyster bars
prominent in the area (and across Florida) and 1,400 licensed oystermen in
Franklin County alone, Grove says this "unilateral" FDA proposal would strangle
the county economy.

   "It was a big surprise. You're talking about putting thousands out of work
with no chance for discussion," she said.

   ALACHUA

   No other county among Florida's 67 and so distant from a major metro area
enjoys an 800-pound gorilla like this one. It's called the University of Florida
in Gainesville, an economic engine any other county would die for. The good news
is that UF helps keep a jobless rate manageable at 7.1 percent. The bad news is
it's tough to diversify Alachua's economy with businesses not tied to the Home
of the Gators or the nearby Shands hospital system. That's education and health,
two positive growth sectors in this recession.

   Alachua also is home to two business incubators: the Sid Martin biotech
incubator affiliated with UF, and GTEC, the Gainesville Technology Enterprise
Center. "We've seen a number of companies graduate from these facilities," said
Alachua chamber CEO Brent Christensen, a Tampa transplant. "Some move into
Gainesville and some have left."

   When Enterprise Rent-A-Car opened a claims service center in the county
earlier this year, Christensen says they had 1,000 applicants for 120 openings.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC - JOHN CORBITT - Times

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2009


                              165 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            November 8, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: D; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1929 words

HEADLINE: The two sides of unemployment Florida's unemployment extremes share a
common goal

BODY:

   On the surface, Liberty County in Florida's Panhandle and Hendry County in
South Florida have plenty in common. They are rural with small populations. But
Liberty's unemployment rate is 5.3 percent while Hendry's is 16.8 percent - 11.5
percentage points higher.

   Why the astounding difference?

   To answer that question, we looked at the five Florida counties with the
lowest jobless rates and the five with the highest. They stretch from Destin to
Key West. What emerges are snapshots of an enormously challenged but resilient
Florida and perhaps some important lessons for the entire state.

   First, riding the real estate and construction boom while failing to
diversify is a sure ticket to desperate times. Second, agriculture products from
oysters, shrimp and citrus to potatoes, sugar and vegetables remain a hugely
important slice of the state economy. Third, alternative energy and biomass
plants are cropping up surprisingly often across the state though their sources
of fuel vary widely.

   And fourth, every last person I interviewed demonstrated a "we shall get
through this downturn and we shall prosper" attitude that speaks well for
Floridians and should bolster the confidence in our state economy - including
Tampa Bay, which is wrestling with its own 11.7 jobless rate.

   Turn to Page 6D to see how 10 very different counties are coping in this
economy.

   Robert Trigaux can be reached at trigaux@sptimes.com

   Counties with highest unemployment:

   Hendry

   The highest unemployment rate (16.8 percent) among Florida's 67 counties is
one bragging right that interim county economic development director Ron
Zimmerly would gladly skip. Hendry is seriously dependent on agriculture, from
citrus and sugar cane to cattle and row crops. Citrus is fighting two attacks -
canker and greening - while the sugar business was upended by the on-again,
off-again deal by the South Florida Water Management District to buy a vast land
tract from U.S. Sugar in Clewiston.

   If the deal goes through, look at 1,100 more lost jobs and the end of as many
as 20,000 indirect jobs, Zimmerly said. But Hendry's got some options.
Alternative energy firm Southeast Renewables signed a deal to produce ethanol
from sweet sorghum to generate electricity for Tampa's Seminole Electric
Cooperative. And Hendry is competing to build an intermodal/logistics center
that would service the Port of Palm Beach.

   "That could possibly be a perfect replacement for our lost U.S. Sugar jobs,"
reasons Zimmerly. He puts Hendry's chances at "better than 50-50."

   Flagler

   Doug Baxter's friendly Australian accent can take only so much of the rough
edge off a 16.2 percent unemployment rate. That's 5,068 lost jobs. The county
chamber of commerce chief has close ties to New York and New Jersey folks who
want to retire to Flagler but can't sell their homes up North. Flagler's biggest
town, 75,000-strong Palm Coast, is only 10 years old and focused much of its
retiree marketing on those two Northeast states way up Interstate 95.

   "We put all our eggs in one basket - housing," Baxter says. The "good news"
is Flagler home prices have dropped so much that some folks up North can now
afford them without first selling their first homes.

   Go west in Flagler, away from the Atlantic beaches (where Flagler tourism is
down 18 percent), for an agriculture surprise. Flagler's got big potato farms,
with almost all the harvest going to Lay's for potato chips. Mother Nature
mashed this year's potato crop with close to 30 inches of rain. Says Baxter:
"We're resilient."

   St. Lucie

   It boomed in the post-2004 clean-up of Hurricanes Frances and Jeanne but
became addicted to construction jobs; bad news when housing tanked, sending the
county unemployment rate to 15.3 percent. But Linda Cox, county chamber of
commerce CEO, has a new mantra: diversify. And she has proof it's working.

   "Biotech cluster." If there are two words more alluring to modern Florida
economic developers, I have yet to hear them. Just as Scripps Research put its
much touted Florida facility in Palm Beach County to the south, St. Lucie lured
Torrey Pines Institute, which begat the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute which
begat the Mann Foundation building a biotech facility just to capture the likely
spinoffs from the first two research firms.

   Add in call centers for QVC and Liberty Medial, and St. Lucie counts 2,500
jobs in its pipeline in the coming years. Just don't ask about construction.
"Nobody's building much of anything right now," Cox says. "I don't know if we've
hit bottom, but I hope what we see now is it."

   Indian River

   Economic development director Helene Caseltine explains a daunting 15.2
percent jobless rate by saying citrus, tourism, construction and real estate are
no longer enough horsepower.

   Like St. Lucie County to the south on I-95, Indian River is keen on grabbing
a piece of the biotech promise. When Scripps Research first came to the state
five years ago searching for locations, the quartet of St. Lucie, Indian River,
Martin and Okeechobee counties united to brand themselves the "Research Coast."
St. Lucie's a big winner so far, but Caseltine hopes Indian River can attract
spinoffs. The county's big win recently is defensive. After decades in Vero
Beach, Piper Aircraft, the county's biggest private employer, considered
relocation. A full-court press kept it happy where it is. Ahead, the most
promising project may be a biomass plant that will burn trash, due by early
2010.

   Economic development, she says, is extremely competitive. "We're not
competing with Alachua or Escambia counties but Ireland and Vietnam."

   Lee County

   The largest among the 10 counties considered in this economic series and the
home of Fort Myers and housing-ravaged Cape Coral, Lee is bracing for a
long-term recovery. The county's unemployment rate of 13.9 percent is well below
Hendry and Flagler, but because this is a higher-population county, those who
are without jobs make up a big number.

   Gary Jackson, Florida Gulf Coast University economics professor and director
of the Regional Economic Research Institute in Fort Myers, closely tracks Lee
County economic trends. The intensity of southwest Florida's boom times - no
other part of Florida roared so hot - contributed to the severity of
overabundant housing, foreclosures and short sales. Tourism is down, too, though
the coming winter season should give a seasonal boost to the area at least until
the snowbirds leave.

   "Right now people understand the recession is over, but it will be a long and
gradual recovery," Jackson says. "That is a concern to folks."

   Counties with lowest unemployment:

   Liberty

   How can such a rural county southwest of Tallahassee boast a 5.3 percent
unemployment rate - less than a third that of Hendry or Flagler counties - in
such a recession? Mother Nature provides. Apalachicola National Forest covers
half of Liberty and "wood" drives much of its economy. That ranges from a
Georgia Pacific mill making a plywood substitute called "oriented strand board"
to a biomass plant that generates 14 megawatts of electricity and promises more
to come. Liberty's big employer, though, is a state prison.

   A born-and-bred Liberty man, 77-year-old Johnny Eubanks is both chamber chief
and publisher of the Calhoun Liberty Journal. The weekly newspaper's unusual
challenge is reporting on Liberty, in the eastern time zone, and Calhoun County
next door in the central time zone.

   "Nearly everyone in Liberty that wants a job has a job," Eubanks says. "There
may be a few that want a better job. But if they want to go to work, they can
find themselves a job."

   Walton

   Bill Arnett used to pitch business on struggling eastern Ohio. So he's in
heaven now that he's spent the last four months directing this Panhandle
county's economic development alliance. With only 6.8 percent unemployed - more
than 4 percentage points below Florida's state average - Walton is a huge
beneficiary of the defense industry. Eglin Air Force Base in nearby Okaloosa
County was a winner in the Defense Department's "BRAC" (Base Realignment and
Closure) commission recommendations because the 7th Special Forces, now at Fort
Bragg, will relocate to Eglin in 2011.

   "It's a big deal," Arnett says. Economic ripples will boost Walton as defense
companies cluster near Eglin and more services handle a growing military
population.

   Tourism's big, too. Arnett says the coming Bay County airport nearby will
bring more people. But the Midwest transplant winces when he hears of Hendry
County's 16.8 percent jobless rate - the state's highest. Says Arnett: "That
sounds like Ohio."

   Monroe

   If there's a ground zero for tourism, Monroe is it. And tourist-wise, Monroe
has been on a good roll, enjoying hotel occupancy rates north of 80 percent and
well above the state average. Add that to the county's relatively low 7 percent
unemployment rate and what's not to like?

   Not all is quite what it seems, says Monroe County administrator Roman
Gastesi. People are leaving Monroe after the real estate decline, because there
are few construction jobs and, Gastesi notes, "this is an expensive county to
live in." That exodus helps the jobless rate look better, but it does not make
the economy more vibrant.

   Housing prices are down on average from $400,000 to $300,000, though the
volume of home sales has started to pick up. Fishing-related business is down.
Take lobsters. Last year, they retailed at $12.99 a pound. Now they're $4.99 a
pound as people tighten their belts.

   Monroe's tourism win? Committing an extra penny to advertising, which Gastesi
says prompted lots of people to "rediscover" the Keys. "So we are okay," he
says, "but the gravy is gone."

   Franklin

   "We farm oysters here," says Anita Grove, who heads the Apalachicola Bay
Chamber of Commerce in Franklin County. The county's modest 4,600-person work
force has a 7.1 percent jobless rate with county government and an area hospital
among the larger employers. Nearly 89 percent of the county's land is owned by
the state or federal government. But oystering and shrimping are the life and
soul of this county on the bay.

   There's just one catch. The federal Food and Drug Administration is pushing
for a ban on the sale of raw oysters from May to September to reduce the threat
of serious illness to people with weak immune systems. With raw oyster bars
prominent in the area (and across Florida) and 1,400 licensed oystermen in
Franklin County alone, Grove says this "unilateral" FDA proposal would strangle
the county economy.

   "It was a big surprise. You're talking about putting thousands out of work
with no chance for discussion," she said.

   Alachua

   No other county among Florida's 67 and so distant from a major metro area
enjoys an 800-pound gorilla like this one. It's called the University of Florida
in Gainesville, an economic engine any other county would die for. The good news
is that UF helps keep a jobless rate manageable at 7.1 percent. The bad news is
it's tough to diversify Alachua's economy with businesses not tied to the Home
of the Gators or the nearby Shands hospital system. That's education and health,
two positive growth sectors in this recession.

   Alachua also is home to two business incubators: the Sid Martin biotech
incubator affiliated with UF, and GTEC, the Gainesville Technology Enterprise
Center. "We've seen a number of companies graduate from these facilities," said
Alachua chamber CEO Brent Christensen, a Tampa transplant. "Some move into
Gainesville and some have left."

   When Enterprise Rent-A-Car opened a claims service center in the county
earlier this year, Christensen says they had 1,000 applicants for 120 openings.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2009


                              166 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           November 7, 2009 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 40 words

HEADLINE: Corrections

BODY:

   An article on Tuesday about an experimental gene therapy procedure intended
to improve vision misstated the name of a gene used in a treatment of five
children and seven adults with a type of congenital retinal disease. It is
RPE65, not REP65.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2009


                              167 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                            November 6, 2009 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 150  words

HEADLINE: HIV therapy halts brain disease

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   French scientists have mixed gene therapy and bone marrow transplants in two
boys to seemingly halt a brain disease that can kill by adolescence.

   The surprise ingredient: They disabled the HIV virus so it couldn't cause
AIDS, and then used it to carry in the healthy new gene.

   The experiment marks the first time researchers have tried that step in
people -- and the first effective gene therapy against a severe brain disease,
said lead researcher Dr. Patrick Aubourg of the University Paris-Descartes.

   The small study, it has "exciting implications" for other blood and immune
disorders that had been feared beyond gene therapy's reach, said Dr. Kenneth
Cornetta, president of the American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy.

   "This study shows the power of combining gene therapy and cell therapy,"
added Cornetta, whose own lab at Indiana University has long researched how to
safely develop gene delivery.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              168 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                            November 6, 2009 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 150  words

HEADLINE: HIV therapy halts brain disease

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   French scientists have mixed gene therapy and bone marrow transplants in two
boys to seemingly halt a brain disease that can kill by adolescence.

   The surprise ingredient: They disabled the HIV virus so it couldn't cause
AIDS, and then used it to carry in the healthy new gene.

   The experiment marks the first time researchers have tried that step in
people -- and the first effective gene therapy against a severe brain disease,
said lead researcher Dr. Patrick Aubourg of the University Paris-Descartes.

   The small study, it has "exciting implications" for other blood and immune
disorders that had been feared beyond gene therapy's reach, said Dr. Kenneth
Cornetta, president of the American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy.

   "This study shows the power of combining gene therapy and cell therapy,"
added Cornetta, whose own lab at Indiana University has long researched how to
safely develop gene delivery.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2009


                              169 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            November 6, 2009 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 886 words

HEADLINE: New triumph cited for gene therapy;
Researchers stabilize 'Lorenzo's Oil' disease in two boys. Experts hail the
breakthrough.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II

BODY:

   In the third gene-therapy success of recent weeks, French researchers have
arrested the progression of the rare and fatal degenerative disorder
adrenoleukodystrophy, which was at the heart of the popular movie "Lorenzo's
Oil." The disease has stabilized in two boys who were 7 years old when the
therapy was performed two years ago, the team reported today in the journal
Science.

   "This is a disease that never, ever stabilizes" on its own, said Dr.
Katherine A. High of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who was not
involved in the research. "The fact that they were able to achieve that means
they are getting a therapeutic effect."

   This is the fifth disease for which gene therapy has been shown to be
beneficial, said Dr. Theodore Friedmann of UC San Diego, who was also not
involved. "That's a major achievement for a field that has been in the clinic
for only 18 or 19 years. . . . This is a new form of medicine and deserves to be
seen as such."

   The French team has already treated a third boy who has the disease. Although
results are not yet available in that case, the team plans to expand the trial
to others, including older men with a milder form of the disease.

   Adrenoleukodystrophy, commonly known as ALD, is identified in about 120 young
boys in the U.S. each year. Those born with the defective ALD gene appear to be
normal until about age 5, "when a really catastrophic process of progressive,
relentless demyelination [of the brain] sets in that leaves them vegetative or
dead within one to two years," said Dr. Florian Eichler of Massachusetts General
Hospital, an expert in the disease. "This is as bad as neurological disorders
get."

   If the disorder is identified before brain deterioration begins, the
concoction known as Lorenzo's oil -- a mixture of fats from olive and rapeseed
oils that purportedly reduces abnormally high levels of damaging long-chain
fatty acids in the brain -- can delay the disease's progress somewhat.

   Once deterioration begins, however, the only option has been a bone marrow
transplant. For the few children who have a closely matched sibling, the
procedure can arrest progression. A transplant from a less closely matched donor
can help, but can also have severe side effects. Some patients, for example,
must use a wheelchair as a result of the procedure.

   The new research was conducted by a team headed by Drs. Nathalie Cartier and
Patrick Aubourg of Paris Descartes University, who have been involved in
previous successful studies of severe combined immunodeficiency disease.

   They took the healthy form of the ALD gene and inserted it into HIV -- the
AIDS virus -- that had been "defanged" so that it could no longer cause disease.
HIV, from the lentivirus family, has been of great interest to gene therapists
because it can insert genes into cells that are not actively dividing. Previous
viruses used as delivery systems have only been able to insert genes into cells
that are dividing.

   The HIV delivery system may also be safer. Mouse retroviruses that have been
used in previous studies of gene therapy can activate genes near where the added
gene is inserted into the chromosome, potentially creating problems. That may be
why a gene-therapy treatment for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, or
SCID, caused some cases of leukemia. Lentiviruses are much less likely to turn
on unwanted genes.

   Despite years of research, this is the first time that a lentivirus has been
used in a human trial. Aubourg and his colleagues chose it because it introduces
the desired gene into a higher proportion of cells.

   The French team isolated bone-marrow stem cells from the two boys, then used
the virus to introduce the healthy ALD gene. They then did the equivalent of a
bone-marrow transplant, destroying the boys' marrow and introducing the modified
cells, which proliferate to form new marrow. About 15% of the cells began
producing the desired protein, and production has persisted for the two years of
follow-up.

   Fifteen percent may not seem like much, but "it is a level that would be
therapeutic for a variety of other diseases, like sickle cell disease," said Dr.
Donald Kohn, a gene-therapy researcher at UCLA.

   He noted that the first successful treatment for SCID in Milan got production
of the desired gene in only "1% of cells at best."

   The effects on the disease were about the same as those from a successful
bone-marrow transplant using closely matched cells, Aubourg noted.

   "That's good news because many patients don't have access to bone-marrow
transplants [that are good matches], and it is not an innocuous procedure,"
Friedmann said.

   The team documented its success in arresting the disease in a variety of
ways, and was able to demonstrate that the procedure was safe.

   In the last two weeks, researchers have reported using gene therapy to treat
an eye disease called Leber's congenital amaurosis and to rejuvenate human lungs
that would otherwise be unfit for transplantation -- although treated lungs have
not yet been transplanted into humans. Two forms of SCID had previously been
cured, and now ALD.

   Gene therapy "has crossed a threshold, scientifically and medically, and also
in credibility," Friedmann said. These studies "are not hype; they are not
hyperbole. They really are providing treatment for sick people."

   --

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2009


                              170 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 6, 2009 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1023 words

HEADLINE: After Setbacks, Small Successes for Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Not long ago, gene therapy seemed troubled by insurmountable difficulties.
After decades of hype and dashed hopes, many who once embraced the idea of
correcting genetic disorders by giving people new genes all but gave up the
idea.

     But scientists say gene therapy may be on the edge of a resurgence. There
were three recent, though small, successes -- one involving children with a
fatal brain disease, one with an eye disease that causes blindness and one with
children who have a disease that destroys the immune system.

     ''We are ready to move,'' said Dr. Luigi Naldini of the Institute for Gene
Therapy at Vita-Salute San Raffaele University in Milan.

     Dr. Kenneth Cornetta, a gene therapy researcher at Indiana University and
president of the American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy, added: ''It's
exciting. The science gets better every year.''

     But given the history of gene therapy, some, like Dr. Mark Kay, a gene
therapy researcher at Stanford, were careful to avoid promising too much.

     The field was dealt a blow when the first gene therapy success, reported
six years ago, turned out to have a problem. Eighteen of 20 children with a rare
genetic disease were cured, but then three of the children developed leukemia
and one died of it. Researchers and gene therapy companies became skittish.

     ''I like to be really cautious,'' Dr. Kay said. But now, he added, ''there
is a lot of reasonably cautious optimism.''

     The latest encouraging news arises from a paper published Friday in the
journal Science. An international team of researchers is reporting the
successful treatment of two children with adrenoleukodystrophy, or ALD, in which
the fatty insulation of nerve cells degenerates. A result is progressive brain
damage and death two to five years after diagnosis. The disease was the focus of
the movie ''Lorenzo's Oil.''

     Scientists say they believe they avoided the cancer problem by using a
different method to get genes into the children's DNA. Two years have gone by,
and the children are doing well.

     The children were not cured, but their disease was arrested. And gene
therapy was as good as the standard treatment, a bone marrow transplant. In this
case, the children could not have a transplant because they did not have marrow
donors who were genetic matches.

     In addition, a paper last month in the journal Lancet reported that a
different method of gene therapy, which did not involve inserting a new gene
into DNA, partly restored the sight of five children and seven adults with a
rare congenital eye disease, Leber's congenital amaurosis. People with the
disease have a mutated gene that prevents them from making a retina protein.

     While not in the DNA, the added gene remains in the body of the cells,
directing the production of the missing protein and helping correct the
disorder. The patients had no standard treatment, and gene therapy offered them
a chance to see again, although their sight was far from perfect. But the gene
is not copied when cells divide, as it would be if it were part of the cells'
DNA, so the method applies only to cells, like those of the retina, that divide
rarely.

     And a paper in The New England Journal of Medicine a year ago reported that
8 out of 10 patients with a rare immunological disorder were cured with gene
therapy. The method was the same as the one that led to leukemia, and Dr.
Cornetta said scientists were still studying why it did not cause cancer in
those children.

     The paper in Science was accompanied by an editorial by Dr. Naldini titled,
''A Comeback for Gene Therapy.'' In a telephone interview, he added that the
result was ''pushing a lot of people to move forward,'' including him.

     The story of gene therapy for ALD began when Amber Salzman of Merion
Station, Pa., learned that her nephew had the disease. Since it is a genetic
disorder, the entire family was tested. A second nephew had the gene, and, Ms.
Salzman learned, so did her 1-year-old son.

     Ms. Salzman and her sisters got to work, forming the Stop ALD Foundation
and pushing scientists and doctors to meet and plan a study of gene therapy.

     It turned out that several groups of researchers had been developing a new
way to get genes into a cell's DNA. The original method used a modified mouse
leukemia virus to insert genes. That method was used in the study in France that
led to leukemia in some children.

     And the virus was unsuitable anyway for most diseases because it corrected
gene defects in only 0.1 percent of cells. That, many said, was a worse problem
than the leukemia.

     Researchers were stymied, said the lead investigator of the ALD study, Dr.
Patrick Aubourg of Inserm, an institute for health and medical research in
France.

     The new approach involved using H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, to
insert genes, modifying the virus first so it could not cause disease.

     ''We were scared, of course,'' said Dr. Naldini, who was working on the
virus in the laboratory of Dr. Inder M. Verma at the Salk Institute. But he
reasoned that if he could remove enough H.I.V. genes to make it safe, the
modified virus could work.

     It solved the efficiency problem -- the modified AIDS virus added genes to
15 percent of cells. And researchers believe it solved the cancer problem. The
virus had less chance of turning on genes that could lead to cancer.

     Ms. Salzman and Ms. Lapin found out about the work and contacted Dr. Verma.
In the end, the company Cell Genesys made the virus, and Dr. Aubourg treated two
boys from Spain.

     Ms. Salzman's son had a bone marrow transplant. Her sister's older boy died
of ALD, and her younger son underwent a bone marrow transplant but had
complications from the procedure and now, successfully treated for ALD, is in a
wheelchair from side effects of the transplant.

     Dr. Aubourg has also treated a third boy with ALD, and he is doing well,
but it is too soon to know if his disease has been arrested.

     ''We have to be cautious -- very, very cautious,'' Dr. Aubourg said. ''But
this is the first time that a very serious disease of the brain, a lethal
disease of the brain, has been treated with success by gene therapy.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2009


                              171 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 6, 2009 Friday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1445 words

HEADLINE: Sisters rally genetic researchers to tackle fatal brain disease

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   The busy scientist was about to leave a conference in Washington for his
native Hungary when he was buttonholed by a persistent Main Line mother worried
about her son's health.

   Amber Salzman told him he absolutely had to meet a researcher in France who
was working on the deadly brain disease that could strike her son. He said,
sure, someday.

   But after boarding the plane to Hungary, he got a surprise message from the
flight attendant: Salzman had already set up the meeting, and the French
researcher would meet him in Budapest.

   That fast-track meeting, and plenty of others arranged by Salzman and her
sister Rachel, eventually led to pioneering research published today in the
journal Science. The authors report that a novel gene therapy seems to stop
progression of ALD, the rare disease featured in the movie Lorenzo's Oil.

   The study describes results from just two patients, and the therapy is not
without risks. Still, other experts said it looked promising, especially for
those lacking a good match for a bone-marrow transplant, the usual treatment.

   And the authors agree it would not have occurred without the Salzmans, who
cold-called scientists, showed up at meetings, and urged far-flung researchers
and companies to collaborate.

   "They never quit, the Salzman sisters," said Nathalie Cartier, a scientist at
INSERM, a public research institute in Paris.

   "They are like fairies," said study leader Patrick Aubourg. "They succeed
with problems that we cannot resolve."

   It is not uncommon for parents of sick children to set up foundations to
raise money and foster research, as the Salzmans did in creating the Stop ALD
Foundation. But they had added advantages.

   Amber, who has a doctorate in mathematics from Bryn Mawr College and lives in
Merion, was a longtime senior executive at GlaxoSmithKline. Rachel, a
veterinarian living in Florida, knew her way around a scientific paper.

   What they soon learned was not encouraging.

   Family crisis It began in late 2000, when a third sister, Eve Lapin of
Houston, learned that her son Oliver had ALD. He had been misdiagnosed as having
attention deficit disorder and then Asperger's syndrome.

   An MRI finally revealed the cruel truth: There were lesions on his brain.
Further tests revealed ALD - adrenoleukodystrophy, which strikes one person in
18,000. The myelin that insulated the nerve cells in his brain was
deteriorating, which could lead to seizures and dementia. He had just a few
years to live.

   Since the disease runs in families, Lapin had her younger son screened, and
Amber Salzman had her son tested as well. Their blood revealed early signs of
the illness.

   The two mothers learned that they were carriers for the disease. They showed
no symptoms, as ALD primarily strikes males, but they had passed it on to their
sons. Their sister, Rachel, the veterinarian, was not a carrier, so her children
would be fine.

   Amber Salzman immediately started working her contacts at Glaxo. Her
then-boss, Tachi Yamada, urged her to investigate gene therapy.

   Just two months after the boys' diagnoses, she and Rachel met in Paris with
French scientists Aubourg and Cartier.

   The scientists had been studying the disease for more than a decade, and had
gotten promising results from gene therapy on lab animals. But to proceed in
humans, they needed someone to make a clinical-grade "vector" - a disabled virus
that would deliver corrective genes to human bone marrow cells.

   That's what led the Salzmans to meet Gabor Veres, the Hungarian scientist at
the Washington meeting. He worked for Cell Genesys, which could make the right
kind of vector, a lentivirus, from a disabled form of HIV.

   Once on the plane for Hungary, Veres was taken aback when he got the
Salzmans' message from the flight attendant. He was even more surprised when he
drove to his parents' home, two hours from Budapest, where another message
awaited him.

   The persistent sisters had called his non-English-speaking parents, with the
help of a translation service. Veres was to meet with Aubourg, the French
scientist, the next day in a Budapest hotel. Rachel Salzman flew from the United
States to join them. "They played a huge role to get the right people together,"
Veres said of the Salzmans.

   Helping others Amber Salzman soon realized that gene therapy would not come
to fruition soon enough for her son or nephews.

   It was also too late for Lorenzo's Oil, the treatment shown in the movie,
which can reduce or delay symptoms.

   Amber's older nephew, Oliver, died in 2004 at 12.

   The younger one, Elliott, and her own son, Spencer Barsh, were candidates for
bone marrow stem-cell transplants, but no matches were available. Instead, in
2002, both received transplants of stem cells from umbilical-cord blood.

   Today, Spencer, 9, is healthy. Elliott, 15, did not fare so well. His brain
is fine, but his immune system had a negative reaction to the foreign cells. He
suffers from graft-vs.-host disease and uses a wheelchair.

   The advantage of gene therapy is that patients do not need to find a match
for a cell transplant. Instead, the patients are their own donors. The
bone-marrow stem cells are removed, so their flawed genetic recipe can be
corrected; the cells are then reinserted into the patient.

   These stem cells give rise to progenitor cells that yield a range of blood
and immune cells - including a special kind called microglia, which travel to
the brain.

   Microglia respond to brain injuries like "traffic cops," said Florian
Eichler, an assistant professor of neurology at Harvard Medical School.

   But in patients with ALD, the microglia make a flawed version of a certain
enzyme, somehow leading to deterioration of the myelin sheaths that protect
nerve cells. Patients' brains also suffer from an accumulation of
very-long-chain fatty acids.

   With gene therapy, in theory, the microglia would make the correct enzyme.
Though it was too late for their family, the Salzmans kept pursuing that route
for others.

   Amber and Rachel spoke with researchers and regulators; Eve Lapin cared for
her children and fielded the heart-wrenching calls from parents of other ill
children.

   At one point, Cell Genesys shut down the business unit that was developing
lentiviral vectors - the kind that would be used in the trial - deciding to
focus on cancer vaccines. Veres, who worked for that unit, was laid off.

   The French scientists thought that was the end of their trial.

   Not the Salzmans.

   "You have to be one of these people who say it will work, otherwise you won't
get up in the morning," said Amber, 47, now chief executive officer of
Cardiokine Inc. in Philadelphia, which develops heart medicines.

   They kept calling Cell Genesys. At one point, Rachel Salzman badgered a
secretary to get someone's e-mail address.

   "I felt terrible," she said. "But not that terrible."

   They eventually got the word: The company would still make their vector.

   Stephen Sherwin, the former CEO, said the company was not paid for its
efforts but went ahead because the approach seemed promising and "it was the
right thing to do."

   He credits the Salzmans for their determination. "They made it happen," said
Sherwin, whose company has since merged with BioSante.

   The two patients, 7-year-old boys from Spain, were treated in 2006 and 2007.
Both had brain lesions but no serious impairment.

   Their brain cells continued to deteriorate for a year, but then the disease
stopped progressing. More than two years after treatment, they remain stable.
Left untreated, they would surely have gotten worse, said Gihan Tennekoon,
director of pediatric neurology at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who
reviewed the paper.

   "I think it's a real step forward," Tennekoon said.

   One potential risk is that the patients would get leukemia as the corrective
genes are inserted into the patients' chromosomes.

   This happened in another trial for an immune disease. But that trial used a
different kind of virus to deliver the genes; in the new study, the patients
show no worrisome signs so far, said Katherine A. High, a leading gene therapy
expert at Children's.

   The authors thanked the Salzmans and many others in a note at the end of
their paper.

   The sisters are pleased but not finished. They are working to get a follow-up
trial in the United States. They hope someday all newborns will be screened for
the disease that struck their family so they can be diagnosed before it's too
late.

   In 2000, plenty of people told them their quest was a long shot.

   "I have had phone calls with scientists who, believe me, have a lot more
degrees than I do, who've told me, 'What you're doing is not going to work,' "
said Rachel, 49. "It doesn't faze me at all."

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2009


                              172 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 3, 2009 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: Giving Sight By Therapy With Genes

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

BODY:

   By the time Corey Haas  was 7, the retinal disease he was born with had
already stolen much of his vision. ''He always clung to me or my wife,'' said
Corey's father, Ethan Haas.

     The boy relied on a cane and adults to guide him, and, unable to see
blackboard writing, sat in back with a teacher's aide, large-type computer
screen and materials in Braille.

     Legally blind, Corey was expected eventually to lose all sight. Then, 13
months ago, after his eighth birthday, he underwent an experimental gene therapy
procedure, receiving an injection in his left eye.

     His vision in that eye improved quickly. Now 9, Corey plays Little League
baseball, drives go-carts, navigates wooded trails near his home in Hadley,
N.Y., and reads the blackboard in class. ''It's gotten, like, really better,''
he said.

     Experts in vision problems say that while it is unclear how many visually
impaired people gene therapy could help, they consider the research promising
for some types of blinding diseases, and an achievement for gene therapy, which
has had many setbacks.

     The study, reported in the journal Lancet, involved five children and seven
adults, from Belgium, Italy and the United states, with a type of Leber's
congenital amaurosis, rare but serious congenital retinal diseases.

     The researchers injected into the eyes of the patients a virus with the
normal version of the gene REP65 inserted into its genome. When the virus
invaded the light-sensing cells in the eye and inserted its own DNA into the
cells' DNA, the crucial human gene was included.

     Starting at about two weeks, ''all 12 had significant improvement,'' said
Stephen Rose, chief research officer at the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which
helped finance the study. That meant the inserted gene was functioning. ''You're
not returning 20-20 vision, let's be real,'' Dr. Rose said, ''but you're
returning a tremendous amount of vision.''

     Dr. Jean Bennett, an ophthalmology professor at University of Pennsylvania
who was a leader of the study, said participants could ''read signs or see
numbers on their cellphones, stripes on their clothes, patterns on furniture,
wood on a violin or marble on a table.'' Some read several more lines on eye
charts.

     Children improved the most, perhaps because fewer photoreceptors had
decayed. But even the oldest patient, Tami Morehouse, 44, who was sometimes
housebound, now walks to meet her children coming from school and ''saw her
daughter hit a home run,'' Dr. Bennett said.

     In a burst of new research on restoring sight, gene therapy is one of the
methods closest to achieving results, but it will not help everyone because some
eye diseases destroy photoreceptor cells, which are crucial for allowing gene
therapy to work. Also, specific genes must be identified for different strains
of diseases.

     ''Gene therapy is great, but it's going to work only when patients have
viable photoreceptor cells,'' said Dr. Gerald Chader, chief scientific officer
at Doheny Retina Institute in Los Angeles, who was not involved in the study.
''There's a great limitation on the number of patients.''

     Dr. Rose said the number helped might be greater than previously thought,
because some patients had ''islands of live photoreceptors'' where gene therapy
might restore partial sight.

     Dr. Katherine High, another study leader, who heads the Center for Cellular
and Molecular Therapeutics at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, said that in
the future, the researchers might inject 3-year-olds, and then 6-month-olds,
ultimately in both eyes.

     ''That would give you the best chance of salvaging as much visual function
as possible,'' Dr. High said.

     The experiment succeeded in part because the body did not mount an immune
response that destroyed the invading virus. Dr. Bennett said she believed that
was because ''the eye itself is enclosed'' and ''protected from the blood
supply,'' so the injected compound ''doesn't escape.''

     Dr. High said that, while researchers expected visual improvement to
plateau after about eight weeks, ''many people report continuing improvement,''
suggesting their brains might be continually adjusting to the new visual
pathways.

     ''It's not appropriate for us to call this a cure because we don't know how
long it will last,'' she said. ''But it's certainly a reversal of the
blindness.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: November 7, 2009

CORRECTION:

   An article on Tuesday about an experimental gene therapy procedure intended
to improve vision misstated the name of a gene used in a treatment of five
children and seven adults with a type of congenital retinal disease. It is
RPE65, not REP65.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2009


                              173 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; National; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Damaged lungs fixed for transplants;
New gene therapy helps patch them

BYLINE: By Lauran Neergaard, Associated press

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Call it a genetic patch job for worn lungs: Canadian researchers
took donated lungs deemed too damaged to transplant and repaired them with
outside-the-body gene therapy.

   It will take lots more research to see if the fix lasts, to find out if the
lungs work as well back inside a body as they do inside a see-through
life-support dome in the laboratory. But the study published yesterday has lung
specialists hopeful they can boost the number of lungs available for people
desperately in need.

   ``We've been banging our heads against the wall with respect to lung
transplant survival for quite some time,'' said Dr. Michael Bousamra of the
University of Louisville, who wasn't involved in the new project.

   ``It's a long way from prime time,'' cautioned Bousamra, lung transplant
chief at Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Ky. But, he said, ``This approach has
the potential to change the way we do things.''

   Only about 15 percent of the lungs now provided from otherwise good organ
donors are usable for transplant.

   The problem often is not that the lungs were diseased. Rather, the delicate
airways were damaged as doctors tried to keep the donor alive, or brain death
caused massive inflammation that triggered further damage. And lungs that are
transplanted are vulnerable to a cascade of inflammation in the first three days
post-surgery.

   In fact, the five-year survival of lung transplant recipients is barely 50
percent, worse than for heart, liver, or kidney recipients.

   The new research, from Toronto's University Health Network, aims first to
save donated lungs that otherwise would be discarded. If that works, it might
help fend off post- transplant damage, too.

   The key: A gene that produces a substance called interleukin-10. Among
IL-10's many jobs is tamping down inflammation from the molecules most prone to
damage lungs. But when lungs are donated, they're quickly put on ice to stop
tissue deterioration, and that keeps whatever IL-10 remains from working.

   Dr. Shaf Keshavjee, University Health Network's lung transplant chief,
devised a two-part fix: First, create a body-temperature chamber that will keep
the lungs alive outside the body. His team created a protective dome to house
the lungs, where a solution of oxygen and nutrients is pumped into them,
mimicking the body but minus the blood.

   Second, insert a gene into those lungs that will quickly produce high levels
of IL-10 and reverse the inflammation.

   His team reports success in yesterday's journal Science Translational
Medicine. They stuck the IL-10 gene into an adenovirus, from the family of cold
viruses, so it would be taken up by lung cells, and snaked the virus inside the
airways of the dome-preserved lung.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                              174 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: A breath of hope for more lung transplants

BYLINE: By LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Call it a genetic patch job for worn lungs: Canadian researchers
took donated lungs deemed too damaged to transplant and repaired them with
outside-the-body gene therapy.

   The study published Wednesday has lung specialists hopeful they can boost the
number of lungs available for people desperately in need.

   "We've been banging our heads against the wall with respect to lung
transplant survival for quite some time," said Dr. Michael Bousamra of the
University of Louisville, who wasn't involved in the new project.

   "It's a long way from prime-time," cautioned Bousamra, lung transplant chief
at Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Ky.

   Only about 15 percent of the lungs now provided from otherwise good organ
donors are usable for transplant.

   And the five-year survival of lung transplant recipients is barely 50
percent, worse than for heart, liver or kidney recipients.

   The new research, from Toronto's University Health Network, aims first to
save donated lungs that otherwise would be discarded - and if that works, it
might help fend off post-transplant damage, too.

   The key: A gene that produces a substance called interleukin-10. Among
IL-10's many jobs is tamping down inflammation from the very molecules most
prone to damage lungs. But when lungs are donated, they're quickly put on ice to
stop tissue deterioration, and that keeps whatever IL-10 remains from working.

   So Dr. Shaf Keshavjee, University Health Network's lung transplant chief,
devised a two-part fix: First, create a body-temperature chamber that will keep
the lungs alive outside the body. His team created a protective dome to house
the lungs, where a solution of oxygen and nutrients is pumped into them,
mimicking the body but minus the blood.

   Second, insert a gene into those lungs that will quickly produce high levels
of IL-10 and reverse the inflammation.

   His team reports success in Wednesday's journal Science Translational
Medicine.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS/SCIENCE PATCH JOB: This undated photo provided by the
journal Science shows some gene repair of human lungs.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                              175 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 29, 2009 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Gene therapy may boost success of lung transplants

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II

BODY:

   A new gene therapy procedure to restore function in lungs damaged during
harvesting from donors could make more of the organs available for
transplanting, Canadian researchers reported Wednesday.

   Currently, only about 15% of potential donor lungs are used because the rest
are too damaged to implant. The new technique, which has not yet been tested in
humans, could prevent that damage or even reverse it, potentially expanding the
supply of lungs sharply.

   Lung transplants are the definitive therapy for many end-stage lung diseases
such as emphysema and cystic fibrosis, but they are fraught with problems.
Because lungs are more likely to be rejected by recipients' bodies than other
organs, the five-year survival rate is only about 50%, lower than that for
heart, liver or kidney transplantation.

   And because of the shortage of donor lungs, an estimated 234 people in the
United States died last year while waiting for a lung transplant, according to
the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. About 1,800 people in this
country are now on the waiting list for a lung, the agency said.

   The problem in both cases is inflammation caused by insufficient amounts of
an immune molecule called lL-10. Donated lungs are immediately chilled on ice,
which destroys any IL-10 that may remain in the lungs, allowing substantial
damage to occur before the organ can be implanted. And a lack of the molecule
after transplantation increases the likelihood that inflammation will damage the
organ and induce rejection.

   "Anything that can decrease inflammatory processes would make them more
suitable for transplantation and also impact the recipient's ability to reject
the organ," said Dr. James McPherson, a thoracic surgeon at Marina Del Rey
Hospital who was not involved in the research. "This looks very promising."

   To circumvent inflammation, Dr. Shaf Keshavjee and Dr. Marcelo Cypel of the
University Health Network in Toronto and their colleagues developed a
two-pronged approach.

   First, they devised a domed chamber that keeps the lungs at body temperature,
preserving IL-10, and that pumps a solution containing oxygen and nutrients
through the lungs to keep them alive. That alone prevented the lungs from
deteriorating and improved the success of transplants in animals.

   The researchers then performed gene therapy on the lungs, using a defanged
adenovirus to deliver a gene that is the blueprint for IL-10 into the lung
tissue. The gene was quickly taken up by the cells and began producing the
molecule, which reduced inflammation.

   "We're transducing the cells in the lung to become little IL-10 factories,"
Keshavjee said in a statement.

   The team reported Wednesday in the new journal Science Translational Medicine
that they used the technique to remove lungs from pigs -- whose metabolism is
similar to that of humans -- perfused them in the domed chamber for 12 hours,
then successfully reimplanted them.

   They then took human lungs that were considered too damaged for
transplantation and subjected them to the same procedure. The treatment
significantly improved blood flow through the lungs and improved their ability
to take in fresh oxygen and remove carbon dioxide. The higher levels of IL-10
persisted in the lungs for 30 days, suggesting that the procedure could also
reduce rejection of the organs. The lungs were not implanted in humans.

   The procedure "not only may result in improved preservation of lungs [before
transplantation] but also may repair lungs otherwise not suitable for
transplantation," Dr. David S. Wilkes of the Indiana University School of
Medicine wrote in an editorial accompanying the report.

   But several questions remain, he said. Implanting lungs from a human donor
might present more problems. And the use of adenoviruses has caused
complications in some gene-therapy experiments when the virus inserted the added
gene at an inappropriate location.

   Keshavjee said the team hopes to begin human trials in a year or so.

   --

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: PROCEDURE: Researchers put lungs in a chamber that pumped them
with oxygen and nutrients, then inserted a gene inducing the lungs to produce
the immune molecule IL-10.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2009


                              176 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 26, 2009 Monday

SECTION: G; Living Arts; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: It's a horror sequel and a health-care initiative

BYLINE: By Wesley Morris, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Here we are a half-dozen movies in and finally some ideas - and what passes
for a navigable screenplay - are on display in ``Saw VI.''

   The horror series has always been more interested in keeping sequels falling
off the assembly line than in fulfilling its potential as a voice on public
affairs. How stunning, then, that ``Saw VI'' steps right into the debate about
America's health-care crisis - offering, well, a slightly more punitive public
option.

   This time the series' hands-off killer John ``Jigsaw'' Kramer (Tobin Bell)
goes after William Easton (Peter Outerbridge), the totally corporate head of the
insurance company that denied his request to try an experimental gene therapy.
Jigsaw may have succumbed to cancer a few movies back, but he lives on through
fresh flashbacks, fantasy sequences, videotapes, and newly conscripted henchmen.

   Like all of Jigsaw's victims, William wakes up and finds himself strapped
into a metal contraption that looks like a tetanus-inducing prop for Criss
Angel's inevitable S&M show. But the stakes this time are compelling. We know
how heartless William is. He's even managed to deny coverage for one of his
employees by manipulating his medical history. So watching him choose, in a
60-minute series of trials, which members of his staff live or die carries a
tinge of drama.

   Still, as bottom-line as William is, I wasn't all that curious to see the
explosives cuffed to his hands and feet detonate if he failed these tests. Yet
suddenly the carnage has a wicked bit of literal and metaphorical social
resonance. Seriously: Health insurance as house of torture.

   All along, Jigsaw has been a nasty moral philosopher and judge. He and his
henchmen (here, it's his widow and Costas Mandylor as a compromised police
detective) have sought to hurt those who broke the law, wasted their lives, or
ruined the lives of others. Written by Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton and
directed by Kevin Greutert, ``Saw VI'' gives that a political spin. And the
movie features two or three scenes that actually feel complete. That's two or
three more than in the other sequels.

   Who knew that the franchise's creators would eventually find a plot twist
that made sense? Who knew they'd realize that Tobin Bell's righteous killer had
current-events value? Given our cable-news climate, it's not beyond imagining
that John Kramer could have his own populist TV show: ``Jigsaw's Death Panel''?

   Wesley Morris can be reached at wmorris@globe.com For more on movies, go to
www.boston.com/ae/movienation.

   MOVIE REVIEW

   SAW VI

   Directed by: Kevin Greutert

   Written by: Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton

   Starring: Tobin Bell,

   Peter Outerbridge, Costas Mandylor, Betsy Russell,

   and Shawnee Smith

   At: Boston Common,

   Fenway, suburbs

   Running time: 91 minutes

   Rated: R (sequences of

   grisly bloody violence and torture, and language)

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009


                              177 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 26, 2009 Monday

SECTION: G; Living Arts; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 470 words

HEADLINE: It's a horror sequel and a health-care initiative

BYLINE: By Wesley Morris, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Here we are a half-dozen movies in and finally some ideas - and what passes
for a navigable screenplay - are on display in ``Saw VI.''

   The horror series has always been more interested in keeping sequels falling
off the assembly line than in fulfilling its potential as a voice on public
affairs. How stunning, then, that ``Saw VI'' steps right into the debate about
America's health-care crisis - offering, well, a slightly more punitive public
option.

   This time the series' hands-off killer John ``Jigsaw'' Kramer (Tobin Bell)
goes after William Easton (Peter Outerbridge), the totally corporate head of the
insurance company that denied his request to try an experimental gene therapy.
Jigsaw may have succumbed to cancer a few movies back, but he lives on through
fresh flashbacks, fantasy sequences, videotapes, and newly conscripted henchmen.

   Like all of Jigsaw's victims, William wakes up and finds himself strapped
into a metal contraption that looks like a tetanus-inducing prop for Criss
Angel's inevitable S&M show. But the stakes this time are compelling. We know
how heartless William is. He's even managed to deny coverage for one of his
employees by manipulating his medical history. So watching him choose, in a
60-minute series of trials, which members of his staff live or die carries a
tinge of drama.

   Still, as bottom-line as William is, I wasn't all that curious to see the
explosives cuffed to his hands and feet detonate if he failed these tests. Yet
suddenly the carnage has a wicked bit of literal and metaphorical social
resonance. Seriously: Health insurance as house of torture.

   All along, Jigsaw has been a nasty moral philosopher and judge. He and his
henchmen (here, it's his widow and Costas Mandylor as a compromised police
detective) have sought to hurt those who broke the law, wasted their lives, or
ruined the lives of others. Written by Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton and
directed by Kevin Greutert, ``Saw VI'' gives that a political spin. And the
movie features two or three scenes that actually feel complete. That's two or
three more than in the other sequels.

   Who knew that the franchise's creators would eventually find a plot twist
that made sense? Who knew they'd realize that Tobin Bell's righteous killer had
current-events value? Given our cable-news climate, it's not beyond imagining
that John Kramer could have his own populist TV show: ``Jigsaw's Death Panel''?

   Wesley Morris can be reached at wmorris@globe.com For more on movies, go to
www.boston.com/ae/movienation.

   MOVIE REVIEW

   SAW VI

   Directed by: Kevin Greutert

   Written by: Marcus Dunstan and Patrick Melton

   Starring: Tobin Bell,

   Peter Outerbridge, Costas Mandylor, Betsy Russell,

   and Shawnee Smith

   At: Boston Common,

   Fenway, suburbs

   Running time: 91 minutes

   Rated: R (sequences of

   grisly bloody violence and torture, and language)

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009


                              178 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 26, 2009 Monday

SECTION: NEWS; National; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy helps eyesight for 12 with rare visual defect

BYLINE: LOS ANGELES TIMES,

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - Researchers using gene therapy have made significant
improvements in vision in 12 patients with a rare inherited visual defect, a
finding that suggests it might be possible to produce similar improvements in a
much larger number of patients with retinitis pigmentosa and macular
degeneration.

   The team reported success with three adult patients last year, an achievement
that was hailed as a major accomplishment for gene therapy. They have now
treated an additional nine patients, including five children, and find that the
best results are achieved in the youngest patients, whose defective retinal
cells have not had time to die off.

   The study, by researchers at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, was published online by the
journal Lancet.

   The 12 patients suffered from Leber's congenital amaurosis, which affects
about 130,000 worldwide. Victims are born with severely impaired vision that
deteriorates until they are blind, usually by adolescence. There is no
treatment.

   The youngest patient, Corey Haas, 9, was considered legally blind before the
treatment began. He was confined largely to his house and driveway when playing,
had immense difficulties in navigating an obstacle course, and required help in
the classroom. Today, after a single injection of a gene-therapy product in one
eye, he rides his bike, needs no assistance in the classroom, navigates the
obstacle course quickly and has even played his first game of softball.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009


                              179 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            October 25, 2009 Sunday
                             FINAL - 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: CTNOW; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: CANCER HOSPITAL SET TO OPEN;
GOAL IS TO GIVE STATE RESIDENTS 'ABSOLUTE BEST CARE'

BYLINE: ARIELLE LEVIN BECKER alevinbecker@courant.com

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN

BODY:

   There will be no televisions in the waiting rooms at the new Smilow Cancer
Hospital, just tanks of saltwater fish.

   It's a small detail, but one Abe Lopman, vice president and executive
director of the hospital, says is important.

   Time and again, Lopman said, patients described the annoyance of visiting the
doctor after a cancer diagnosis, only to enter the waiting room and see a
television blaring. It was distracting, they said, and a sign that they would be
waiting a long time.

   "Virtually every step of the way, when we came up with the design [for
Smilow], we would have patients and families tell us if we got it right," he
said.

   The fish-for-TVs swap is a small piece, of course, of the $467 million,
14-story cancer hospital, which opens for patients Monday morning, the
culmination of a multiyear expansion effort at Yale-New Haven Hospital and part
of a larger campaign to raise the hospital's profile in the treatment of cancer.

   "Cancer is a disease of aging, primarily. Our population is aging," Lopman
said. "We're treating more cancer patients not because the incidence of cancer
is greater but we're just finding it earlier. We have better tools than we've
ever had to find cancer at a much earlier stage."

   "You put all of that together, it makes absolute sense to focus on building a
cancer program."

   The hospital is in the midst of a recruitment drive that could lead to more
than 60 additional physicians specializing in cancer, Lopman said.

   Yale, meanwhile, is creating a cancer biology institute on its West Campus in
West Haven, which will focus on basic research on topics including cancer cells,
immunology and drug development.

   Once it's fully operational early next year, Smilow, which is attached to
Yale-New Haven Hospital, will have 168 beds, 12 operating rooms, outpatient
treatment rooms, a specialized women's cancer center and a rooftop healing
garden with a stream.

   Although in the past, cancer patients often had to visit more than one spot
on the medical campus - cancer care was spread among six locations - the new
hospital will allow patients, some of whom are frail, to receive treatment, see
their doctors and undergo tests in one place.

   It's more than a physical difference, Lopman said. Patients are cared for by
a team of health care providers - one team might include oncologists, a surgeon,
a pathologist, a nurse and a social worker - and the new layout puts each team
in one place, with spaces between the exam rooms where the team members can't
help but run into each other. It will be easier for patients to see more than
one of the doctors on a single visit, instead of making separate appointments on
separate days, and it will help foster the team concept, Lopman said.

   "All the appropriate caregivers have a work environment where it makes it
easy for them to collaborate," he said.

   The chemotherapy infusion suites were designed to allow patients room to be
social or the privacy not to be. The in-patient rooms were built larger than
usual, with couches that turn into beds so that family members can stay
overnight.

   Yale-New Haven Hospital has a high profile in the state; the Yale Cancer
Center is the only National Cancer Institute-designated Comprehensive Cancer
Center in the state, one of only 40 in the country.

   But many state residents still seek cancer care out of state, something
hospital officials hope to reverse. In its application for state approval for
the cancer hospital, Yale-New Haven Hospital noted that 7 percent of Connecticut
cancer patients went outside Connecticut for treatment in 2002.

   "We are mindful of the out-migration," Lopman said. "We watch it. We're very
conscious of it. And part of building this facility and moving the science where
we're moving it is to make sure Connecticut residents don't have to leave
Connecticut to get the absolute best care for their cancer."

   The hospital's namesake, Joel E. Smilow, described a larger goal during the
dedication last week.

   Forty or 50 years from now, he told a crowd gathered for the building's
dedication, he hoped that his grandchildren would get a telephone call from an
executive at the hospital, asking to talk to them about an "interesting
development."

   "There are so few people getting cancer that this hospital is working way
under capacity," Smilow described the future executive as saying.

   Scientists have made progress in cancer care and treatment in the past
half-century, but for patients whose cancer has spread, there has been only
marginal progress since President Richard Nixon declared a "war on cancer" in
1971, Dr. Thomas J. Lynch Jr., Smilow's physician-in-chief and director of the
Yale Cancer Center, said during the dedication.

   But Lynch said he is hopeful that there will be more progress fighting cancer
in the coming years. Work in genetics allows researchers to explore what genes
are abnormal in a cancer cell, and doctors can now target therapies to patients
based on particular abnormal genes. Eventually, Lynch said, scientists will be
able to design therapies that can interrupt genetic abnormalities in cancer.

   "It's the kind of work that will take unrelenting effort," he said.

   Online Extra: ON THE WEB Visit courant. com/ smilow for more photos of the
hospital.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 1-2: (B&W), MICHAEL McANDREWS | mmcandrews@courant.com
 PHOTO 1: DEAN KRYNICKI,  a technician at the Smilow Cancer Hospital in New
Haven, prepares a linear accelerator for calibration. The $467 million, 14-story
hospital - part of Yale-New Haven Hospital - is set to open for patients Monday
morning.  PHOTO 2: HOSPITAL OFFICIALS say they have paid special attention to
the center's design, part of which is the spacious front entrance.

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2009


                              180 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            October 25, 2009 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
With gene therapy, sight returns;
The treatment helps 12 patients with a rare visual defect and may one day help
macular degeneration.

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II

BODY:

   Pennsylvania researchers using gene therapy have made significant
improvements in vision in 12 patients with a rare inherited visual defect, a
finding that suggests it may be possible to produce similar improvements in a
much larger number of patients with retinitis pigmentosa and macular
degeneration.

   The team last year reported success with three adult patients, an achievement
that was hailed as a major accomplishment for gene therapy. They have now
treated an additional nine patients, including five children, and find that the
best results are achieved in the youngest patients, whose defective retinal
cells have not had time to die off.

   The youngest patient, 9-year-old Corey Haas, was considered legally blind
before the treatment began. He was confined largely to his house and driveway
when playing, had immense difficulties in navigating an obstacle course and
required special enlarging equipment for books and help in the classroom.

   Today, after a single injection of a gene-therapy product in one eye, he
rides his bike around the neighborhood, needs no assistance in the classroom,
navigates the obstacle course quickly and has even played his first game of
softball.

   The results are "astounding," said Stephen Rose, chief scientific officer of
Foundation Fighting Blindness, which supported the work but was not involved
directly. "The big take-home message from this is that every individual in the
group had improvement . . . and there were no safety issues at all."

   The study "holds great promise for the future" and "is appealing because of
its simplicity," wrote researchers from the Nijmegen Medical Center in the
Netherlands in an editorial accompanying the report, which was published online
Saturday by the journal Lancet.

   The 12 patients had Leber's congenital amaurosis, which affects about 3,000
people in the United States and perhaps 130,000 worldwide. Victims are born with
severely impaired vision that deteriorates until they are totally blind, usually
in childhood or adolescence. There is no treatment.

   Leber's is a good candidate for gene therapy because most of the visual
apparatus is intact, particularly at birth and in childhood. Mistakes in 13
different genes are known to cause it, but all 12 of the patients suffered a
defect in a gene called RPE65. This gene produces a vitamin A derivative that is
crucial for detecting light.

   About five children are born each year in the United States with that defect,
which was chosen because researchers at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
and the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine had cloned the gene,
making copies available for use.

   The study, led by Dr. Katherine A. High, Dr. Albert M. Maguire and Dr. Jean
Bennett of those two institutions, enrolled five people in the United States,
five from Italy and two from Belgium. Five were children, and the oldest was 44.

   The good copy of the RPE65 gene was inserted into a defanged version of a
human adenovirus. The engineered virus then invaded retinal cells and inserted
the gene into the cells' DNA.

   Maguire used a long, thin needle to insert the preparation into the retina of
the worst eye in each of the patients. Within two weeks, the treated eyes began
to become more sensitive to light, and within a few more weeks, vision began to
improve. The younger the patients were, the better they responded. That was
expected, Bennett said, because similar results had been observed in dogs and
rodents.

   By both objective and subjective measures, vision improved for all the
patients. They were able to navigate obstacle courses, read eye charts and
perform most of the tasks of daily living. The improvement has now persisted for
as long as two years.

   The children who were treated "are now able to walk and play just like any
normally sighted child," Maguire said.

   Bennett noted that the oldest patient in the trial, a mother, had not been
able to walk down the street to meet her children at school. "Now she can. She
also achieved her primary goal, which was to see her daughter hit a home run."

   There are clear limitations to the study. The patients' vision was not
corrected to normal because of the damage that had already been done to the
retina, and only one eye was treated.

   "The big elephant in the room is: Can you treat the other eye?" Rose said.

   The foundation will put more funding into the research "to make sure that if
you go back and treat the other eye, it won't ablate the positive results in the
first eye due to an immune reaction or something else."

   Researchers also have not optimized the dosage of the adenovirus used to
carry the gene into the eye. Those issues will be studied in Phase 2, a larger
clinical trial that they hope to begin soon.

   Meanwhile, the team has begun treating some patients at the University of
Iowa.

   Researchers also hope they will be able to translate the results to other
congenital conditions using different genes.

   Leber's is one form of retinitis pigmentosa, which affects an estimated
100,000 Americans.

   The findings might be applicable to macular degeneration, which affects an
estimated 1.25 million Americans and is the major cause of visual impairment in
the elderly.

   --

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: SEEING IMPROVEMENT: Patient Corey Haas with his parents, Ethan
and Nancy, and two of the research leaders: Dr. Katherine High, left, and Dr.
Jean Bennett, right.  PHOTOGRAPHER:Daniel Burke Photography

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2009


                              181 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            October 25, 2009 Sunday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy successful on a blindness

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Corey Haas used to need a high schooler to accompany him on the soccer field,
to point out where the ball was.

   Whenever the 9-year-old played with his Lego blocks, he had to feel around
for them. At school in Upstate New York, he needed the help of a teacher's aide
and a special computer screen to display class materials in giant size.

   Not anymore.

   A year and a half after reporting that it could restore some vision to young
adults who have a rare form of blindness, a team of Philadelphia researchers
announced yesterday that its gene therapy works even better in children.

   Twelve patients, the oldest one 44, received an injection of corrective genes
in one eye to replace the malfunctioning genes they were born with. Corey, the
youngest of the 12 when he was treated last year, saw some of the biggest
improvement.

   His treated eye became 10,000 times more sensitive to light, as measured by
the pupil's ability to constrict, said the University of Pennsylvania's Jean
Bennett, senior author of the findings, published in the Lancet. The eyes of the
adults became hundreds of times more sensitive, at best.

   All 12 experienced at least some visual gains in the trial, done in
collaboration with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. None is close to having
normal eyesight. But depending on how the term is defined, several, including
Corey, are no longer legally blind.

   The results are one of the few successes thus far in the young field of gene
therapy, though the pace is starting to accelerate. Two other teams of
researchers, one of them led by Penn's Samuel G. Jacobson, have reported
improvements in patients with the same form of blindness - Leber's congenital
amaurosis. Elsewhere, physicians have had some success in alleviating symptoms
of Parkinson's disease by injecting genes into the brain.

   Still others are removing defective bone-marrow cells, adding new genes, and
reinserting the cells to tackle an inherited immune deficiency.

   For various reasons, treating genetic defects that affect other parts of the
body will be even more challenging, said Michel Sadelain, director of the Center
for Cell Engineering at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.
Still, the new eye study is promising, he said.

   "The results are superb," said Sadelain, who was not involved with the study.
"This is extremely encouraging for the field in general."

   Corey's parents first had a clue that the therapy was working just three or
four days after the surgery, performed by Bennett's husband, Albert Maguire. On
a sunny day at the zoo, the boy suddenly said it was too bright, recalled his
mother, Nancy.

   At a news conference at Children's Hospital on Thursday, she began to cry as
she said that in the old days, "he never said that. Wow."

   Corey now rides his bike in the street near the family's home in Hadley,
N.Y., and he can see well enough to hit underhand pitches in Little League, said
his father, Ethan. Before the surgery, they thought baseball was too dangerous
for a boy who could barely see the ball.

   "I'd be scared of having to go see the dentist," Corey's father said.

   Corey is able to see colors better, so much so that on one occasion, he
mistakenly thought one of his playmates had started to dye her hair a brighter
hue. Corey's ability to read letters on an eye chart did not improve, as it did
for some of the 12 patients, but he already had been among the best of the bunch
at that task, scoring about 20/200.

   Children experienced greater improvements in light sensitivity because
Leber's congenital amaurosis is a progressive disease, said Stephen M. Rose,
chief research officer at the nonprofit Foundation Fighting Blindness, which
helped fund the study.

   Patients' retinal cells deteriorate more as they get older, so younger people
have more viable cells to rescue, he said. That was why the Penn-Children's
trial was initially limited to those 27 and younger; expectations for patients
in their 20s were low.

   But even those patients, including 26-year-old twins from Italy, improved
more than the researchers expected. So the team expanded the trial to a
35-year-old and a 44-year-old, who experienced modest improvement.

   People with the disease have a mutation in a specific gene, a flawed recipe
that prevents their bodies from making a protein essential for converting light
signals into something the brain can recognize.

   The trial, which cost more than $2 million, has been more than a decade in
the making. The surgery was tried first on dogs with the same kind of mutation.
The first dog, Lancelot, retains his improved vision more than nine years later.

   Trying the technique on people was an even bigger step, said Katherine A.
High, director of the Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics at
Children's Hospital - the study's primary funder. It required layers of
government and university scrutiny, and the efforts of dozens of researchers.

   "There's no training manual," said High, one of the lead authors of the
study.

   Always in the back of the mind of any gene therapist is the early tragedy of
Jesse Gelsinger, in 1999 at Penn. Gelsinger was injected with viruses that
carried therapeutic genes, but he died when the microbes made his immune system
go haywire. In the blindness trial, the genes are delivered by a primitive virus
that can't make copies of itself.

   Additional testing of the blindness treatment will follow, and High is
hopeful that someday the team will get permission to treat children as young as
3. Meanwhile, researchers intend to use similar genetic techniques to fight
other inherited forms of blindness. Some are starting to explore ways to address
the most common: macular degeneration.

   In a few years, the Penn-Children's team hopes to seek government approval
for its therapy used on Leber's. Eventually, the original 12 patients might have
their other eye treated if the therapy wins additional approvals.

   Corey's father said he would be eager to bring the boy back for that. In the
meantime, Ethan Haas said, he has to keep his own eyes on the active youngster.

   Once reluctant to play outside, Corey now loves it, his father said.

   "Now, it's getting really dark out and it's like, 'Gee, where's Corey?' "


   View video of Corey Haas negotiating a maze - once relying on an untreated
eye, and again after treatment - at http://go.philly.com/health

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2009


                              182 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           October 14, 2009 Wednesday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL/OPINION; Pg. 013

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: Market still the best place to rein in Rx costs

BYLINE: JOHN E. CALFEE

BODY:

   Should the United States control drug prices? Every other advanced nation
does, and more than a few Americans think we should, too. The advocates say U.S.
medication costs are skyrocketing and wonder why they should pay more than
consumers in other parts of the world. They complain that drug consumption is
manipulated through advertising and marketing. And they blithely dismiss the
idea that lower prices might damage essential research and development.

   But their arguments don't hold up. For one thing, drug costs have been
slowing relative to the rest of the health care system. After adjusting for
inflation, data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services show that
the growth rate for prescription drug spending dropped from 9.3 percent in 2006
to 0.8 percent in 2007 and 3.4 percent last year. Pharmaceuticals' share of
health spending has slowly declined from 10.2 percent in 2006 to a predicted 9.8
percent this year.

   A big reason for the U.S. decline is that we are in the middle of an
unprecedented surge in blockbuster patent expirations, and when patents end,
generics enter. Generics now account for more than 60 percent of all
prescriptions (more than 70 percent in the Medicare Part D drug benefit).

   The argument that drug marketing, especially direct-to-consumer advertising,
inflates the amount Americans spend on drugs is also specious. With spending on
consumer advertising equal to less than 2 percent of drug sales, according to
TNS Media Intelligence, advertising is a weak force in the pharmaceutical
market. Numerous economic studies of consumer advertising have failed to
demonstrate a noticeable impact in any drug market. Promotions aimed at doctors
are a bit more effective, but again, research has not revealed a large effect on
prescribing.

   Drug prices are an easy target for regulation because if you look only at the
costs of manufacturing and distribution, the profit on an individual pill can
appear huge. But that is because we are talking about an industry in which most
costs are borne upfront for development.

   Most new drug development projects end up as costly failures. In fact, the
biotechnology industry, the source of dozens of lifesaving drugs, has yet to
make an industrywide profit. What motivates continued research, whether in
biotechnology or traditional biochemistry, is the expectation of high profits on
rare successes.

   Pharmaceutical innovation is widely misunderstood. What's important isn't
simply how many new drugs are approved by the FDA each year. We need to look at
the fruits of all ongoing research, much of it devoted to exploring the benefits
of older drugs.

   Consider the history of the statin class of cholesterol-reducing drugs, such
as Zocor, Pravachol, Lipitor, Crestor and others. Clinical trials on these drugs
have revolutionized scientific understanding and medical treatments for heart
attacks, yet most of that research was performed by drug manufacturers long
after their drugs had been approved. Drug manufacturers need to have an
incentive to continue researching both new drugs and those they have already
brought to market.

   We are still early in the learning curve for harnessing biotechnology and the
rest of modern biology and chemistry, and even computer science, to the task of
improving health and letting us live longer and more active lives. Only after
two decades or so of difficult research did private industry create a biotech
drug to attack cancer cells by limiting their blood supply. Now dozens of drugs
based on the same idea are in development.

   Or consider research on therapeutic vaccines. These are designed to buttress
the immune system to attack an illness rather than prevent it, as traditional
vaccines do. After many false -- and expensive -- starts, a therapeutic vaccine
for prostate cancer is close to FDA approval. Other therapeutic vaccines are in
development for cancer, Alzheimer's disease and AIDS.

   In the meantime, the first form of gene therapy, in which a drug actually
alters the patient's DNA to prevent or cure a genetic disease, has been
approved.

   Again, this small triumph (for a very rare disease) arrived after decades of
failure, and again, no one knows what larger victories may lie ahead.

   The surest way to discourage high-risk, high-payoff drug research is to raise
the specter of capping prices after victory has been achieved. If health care
reform, with all its virtues, should turn to drug-price controls, we will be
stacking the deck against dramatic improvements in our future health. We should
not control our drug prices. Instead, the rest of the world should stop
controlling theirs.

   John E. Calfee is a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in
Washington, where he studies health care. He has consulted for the
pharmaceutical industry. This article was written for the Los Angeles Times.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2009


                              183 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 11, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: TAB2; Business; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 701 words

HEADLINE: Big or small, aim to match goals, comfort zone

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Few choices will influence the work life of job applicants more than the size
of the enterprises where they land. Yet the decision of where to apply - big or
little company - is no easy matter.

   During the high-tech boom of the late 1990s, it was a no-brainer. Bright
college graduates and even many ambitious midcareer employees jumped on the
bandwagon of start-ups offering stock options and the promise of becoming the
next Microsoft. But when the bubble burst early this decade, there was a flight
to the presumed stability and security of larger and more established firms.

   Today there are few islands of stability, and fewer stock options, to be
found in businesses big or small. So more than at any time in the recent past,
the decision comes down to which organization matches best with an individual's
goals and comfort zone.

   ``In terms of large company versus small company, it's less about which is
better and more about which is a better fit for any given person,'' said Tom
Hopcroft, the president and chief executive of the Massachusetts Technology
Leadership Council in Burlington, a trade association that represents computer
software, robotics, Internet video, digital game, and other high-tech companies
across the state.

   ``Our digital game and robotics companies are talking about employment growth
of 20 percent over the next year. These are innovative and entrepreneurial
sectors. But they're only going to be real good opportunities if that's the kind
of risk and environment you like.''

   Small businesses account for about 40 million US jobs, and are expected to do
a large share of the hiring as the recession comes to an end over the coming
year.

   For employees who have qualms about joining start-up companies, one
attraction of a larger company is the greater likelihood it will still be around
in five or 10 years. And despite some high-profile financial firms that folded
or were merged a year ago, a number of big companies have been expanding their
Boston-area operations even through the downturn, especially in fields like
biotechnology and life sciences.

   Shire PLC, the British drug maker whose big human genetic therapies division
is based in Lexington, plans to hire about 750 employees over the next eight
years as it completes construction of a new building on its Lexington campus.

   ``We're drawing from a good pool of qualified and experienced biotech
employees in the area,'' said Sylvie Gregoire, the president of Shire's human
genetic therapies unit. ``We have an upbeat environment, and that helps in
attracting a lot of qualified talent.''

   But smaller biotech companies often seek to poach talent from the giants,
offering a more nimble work environment with the opportunity to have a greater
impact and advance more quickly. Many executives at start-ups are refugees from
established firms.

   ``Big companies have entrepreneurial individuals who are stifled there,''
said Jasbir Seehra, chief scientific officer at Acceleron Pharma, a
five-year-old Cambridge biotechnology company with about 150 employees. ``In a
company like this, they are let loose to do whatever they want, and a lot of
them flourish in that environment.''

   Some big companies, however, take pains to hold onto the culture of risk,
collaboration, and quick decision-making they nurtured as emerging businesses.
One is Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., a Cambridge biotech that was acquired by
Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd. of Japan last year. Since it was purchased,
Millennium has hired over 225 people - it now employs more than 1,200 - as its
new parent company has poured in resources.

   Millennium, which has absorbed some of Takeda's own oncology businesses in
North America, expects to hire another 130 employees by the end of its current
fiscal year March 31 - about 70 percent of them in research and development.
While the firm now has products in all development phases, Millennium executives
say they have not forgotten their roots as a smaller company. ``We're not a
25-person start-up, to be sure,'' said Stephen M. Gansler, Millennium's senior
vice president for human resources. ``But we've maintained a culture that's
still entrepreneurial.''

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2009


                              184 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           October 10, 2009 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Editorial pages Desk; Part A; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 908 words

HEADLINE: Paying for pills;
Cost controls sound like a cure, but they'll poison innovation.

BYLINE: John E. Calfee, John E. Calfee is a resident scholar at the American
Enterprise Institute in Washington, where he studies healthcare. He has
consulted for the pharmaceutical industry.

BODY:

   Should the United States control drug prices? Every other advanced nation
does, and more than a few Americans think we should too. The advocates say U.S.
medication costs are skyrocketing and wonder why they should pay more than
consumers in other parts of the world. They complain that drug consumption is
manipulated through advertising and marketing. And they blithely dismiss the
idea that lower prices might damage essential research and development.

   But their arguments don't hold up. For one thing, drug costs have been
slowing relative to the rest of the healthcare system. After adjusting for
inflation, data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services show that
the growth rate for prescription drug spending dropped from 9.3% in 2006 to 0.8%
in 2007 and 3.4% in 2008. Pharmaceuticals' share of health spending has slowly
declined from 10.2% in 2006 to a predicted 9.8% in 2009.

   A big reason for the U.S. decline is that we are in the middle of an
unprecedented surge in blockbuster patent expirations, and when patents end,
generics enter. Generics now account for more than 60% of all prescriptions
(more than 70% in the Medicare Part D drug benefit).

   The argument that drug marketing, especially direct-to-consumer advertising,
inflates the amount Americans spend on drugs is also specious. With spending on
consumer advertising equal to less than 2% of drug sales, according to TNS Media
Intelligence, advertising is a weak force in the pharmaceutical market. Numerous
economic studies of consumer advertising have failed to demonstrate a noticeable
impact in any drug market. Promotions aimed at doctors are a bit more effective,
but again, research has not revealed a large effect on prescribing.

   Drug prices are an easy target for regulation because if you look only at the
costs of manufacturing and distribution, the profit on an individual pill can
appear huge. But that is because we are talking about an industry in which most
costs are borne upfront for development. Price controllers abroad know that even
when prices are cut to half the market level, the typical drug will still be
supplied because manufacturers will still make a profit.

   But we have to also understand that price controls disincentivize research.
Most new drug development projects end up as costly failures. In fact, the
biotechnology industry, the source of dozens of lifesaving drugs, has yet to
make an industrywide profit. What motivates continued research, whether in
biotechnology or traditional biochemistry, is the expectation of high profits on
rare successes.

   Price regulators in European nations actually understand the logic of profits
and innovation, but they also know that their own nation's share of worldwide
profits is so small (just a few percentage points) that their prices have a
negligible effect on research-and-development incentives. We are different. The
U.S. accounts for perhaps 40% to 50% of worldwide profits. We cannot ignore the
impact of price controls on innovation.

   Pharmaceutical innovation is widely misunderstood. What's important isn't
simply how many new drugs are approved by the FDA each year. We need to look at
the fruits of all ongoing research, much of it devoted to exploring the benefits
of older drugs.

   Consider the history of the statin class of cholesterol-reducing drugs, such
as Zocor, Pravachol, Lipitor, Crestor and others. Clinical trials on these drugs
have revolutionized scientific understanding and medical treatments for heart
attacks, yet most of that research was performed by drug manufacturers long
after their drugs had been approved. Drug manufacturers need to have an
incentive to continue researching both new drugs and those they have already
brought to market.

   We are still early in the learning curve for harnessing biotechnology and the
rest of modern biology and chemistry, and even computer science, to the task of
improving health and letting us live longer and more active lives. Only after
two decades or so of difficult research did private industry create a biotech
drug to attack cancer cells by limiting their blood supply. Now dozens of drugs
based on the same idea are in development, with much promise for cancer
patients.

   Or consider research on therapeutic vaccines. These are designed to buttress
the immune system to attack an illness rather than prevent it, as traditional
vaccines do. After many false -- and expensive -- starts, a therapeutic vaccine
for prostate cancer is close to FDA approval. Other therapeutic vaccines are in
development for cancer, Alzheimer's disease and AIDS. In the meantime, the first
form of gene therapy, in which a drug actually alters the patient's DNA to
prevent or cure a genetic disease, has been approved. Again, this small triumph
(for a very rare disease) arrived after decades of failure, and again, no one
knows what larger victories may lie ahead.

   Of course, the list of breakthroughs yet to be achieved is long, and it is by
no means restricted to exotic forms of biotechnology. We need to make sure
nothing gets in the way. The surest way to discourage high-risk, high-payoff
drug research is to raise the specter of capping prices after victory has been
achieved.

   If healthcare reform, with all its virtues, should turn to drug-price
controls, we will be stacking the deck against dramatic improvements in our
future health. We should not control our drug prices. Instead, the rest of the
world should stop controlling theirs.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2009


                              185 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            October 8, 2009 Thursday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 416 words

HEADLINE: JASMINA'S NEW HEARTACHE. GIRL'S VALIANT BID FOR BONE MARROW TOUCHED
CITY, BUT LEUKEMIA'S BACK

BYLINE: BY RICH SCHAPIRO DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   JASMINA ANEMA, the cancer-stricken Manhattan girl who asked for a miracle
bone-marrow transplant and got it, now needs the city's prayers.

   The 6-year-old's leukemia has returned, and doctors say her only option is an
experimental procedure that has never been used on children, her heartbroken
mother said yesterday.

   "It's just horrible," Thea Anema said. "I thought the hardest was over. I
thought we were on Easy Street.

   "Life was slowly going back to normal, and now it's just devastating, truly
devastating."

   Despite the grim odds, Anema said she's still hopeful.

   "There's still 10% in me that says this can't happen," she added. "There must
be a miracle somewhere - a new treatment, a new drug, something that will make
this okay."

   Jasmina inspired the city this year with her brave battle against an
especially fatal form of leukemia.

   Alerted by a series of stories in the Daily News, thousands of New Yorkers
turned out for bone marrow donor drives.

   A slew of celebrities, including singer Rihanna and NBA star Paul Pierce,
also pleaded for donors to come forward.

   Hope seemed lost until early May, when a near-perfect donor match was finally
found.

   The resulting transplant was a success, bringing tears of joy to her mother.

   The happiness did not last.

   Jasmina suffered a setback after she left Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in July.

   She contracted a fever and spent several weeks back in the hospital. Things
soon got worse.

   Jasmina started vomiting frequently and became extremely lethargic.

   After doctors discovered her blood cell counts were off, she underwent
numerous transfusions.

   The news Jasmina's mom feared most came three weeks ago after doctors gave
her the results of a biopsy: Jasmina's leukemia had returned and was growing
rapidly.

   In the hospital that day, the courageous kindergartner looked into her
mother's bloodshot eyes and tried to console her.

   "Mama, no reason to cry. Just think of something beautiful," Jasmina told her
mother, Anema said.

   That hasn't been easy.

   Jasmina developed graft-versus-host disease, a common complication in
bone-marrow transplants in which the new cells attack the recipient's body.

   She was released from the hospital Friday.

   In recent days, Jasmina's energy has returned, but her cancer cells haven't
dissipated.

   Anema is waiting for final word on when doctors can start an experimental
gene therapy designed to slow down the spread of Jasmina's cancer cells.

   "I still believe there is a chance - somewhere, somehow," she said.

   rschapiro@nydailynews.com

GRAPHIC: Thea Anema holds her daughter, 6-year-old Jasmina, who needs another
miracle because her leukemia has returned. Photo by Alfred Giancarli

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009


                              186 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           October 7, 2009 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Living - How We Live

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: Partial success of AIDS vaccine raises hopes

BYLINE: ANDY DWORKIN, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: A Thai trial scores a 31.2 percent prevention rate, hinting at
possible strategies

   Figuring out

   how it works

   a challenge Partial success of AIDS vaccine raises hopes

   ANDY DWORKIN

   It's October, and the world is buzzing about a .312 batter --not in baseball,
but medicine.

   Last month, scientists testing an HIV vaccine in Thailand reported the shots
seemed to cut the risk of infection by 31.2 percent. That's not much: The Thai
government has said a vaccine would have to halve the risk of getting the virus
that causes AIDS to be considered for widespread use. But it's the first time an
HIV vaccine has shown any hint of ability to stop new infections, which strike
about 5 million people a year worldwide.

   "I guess I'd classify it as a single, maybe a really hard single, in the
baseball vernacular," said Dr. Larry Corey, principal investigator of the HIV
Vaccine Trials Network in Seattle. "Once you're on first base, it's much easier
to get to home."

   The Thai trial tested what scientists call a "prime-boost" combination of two
vaccines, said Dr. Shelly Karuna, who works with Corey in the HIV Vaccine Trials
Unit of Seattle's Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center. The first "primed" the
immune system by showing it three genes from HIV delivered in a canarypox virus,
which normally infects birds. A second vaccine aimed to boost immunity by
showing the body a protein called gp120 that is located on the surface of HIV
particles.

   More than 16,400 Thai men and women, ages 18 to 30, got either the injections
or placebos. After three years, 74 people who got placebo shots had been
infected with HIV compared to 51 people who got the vaccine. The vaccine didn't
make the infections any less severe in the 51 people who contracted HIV.

   Those are "pretty marginal results," said Dr. Louis Picker, who studies HIV
at Oregon Health & Science University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute. The
numbers of people infected are so small that some scientists are questioning
whether the vaccine really worked. And if it did work, it may be hard to figure
out just how the vaccine helped, he said. Still, Picker and others are very
eager to hear more details of the Thai study at an HIV conference later this
month in Paris.

   "It's nice to have even a modest success," he said.

   You have to know the 25-year history of HIV vaccine tests to understand why
this lukewarm success is invigorating scientists working on HIV vaccines.

   Earlier tests

   The first big test, which started in the late 1990s, inoculated volunteers
from Seattle and cities worldwide with the gp120 molecule. That vaccine didn't
prevent infections or make them less severe.

   In 2007, tests of a different vaccine stopped when scientists found it
actually increased the risk of getting HIV in one group: uncircumcised men who
had previously been infected with a common cold-causing virus that was used to
make the vaccine.

   "This was a huge, huge surprise and a huge, huge, horrific finding," Karuna
told the audience gathered last month at Cascade AIDS Project's annual meeting.

   The failure discouraged many HIV researchers. Some quit the field entirely.
And that's why people still researching HIV vaccines are so excited about the
Thai trial's modest success.

   Figuring out the lessons of the Thai vaccine will take years. Scientists must
determine what made this vaccine better than previous failures: Is it the new
genes used in the first shots, the mix of "prime" and "boost" injections, or
something else?

   Other trials

   And while researchers debate those questions, other HIV vaccine trials will
push forward. The Seattle group is enrolling volunteers in a nationwide study of
a different two-vaccine combination. Scientists don't expect the vaccines to
prevent infections but hope they will limit the ability of HIV particles to
reproduce after they have infected someone.

   The new study, known as HVTN 505, will follow 1,350 HIV-negative circumcised
men who have sex with other men, including about 100 men from Seattle. Half will
get the vaccines and half a placebo.

   Two of the genes included in the HVTN 505 vaccine also were used in the Thai
trial. That makes this test the kind of variation on a theme that will help
scientists explore their first success, Corey said. If this test works well,
those genes probably will be used in future studies. If not, scientists may
reconsider other parts of the Thai vaccine.

   It may be "two steps forward, one step back," Corey said.

   Other approaches

   Others are trying different approaches to HIV vaccines. At the Paris
conference, Picker will present information about a vaccine he's studied in
monkeys that boosts T-cells, immune system cells that fight infected cells in
the body. This vaccine doesn't prevent infection, but it did seem to "protect
monkeys from a systemic infection about half the time," Picker said.

   Having people working on many tracks at once is good because a final HIV
vaccine probably would combine many separate ingredients. Some will try to churn
out antibodies that can prevent infections, which may be what happened in the
Thai trial. Other ingredients may work more like Picker's candidate, limiting
infection from viruses that slip past the antibodies. The mix of approaches is
needed because HIV grows and changes so fast: The germ makes 10 billion copies a
day, Karuna said, and two HIV strains can be as genetically different as a mouse
and a human.

   Figuring out the right mix of vaccines, and just when and how to give them,
will take scientists many years. The Thai results offer some encouragement on
that long journey.

   "I may not see an HIV vaccine in my lifetime," Karuna said. "But I hope I
will see one in my son's lifetime."

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8271; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2009


                              187 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            October 6, 2009 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 006

LENGTH: 26 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY (photo caption only)

BODY:

   Gene Simmons of KISS unleashes a few signature guitar licks for hard-core
fans at the TD Garden last night. Review, Page 26. STAFF PHOTO BY CHRISTOPHER
EVANS

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2009


                              188 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                            October 6, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: Hope for a cure

BYLINE: PEGGY O'FARRELL

BODY:

   CINCINNATI ENQUIRER

   Kameron Kinebrew, 12, spent a month hooked to a morphine pump to control the
sickle-cell anemia pain, something he compared to "a couple of knives stabbing
you in your back, over and over."

   His twin brother, Kaleb, rattles off pain management techniques without
thinking: Slow breathing, plenty of fluids, distraction. "We know what to do,"
he said. "It's normal for us."

   People with sickle cell disease face a lifetime of pain and fatigue. They
also risk stroke, blindness, organ failure and bone loss. The only effective
treatments are bone marrow transplants and chemotherapy, and they don't work for
everyone with the disease.

   But researchers at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center offer hope
for a cure for the thousands of Americans afflicted by the life-shortening blood
disease.

   After a decade of research, scientists led by Punam Malik have developed a
cutting-edge gene therapy that -- in lab animals and human tissue samples --
made the body stop producing the malformed red blood cells that characterize
sickle cell disease.

   They want to start testing it next year if federal regulators sign off.

   "If it works, it's a cure," said Malik, a hematology-oncology specialist at
Cincinnati Children's.

   Sickle cell affects some 70,000 to 100,000 people in the United States. One
in 500 African Americans has the disease. Worldwide, the disease affects
millions.

   The damage of the disease starts early. Kameron Kinebrew's doctors have
already identified spots of dead bone tissue in his legs because of sickle cell.

   The therapy developed at Cincinnati Children's would implant a gene that
counteracts hemoglobin S, allowing the body to make the correct type of
hemoglobin to form normal, doughnut-shaped red blood cells.

   In the proposed clinical trial, researchers will collect stem cells from the
bone marrow of patient volunteers. In the lab, they'll implant engineered
viruses containing the new gene in those stem cells.

   Then, they'll return the stem cells containing the engineered viruses to the
patient volunteers' bodies.

   The viruses used in the experimental therapy have been altered so that they
can't cause disease. Giving patients back their own stem cells means patients
and doctors won't have to worry about any organ rejection issues, Malik said.

   Testing the new therapy could take five years or more.

   About 500 people die of sickle cell and its complications each year in the
U.S., said Clinton Joiner, director of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center at
Cincinnati Children's.

   The disease affects the entire family. The Kinebrews never know when they're
going to have to take Kaleb or Kameron to the emergency room for a pain crisis.

   Both boys have suffered acute chest syndrome, a condition similar to
pneumonia that occurs when lung tissue isn't getting enough oxygen. It's
extremely painful and dangerous as lung function is lost.

   Both have undergone blood transfusions, one temporary remedy for the disease.

   "The reality is depending on the day, you never know if there's going to be a
pain crisis or an emergency or a call from school that they're having problems,"
said Kevin Kinebrew, the twins' father.

   Sickle-cell anemia

   Sickle-cell anemia is a hereditary disease affecting red blood cells, which
carry oxygen to the body's tissues. Both parents have to carry the genetic trait
for the disease for a child to develop it.

   There is no cure, and few treatments. Average life-expectancy for Americans
with the disease is in the mid-40s, though sickle-cell patients can live into
their 60s.

   Normal red blood cells are doughnut-shaped and can easily slip through
arteries, veins and tiny capillaries to carry oxygen to tissue throughout the
body. In sickle cell, the cells are shaped like crescent moons or sickles,
making it harder for them to get through the blood vessels.

   Sometimes, the misshapen cells get stuck or cause other damage that narrows
the blood vessels. If the blood vessels are in the brain, stroke can result. If
the blood vessels are in the eyes, blindness may result.

   The cells become misshapen because the body makes the wrong kind of
hemoglobin, the chemical that makes blood red.

   People with sickle-cell suffer chronic pain, including severe episodes that
may require narcotics. When blood flow to the organs is disrupted, permanent
damage can result, including organ failure. Infections are common, as is damage
to bones and joints. Sickle-cell is the leading cause of stroke in children.

   Learn more at www.sicklecelldisease.org.

   Cincinnati Enquirer

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2009


                              189 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             October 4, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: MANDEVILLE PICAYUNE; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: You can be part of a miracle on Friday;
Fundraiser to help ailing 6-year-old

BYLINE: By Margaret Schonberg, St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   It's not often that a person has the opportunity to help make a miracle
happen.

   But by participating in the Miracles Can Happen Benefit, that's just what is
possible.

   Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation will host its second annual benefit on
Friday at Benedict's Plantation in Mandeville. A patron party preview begins at
6 p.m., with the event itself starting at 7 p.m.

   Mary Payton Vigil, is the 6-year-old daughter of Joe and Nikki Vigil of
Mandeville. In January of 2008, the Mandeville Elementary School student was
diagnosed as having Late Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis (LINCL), also
known as Batten Disease.

   "Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation was formed in order to help children
affected by Batten Disease, specifically the Late Infantile form," said Michelle
Boudreaux, president of the organization. "The difference with this particular
disease is that a prominent researcher at Cornell Medical in New York has been
working on a cure for over 10 years.

   "A few years back, he developed a specific gene therapy that he felt would
stop or slow the progression of the Late Infantile version of Batten Disease. He
took this therapy to clinical trial where it has been documented to have stopped
the progression of the disease in the children treated and, in some cases,
actually helped patients regain some function lost.

   "Cornell has agreed to allow a privately funded treatment program to take
place for children affected with the late infantile version of Batten Disease,"
Boudreaux said. "This is the best chance these children have at life. We need to
set this next stage of trial and treatment into motion," she said. "MPMF has
worked diligently in our community, with politicians and with the National
Institute of Health to insure the federal funds will be released so that the
treatment may be provided to all children with LINCL. Mary Payton, however, does
not have the time to wait. It could take another year or so for federal funding
to come through.

   "She can no longer do the things a 6-year-old should be able to do,"
Boudreaux said. "Cornell has agreed to set up treatment for a minimum of five
children at the cost of $2.5 million," she said. "There are several kids who do
not have the time to wait due to the progression of their disease. We are
desperately racing against time to provide this treatment and save the lives of
these children."

   Entertainment for the evening will be provided by 4 Unplugged and Three's a
Crowd. Menu items will include a grilling station, sushi, a chocolate fountain
and more. A special martini bar will allow guests to buy hand-painted martini
glasses with unlimited martinis for $25. More than 400 people attended last
year's event, helping to raise $83,000 for treatment and research for LINCL.

   Tickets to the Miracles Can Happen Benefit are $100 per person, with reserved
tables also available. For more information, go online to
www.marypaytonsmiracle.com or call Boudreaux at 504.382.2621.

   "Where at one time, Mary Payton was a healthy, laughing, playing, beautiful
child, she no longer can walk without assistance, she cannot speak, although she
tries desperately," Boudreaux said. "But what keeps us pushing forward is her
laughter. Through all the pain and suffering, this poor child endures, when she
sees a familiar face or hears one of her favorite songs, the smiles, hugs and
laughter from her is a piece of heaven."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2009


                              190 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           September 28, 2009 Monday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS INSIDER; HONING THE EDGE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1482 words

HEADLINE: HONING THE EDGE: A bio border battle;
Second of two parts;
BADGER STATE'S TECH BOOM;
A look under the hood at Wisconsin's biotech start-up machine reveals a
powerfully successful combination of academic and commercial cooperation.

BYLINE: THOMAS LEE, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   STAR TRIBUNE - ONLY IN YOUR MONDAY PAPER

   MADISON - There was a time at the University of Wisconsin-Madison when
starting a company ranked somewhere between gambling and arms dealing.

   Faculty members shunned entrepreneurship because it seemed to conflict with
the school's true mission of conducting research and educating students, a
debate that still rages at schools across the country, including the University
of Minnesota.

   "Prior to 1992, very few faculty started companies," said Thomas (Rock)
Mackie, chairman and co-founder of TomoTherapy Inc., who still teaches medical
physics at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. "It was almost frowned upon. But
now it's actively encouraged."

   What changed? Experts point to a number of factors -- luck, generous tax
credits, research breakthroughs. But say `'innovation'' in Madison and one word
repeatedly surfaces: WARF.

   Founded in 1925, the Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation is a private,
nonprofit organization that commercializes technologies created at the
University of Wisconsin. The group, along with University Research Park (URP),
is widely praised for creating one of the country's most dynamic and successful
environments for entrepreneurship and tech transfer over the past 30 years, one
that rivals top schools such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Stanford University.

   Wisconsin's track record has caught the attention of business, political and
academic leaders in Minnesota, where repeated attempts to create the climate to
grow high-tech start-ups -- the so-called "next Medtronics'' -- have stalled.
Indeed, Minnesota has lost start-up companies to the Badger state, where
entrepreneurs often can find more financial support.

   WARF's unique structure -- it's independent but works closely with the
university -- allows it to avoid school bureaucracy and adopt a
fast-and-flexible approach to tech transfer. Many schools often jealously guard
their intellectual property, which can scare off outside investors and
companies, experts say. Critics often knock the University of Minnesota for
these reasons.

   "We're like an 85-year-old start-up," said WARF managing director Carl
Gulbrandsen. "It permits us to take risks. We can think more commercially. We
aren't academics. We allow the university to focus on academics."

   In some ways, Wisconsin's sense of urgency and Minnesota's lack of one is not
surprising.

   Minnesota is home to 19 Fortune 500 companies spread out across multiple
industries, including heavyweights like Target Corp., 3M Co., UnitedHealth Group
and Medtronic Inc. Wisconsin is home to 10 Fortune 500 companies, about half of
them in manufacturing.

   Stung by lower-cost competition from India and China, industrial Midwest
states over the years have tried to expand into high-tech growth industries like
biotechnology, especially in Wisconsin, home to the country's most industrial
workforce.

   More pressing needs

   "Wisconsin was a Rust Belt state with heavy manufacturing losses sustained in
the early 1980s," said Randy Olson, a vice president for economic opportunity
for the Initiative Foundation in Little Falls, Minn. "Leaders in government and
education realized that the economy had to transform itself and become less
reliant on manufacturing, with an emphasis on technology development."

   Olson said WARF jump-started a tech boom.

   "Aggressive licensing of UW intellectual property through WARF created a
valid and reliable pipeline" of tech start-ups, he said.

   Gulbrandsen says WARF tries to be very friendly to entrepreneurs. For
example, students and faculty own their technologies and are not required to go
to WARF. (However, U.S. law requires WARF to manage any technology created at
the university that's funded with federal research money.)

   "If we invent it, we own it," Mackie of TomoTherapy said.

   The organization can take equity stakes in start-ups, resulting in lower
licensing fees for them to develop the technology. Faculty and students can
receive both founders shares and royalty rights to their inventions. WARF also
pays entrepreneurs 20 percent of the start-up's gross income upfront, before it
deducts expenses. If WARF chooses to liquidate its shares, it will pay
entrepreneurs 20 percent of the proceeds upfront.

   By contrast, the University of Minnesota, which owns all inventions,
determines compensation on a case-by-case basis. If a start-up is sold or goes
public, entrepreneurs receive one-third of the school's stake in the company.

   WARF-bred companies have scored huge payouts. Hologic Inc. acquired Third
Wave Technologies Inc. for $580 million. Drug firm Roche purchased NimbleGen
Systems Inc. for $272.5 million. That success helps inspire other faculty to
start companies, said Doug Cameron, a former clean-tech venture capitalist who's
now chief science adviser to Piper Jaffray & Co. in Minneapolis.

   `WARF was extremely helpful'

   "WARF encouraged faculty to start companies," said Cameron, who taught
chemical engineering and life sciences at the University of Wisconsin-Madison
for 12 years. "But it needed role models to make it easier for faculty" to do
so.

   Mackie, the medical physics professor, co-founded TomoTherapy in 1997. The
company developed a dual CT scanner/radiation therapy device that could better
target cancer cells. Under WARF's guidance, the company went public in 2007 and
raised $180 million, one of the state's most successful initial public
offerings. Today TomoTherapy generates annual sales of $200 million and employs
650.

   "WARF was extremely helpful," Mackie said. "They found us our first VC money.
They have a progressive spirit. WARF really has a culture that's not about
whether we should start companies based on university technology but how."

   WARF has built a portfolio most investors would envy. In 2007, the
organization's net assets totaled $1.95 billion, a 17.3 percent gain from the
previous year, according to federal tax documents. That includes $53.7 million
in licensing and royalty income and $282.9 million from the sale of assets. WARF
donated $83 million to support university research that year.

   That financial prowess gives WARF clout with investors. Venture capitalists
will often ask WARF to invest in their start-ups and vice-versa, Mackie said.

   "VCs come to them," he said.

   Soul and shape

   If WARF can give start-ups a soul, then University Research Park provides
them physical shape. The 300-acre park is home to 115 companies, including
start-ups working on diagnostics, gene therapy and pharmaceuticals. Those
companies collectively employ 4,000 workers who enjoy an average annual salary
of $62,000. URP also hosts the WiCell Research Institute, a WARF subsidiary that
controls the university's patents on human embryonic stem cell technology.

   Like WARF, URP is also an independent nonprofit organization but closely
works with the university and WARF.

   "We get the best of both worlds," said URP director Mark Bugher. "The model
is extremely efficient. We try to replicate what an entrepreneurial real estate
company would look like. ... We're joined at the hip with WARF. We create the
physical infrastructure for faculty to create companies."

   Minnesota's University Enterprise Laboratories tried to emulate URP. The St.
Paul facility is also run by an independent nonprofit organization, for example.
But it's lacked state support and a strong connection to the University of
Minnesota. The Biomedical Discovery District is the U's latest attempt to spur
commercialization by clustering its research buildings and entrepreneurial
facilities together on campus, a model that resembles URP.

   The Madison-based research park is a small city. It hosts a small business
bank, a venture capital firm, a website development company, and two child-care
centers -- services start-up firms might find useful. URP is also building a
90,000-square-foot "Accelerator" office for more developed start-ups and
recently opened a 6,000-square-foot Metro Innovation Center in downtown Madison
for student entrepreneurs and computer engineers.

   Next week, the Madison Planning Commission is expected to approve plans for
University Research Park II, a 270-acre site that can field 200 more companies.
The city is already spending $6 million in federal stimulus money to build roads
and intersections near the park.

   WARF and URP have created a real culture of innovation and urgency that's
missing in Minnesota, said Peter Bianco, director of life science business
development at Halleland Health Consulting in Minneapolis.

   "There is a real desire to succeed in Wisconsin," Bianco said. "The state has
no stodgy culture. It's a culture of newness, a desire to try new things.
Minnesota is like the sleeping giant. We're not living up to our potential."

   Thomas Lee - 612-673-7744

   To read the Honing the Edge project, go to www.startribune.com/edge.

   For more information and analysis, go to the Patent Pending blog at
www.startribune.com/blogs/pending.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2009


                              191 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. NaN

LENGTH: 1422 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy raises hope for sickle-cell anemia cure

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell

BODY:

   Kameron Kinebrew, 12, spent a month hooked to a morphine pump to control the
sickle-cell anemia pain, something he compared to "a couple of knives stabbing
you in your back, over and over."

   His twin brother, Kaleb, rattles off pain management techniques without
thinking: slow breathing, plenty of fluids, distraction. "We know what to do,"
he said. "It's normal for us."

   People with sickle-cell disease face a lifetime of pain and fatigue. They
also risk stroke, blindness, organ failure and bone loss. The only effective
treatments are bone marrow transplants and chemotherapy, and they don't work for
everyone with the disease.

   But researchers at Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center offer hope
for a cure for the tens of thousands of Americans afflicted by the
life-shortening blood disease.

   After a decade of research, scientists led by Punam Malik have developed a
cutting-edge gene therapy that - in lab animals and human tissue samples - made
the body stop producing the malformed red blood cells that characterize
sickle-cell disease.

   They want to start testing it next year if federal regulators sign off.

   "If it works, it's a cure," said Malik, a hematology-oncology specialist who
heads up all of the gene and molecular therapy research at Cincinnati
Children's.

   Sickle cell affects 600 to 800 people in Greater Cincinnati and Northern
Kentucky, and some 70,000 to 100,000 people in the United States. One in 500
African-Americans has the disease. Worldwide, the disease affects millions.

   In sickle cell, a genetic defect makes red blood cells carry an abnormal type
of hemoglobin, called hemoglobin S, that changes their shape, making it harder
for the blood cells to pass through blood vessels. The cells can't efficiently
carry oxygen to tissue, and the tissues become damaged and eventually die. Over
several years, people with sickle cell suffer organ damage and organ failure.
One study found that organ failure, especially kidney failure, killed about 20
percent of adult sickle-cell patients.

   The damage starts early. Kameron Kinebrew's doctors have already identified
spots of dead bone tissue in his legs because of sickle cell.

   The therapy developed at Cincinnati Children's would implant a gene that
counteracts hemoglobin S, allowing the body to make the correct type of
hemoglobin to form normal, doughnut-shaped red blood cells.

   In the proposed clinical trial, researchers will collect bone marrow stem
cells from the bone marrow of patient volunteers. In the lab, they'll implant
engineered viruses containing a new gene in those stem cells, which make red
blood cells.

   Then, they'll return the stem cells containing the engineered viruses to the
patient volunteers' bodies. Each patient volunteer will get his own stem cells
back.

   The viruses used in the experimental therapy have been altered so that they
can't cause disease. Giving patients back their own stem cells means patients
and doctors won't have to worry about organ rejection, Malik said.

   Researchers hope the implanted gene would allow sickle cell patients to make
hemoglobin F, which lets red blood cells form normally.

   The engineered virus would continue to reproduce in volunteers' bone marrow
and let volunteers permanently make normal red blood cells if the therapy works.

   Federal health regulators are reviewing the therapy, which took a decade of
groundwork to develop.

   If the feds give the go-ahead, Malik and her team could begin the first phase
of human trials in adults with sickle cell next year, possibly in the spring or
summer. Malik expects to recruit 10 people for the first phase.

   Testing the new therapy will be a slow process that could take another five
years or longer. Regulators and researchers will monitor volunteers who undergo
the therapy to make sure it's safe and to see if it works.

   The experimental therapy might not work in people, Malik warned. Some
therapies don't translate from mice to humans. Federal regulators could pull the
plug at any time if there are signs the therapy could be dangerous. In a French
gene therapy trial aimed at treating a rare immune disorder in children in 2003,
some patients who received the therapy developed leukemia.

   Malik and her colleagues, though, remain cautiously optimistic.

   "If it works, the impact would be significant," said Clinton Joiner, director
of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center and the Hematology Program at Cincinnati
Children's. "This is a bad, bad disease to have."

   About 500 people die of sickle cell and its complications each year in the
U.S., Joiner said, and about half of sickle-cell patients die by age 45.

   Sickle-cell patients don't have many treatment options now, he said.

   Bone marrow transplants work well, but only about 10 percent of people with
sickle cell get them because it's so hard to find a donor match if a sibling
can't donate.

   There's also a time limit for bone marrow transplants, Joiner said. By the
time sickle cell patients are 16 or 17, the disease has caused enough damage
that the risks from the transplant are too high to make it worthwhile, and the
transplant itself can cause problems even in younger patients.

   Some sickle-cell patients benefit from hydroxyurea, a drug that lets the body
make hemoglobin F and reduces the number of sickle cells, but doesn't remove
them completely.

   Hydroxyurea doesn't work for everyone with sickle cell, though, and it's a
form of chemotherapy, so it has its own side effects, including immune
suppression.

   The disease affects the entire family. The Kinebrews of Colerain Township
never know when they're going to have to take Kaleb or Kameron to the emergency
room for a pain crisis.

   Both boys have suffered acute chest syndrome, a condition similar to
pneumonia that occurs when lung tissue isn't getting enough oxygen. It's
extremely painful and dangerous as lung function is lost.

   Both have undergone blood transfusions, one temporary remedy for the disease.

   "A lot of times, people look at the boys, and you can't see sickle cell. They
live with it every day, and they don't look sick," said Kevin Kinebrew, the
twins' father. "The reality is depending on the day, you never know if there's
going to be a pain crisis or an emergency or a call from school that they're
having problems."

   Kinebrew and his wife, Robyn, both have the sickle cell gene, although Robyn
was originally told she didn't have it.

   When the boys were diagnosed at birth with sickle cell, doctors re-tested
Robyn and found out she carried the trait.

   The boys participate in ongoing research at Cincinnati Children's, including
a study looking at what factors contribute to acute chest syndrome, she said.

   "It's important to learn more, to find something that might help them and
other families," she said.

   Sickle-cell anemia and its effects

   Sickle-cell anemia is a hereditary disease affecting red blood cells, which
carry oxygen to the body's tissues. Both parents have to carry the genetic trait
for the disease for a child to develop it.

   There is no cure, and few treatments. Average life expectancy for Americans
with the disease is in the mid-40s, though sickle cell patients can live into
their 60s.

   Normal red blood cells are doughnut-shaped and can easily slip through
arteries, veins and tiny capillaries to carry oxygen to tissue throughout the
body. In sickle cell, the cells are shaped like crescent moons or sickles,
making it harder for them to get through the blood vessels.

   Sometimes, the misshapen cells get stuck or cause other damage that narrows
the blood vessels. If the blood vessels are in the brain, stroke can result. If
the blood vessels are in the eyes, blindness may result.

   The cells become misshapen because the body makes the wrong kind of
hemoglobin, the chemical that makes blood red.

   Babies can be diagnosed with sickle cell at birth, but symptoms don't start
until they're about 4 to 6 months old.

   That's when the body stops making fetal hemoglobin, or hemoglobin F. At that
point, a baby without sickle cell disease starts making hemoglobin A, which lets
their bodies make normal red blood cells.

   Babies with sickle cell make hemoglobin S, which deforms the red blood cells.
The cells become fibrous and form sickles, especially when they're low in
oxygen.

   People with sickle cell suffer chronic pain, including severe episodes that
may require narcotics. When blood flow to the organs is disrupted, permanent
damage can result, including organ failure. Infections are common, as is damage
to bones and joints. Sickle cell is the leading cause of stroke in children.

   Learn more at

   www.sicklecelldisease.org.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2009


                              192 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: A burst of technology helps the blind to see An artificial retina is
part of a surge of new research in sight

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK, NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   NEW YORK - Blindness first began creeping up on Barbara Campbell when she was
a teenager, and by her late 30s, her eye disease had stolen what was left of her
sight.

   Campbell, now 56, would have been thrilled to see something. Anything.

   Now, as part of a striking experiment, she can. So far, she can detect
burners on her stove, her mirror frame and whether her computer monitor is on.

   She is beginning an intensive three-year research project involving
electrodes surgically implanted in her eye, a camera on the bridge of her nose
and a video processor strapped to her waist.

   Some of the 37 other participants further along in the project can
differentiate plates from cups, tell grass from sidewalk, sort white socks from
dark and see where people are, albeit not details about them.

   Linda Morfoot, 65, of Long Beach, Calif., blind for 12 years, says she can
now toss a ball into a basketball hoop, follow her nine grandchildren as they
run around her living room and "see where the preacher is" in church.

   "For someone who's been totally blind, this is really remarkable," said
Andrew P. Mariani, a program director at the National Eye Institute.

   The project, an artificial retina, is part of a burst of recent research
aimed at one of science's most sought-after holy grails: making the blind see.

   More than 3.3 million Americans 40 and over are blind or have vision so poor
that even with glasses, medicine or surgery, everyday tasks are difficult,
according to the National Eye Institute, a federal agency. That number is
expected to double in the next 30 years.

   The approaches include gene therapy, which has produced improved vision in
people who are blind from one rare congenital disease. Stem cell research is
considered promising, and other studies involve a light-responding protein and
retinal transplants.

   And recently, Sharron Kay Thornton, 60, from Smithdale, Miss., blinded by a
skin condition, regained sight in one eye after doctors at the University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine extracted a tooth, shaved it down and used it as
a base for a plastic lens replacing her cornea.

   Campbell, a vocational rehabilitation counselor for New York's Commission for
the Blind and Visually Handicapped, has long been cheerfully self-sufficient.

   But little things rankle, like not knowing if clothes are stained and needing
help shopping for greeting cards.

   The device will not make her "see like I used to see," she said. "But it's
going to be more than what I have. It's not just for me - it's for so many other
people that will follow me."

GRAPHIC: BEATRICE DE GEA PHOTOS: NEW YORK TIMES MAKING STEPS: Barbara Campbell,
a blind New York City resident who has long been self-sufficient, is
participating in an experiment to restore some of her sight that involves
wearing a camera on the bridge of her nose and a video processor attached to her
waist. BIONIC EYE: Thanks to an artificial retina, Campbell is now able to
detect whether her computer monitor is on.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2009


                              193 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 27, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1549 words

HEADLINE: A Burst of Technology, Helping the Blind to See

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

BODY:

   Blindness first began creeping up on Barbara Campbell when she was a
teenager, and by her late 30s, her eye disease had stolen what was left of her
sight.

     Reliant on a talking computer for reading and a cane for navigating New
York City, where she lives and works, Ms. Campbell, now 56, would have been
thrilled to see something. Anything.

     Now, as part of a striking experiment, she can. So far, she can detect
burners on her stove when making a grilled cheese, her mirror frame, and whether
her computer monitor is on.

     She is beginning an intensive three-year research project involving
electrodes surgically implanted in her eye, a camera on the bridge of her nose
and a video processor strapped to her waist.

     The project, involving patients in the United States, Mexico and Europe, is
part of a burst of recent research aimed at one of science's most-sought-after
holy grails: making the blind see.

     Some of the 37 other participants further along in the project can
differentiate plates from cups, tell grass from sidewalk, sort white socks from
dark, distinguish doors and windows, identify large letters of the alphabet, and
see where people are, albeit not details about them.

     Linda Morfoot, 65, of Long Beach, Calif., blind for 12 years, says she can
now toss a ball into a basketball hoop, follow her nine grandchildren as they
run around her living room and ''see where the preacher is'' in church.

     ''For someone who's been totally blind, this is really remarkable,'' said
Andrew P. Mariani, a program director at the National Eye Institute. ''They're
able to get some sort of vision.''

     Scientists involved in the project, the artificial retina, say they have
plans to develop the technology to allow people to read, write and recognize
faces.

     Advances in technology, genetics, brain science and biology  are making a
goal that long seemed out of reach -- restoring sight -- more feasible.

     ''For a long time, scientists and clinicians were very conservative, but
you have to at some point get out of the laboratory and focus on getting
clinical trials in actual humans,'' said  Timothy J. Schoen, director of science
and preclinical development for the Foundation Fighting Blindness. Now ''there's
a real push,'' he said, because ''we've got a lot of blind people walking
around, and we've got to try to help them.''

     More than 3.3 million Americans 40 and over, or about one in 28, are blind
or have vision so poor that even with glasses, medicine or surgery, everyday
tasks are difficult, according to the National Eye Institute, a federal agency.
That number is expected to double in the next 30 years. Worldwide, about 160
million people are similarly affected.

     ''With an aging population, it's obviously going to be an increasing
problem,'' said  Michael D. Oberdorfer, who runs the visual neuroscience program
for the National Eye Institute, which finances several sight-restoration
projects, including the artificial retina. Wide-ranging research is important,
he said, because different methods could help different causes of blindness.

     The approaches include gene therapy, which has produced improved vision in
people who are blind from one rare congenital disease. Stem cell research is
considered  promising, although far from producing results, and other studies
involve a light-responding protein and retinal transplants.

     Others are implanting electrodes in monkeys' brains to see if directly
stimulating  visual areas might  allow even people with no eye function to see.

     And recently, Sharron Kay Thornton, 60, from Smithdale, Miss., blinded by a
skin condition, regained sight in one eye after doctors at the University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine extracted a tooth (her eyetooth, actually),
shaved it down and used it as a base for a plastic lens replacing her cornea.

     It was the first time the procedure, modified
osteo-odonto-keratoprosthesis,  was performed in this country. The surgeon, Dr.
Victor L. Perez, said it could help people with severely scarred corneas from
chemical or combat injuries.

     Other techniques focus on delaying blindness, including one involving a
capsule implanted in the eye to release proteins that slow the decay of
light-responding cells. And with BrainPort, a camera worn by a blind person
captures images and transmits signals to electrodes slipped onto the tongue,
causing tingling sensations that a person can learn to decipher as the location
and movement of objects.

     Ms. Campbell's artificial retina works similarly, except it produces the
sensation of sight, not tingling on the tongue. Developed by Dr. Mark S.
Humayun, a retinal surgeon at  the University of Southern California, it drew on
cochlear implants for the deaf and is partly financed by a cochlear implant
maker.

     It is so far being used in people with retinitis pigmentosa, in which
photoreceptor cells, which take in light, deteriorate.

     Gerald J. Chader, chief scientific officer at the University of Southern
California's Doheny Retinal Institute, where Dr. Humayun works, said it should
also work for severe cases of age-related macular degeneration, the major cause
of vision loss in older people.

     With the artificial retina, a sheet of electrodes is implanted in the eye.
The person wears glasses with a tiny camera, which captures images that the
belt-pack video processor translates into patterns of light and dark, like the
''pixelized image we see on a stadium scoreboard,'' said  Jessy D. Dorn, a
research scientist at Second Sight Medical Products, which produces the device,
collaborating with the Department of Energy. (Other research teams are
developing similar devices.)

     The video processor directs each electrode to transmit signals representing
an object's contours, brightness and contrast, which pulse along optic neurons
into the brain.

     Currently, ''it's a very crude image,'' Dr. Dorn said, because the implant
has only 60 electrodes; many people see flashes or patches of light.

     Brian Mech, Second Sight's vice president for business development, said
the company was seeking federal approval to market the 60-electrode version,
which would cost up to $100,000 and might be covered by insurance. Also planned
are 200- and 1,000-electrode versions; the higher number might provide enough
resolution for reading. (Dr. Mech said a maximum electrode number would
eventually be reached because if they are packed too densely, retinal tissue
could be burned.)

     ''Every subject has received some sort of visual input,'' he said. ''There
are people who aren't extremely impressed with the results, and other people who
are.'' Second Sight is studying what affects results, including whether practice
or disease characteristics influence the brain's ability to relearn how to
process visual signals.

     People choose when to use the device by turning their camera on. Dean
Lloyd, 68, a Palo Alto, Calif., lawyer, was ''pretty disappointed'' when he
started in 2007, but since his implant was adjusted so more electrodes
responded, is ''a lot more excited about it,'' he said. He uses it constantly,
seeing ''borders and boundaries'' and  flashes from highly reflective objects,
like glass, water or eyes.

     With Ms. Morfoot's earlier 16-electrode version, which registers objects as
horizontal lines, she climbed the Eiffel Tower and ''could see all the lights of
the city,'' she said. ''I can see my hand when I'm writing. At Little League
games, I can see where the catcher, batter and umpire are.''

     Kathy Blake, 58, of Fountain Valley, Calif., said she mainly wanted to help
advance research. But she uses it to sort laundry, notice cars and people, and
on the Fourth of July, to ''see all the fireworks,'' she said.

     Ms. Campbell, a vocational rehabilitation counselor for New York's
Commission for the Blind and Visually Handicapped, has long been cheerfully
self-sufficient, traveling widely from her fourth-floor  walk-up, going to the
theater, babysitting for her niece in North Carolina.

     But little things rankle, like not knowing if clothes are stained and
needing help shopping for greeting cards. Everything is a ''gray haze -- like
being in a cloud,'' she said. The device will not make her ''see like I used to
see,'' she said. ''But it's going to be more than what I have. It's not just for
me -- it's for so many other people that will follow me.''

     Ms. Campbell's ''realistic view of her vision'' and willingness to practice
are a plus, said  Aries Arditi, senior fellow in vision science at Lighthouse
International, a nonprofit agency overseeing her weekly training, which includes
practice moving her head so the camera captures images and interpreting light as
objects.

     ''In 20 years, people will think it's primitive, like the difference
between a Model T and a Ferrari,'' said Dr. Lucian Del Priore, an ophthalmology
surgeon at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Columbia University Medical Center,
who implanted Ms. Campbell's electrodes.  ''But the fact is, the Model T came
first.''

     Ms. Campbell would especially like to see colors, but, for now, any color
would be random flashes, Dr. Arditi said.

     But she saw circular lights at a restaurant, part of a light installation
at an art exhibition. ''There's a lot to learn,'' she said. Still, ''I'm, like,
really seeing this.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Barbara Campbell is part of a worldwide sight experiment.(A1)
 Barbara Campbell has long been self-sufficient. But little things can rankle,
like not being able to tell if clothes are stained.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY BEATRICE DE
GEA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A26) DIAGRAM: An Artificial Retina: Camera
Transmitter Cable to video processor and battery Currently in use to treat
people with damaged photoreceptor cells, the device consists of a small camera,
a belt-worn video processor and an implanted array of 60 electrodes. Images are
converted into patterns of light and dark and transmitted to the electrodes,
which send signals through the optic nerve to the brain and form a crude image
of light and dark patches.(Source: Second Sight Medical Products)(A26)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2009


                              194 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Science Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 610 words

HEADLINE: With Genetic Gift, 2 Monkeys Are Viewing a More Colorful World

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Dalton and Sam are male squirrel monkeys, about a foot tall. Their ancestors
lived by eating fruit and insects and dodging falcons in the forest canopy of
Central and South America. Dalton and Sam lead a more protected life in the
laboratory of Jay and Maureen Neitz at the University of Washington, Seattle.
Recently, the Neitzes endowed them with a new genetic gift: the ability to see
the world with full color vision.

     Male squirrel monkeys have only two of the color pigments known as opsins,
unlike people who have three. The Neitzes, with Katherine Mancuso and other
colleagues, used the technique of gene therapy to introduce the gene for the
missing red pigment into the cone cells of the monkeys' retinas. Several months
after the therapy, Dalton and Sam were able to see a world in which red hues
were visible and oranges no longer looked like lemons, the researchers say in
the current issue of Nature.

     Although the monkeys could not report that they saw the world with new
eyes, their ability to do so was judged by their performance on a color-vision
test with a reward of fruit juice.

     Jay Neitz said Dalton was named for John Dalton, who not only invented
modern atomic theory but in 1794 was also the first person to describe color
blindness -- his own.

     It was somewhat surprising that the monkeys' brains could take advantage of
a third opsin. The retina, however, seems to work by recording the difference
between the signals from neighboring cones, the cells that detect color. So the
extra opsin gene given to Dalton and Sam would have changed the signal from
affected cones and hence the message forwarded from the retina to the visual
cortex in the brain.

     The red opsin gene was carried on a standard virus used for gene therapy
experiments. Injected into the eye, the virus donated the opsin gene to the
monkeys' cones along with a piece of DNA that directed the cones to make the new
red opsin in preference to their own green opsin.

     Because some cones were infected by the virus and some were not, the
monkeys had both red and green cones at work, in addition to their unaffected
blue cones.

     Dr. Jeremy Nathans, a molecular biologist at Johns Hopkins University who
has genetically engineered a mouse with full color vision, said the monkey
experiment would help researchers understand the circuitry used by the primate
brain to analyze color. A next step might be to see how the cells in the
monkeys' visual cortex respond to the new signals from the retina, Dr. Nathans
said.

     New World male monkeys like Dalton and Sam are chromatically challenged
because their ancestors split off from Old World primates before full color
vision evolved. At the time of the split, primates had only two visual pigments,
one that is particularly sensitive to blue light and another that responds best
to either green or red, depending on which variant of the gene is inherited.

     After the split, which began with the opening of the Atlantic between
Africa and South America some 150 million years ago, the Old World primates
benefited from a genetic accident. The gene for the red or green opsin was
duplicated, allowing individuals to see red and green instead of just one or the
other.

     New World monkeys never developed the duplicated gene, but many females
have full color vision nevertheless. The reason is that the red/green opsin gene
lies on the X chromosome, so females who inherit a different version from each
parent have both red and green opsins along with the blue opsin on another
chromosome. But males, with only one X chromosome, inherit just one variant of
the red/green opsin -- the green in the case of Dalton and Sam.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009


                              195 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           September 22, 2009 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. HE02

DISTRIBUTION: District-Maryland

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: The Checkup;
Health in the News and in Your Life

BYLINE: Adapted from voices.washpost.come/checkup

BODY:


   Gene Therapy for Colorblindness?

   Scientists say they have used gene therapy to enable colorblind monkeys to
see red and green, possibly opening the door to curing colorblindness in people.

   Researchers at the University of Washington in Seattle injected gene-carrying
viruses into the retinas of two male squirrel monkeys, which are naturally
colorblind. The gene carried instructions for the production of a protein known
as opsin, which makes pigments that are sensitive to the colors red and green.

   About five weeks after the treatment, the monkeys -- named Dalton and Sam --
began to develop the ability to see those colors, according to an article last
week in the journal Nature.

   The technique could be used to treat colorblind humans, including the
estimated 3.5 million people in the United States who  have the condition, which
primarily affects men.

   -- Rob Stein

   smf25 wrote:

   The implications of this research go far beyond correcting colorblindness.
The same methodology, if safe in humans, could correct many nervous system
disorders that are due to a single defective gene. This is an amazing "proof of
concept" for genetic engineering in the central nervous system.

   New Lunchables Are 'Wholesome'

   Kraft has added a line of "wholesome" Lunchables to its repertoire.  The
turkey and cheddar sub,  for example, features "spring water" and applesauce,
"bread made with whole grain," "turkey made with 100% turkey breast," plus  2
percent milk reduced-fat cheddar cheese.

   I invite you to scan the ingredients. Kraft has managed to turn a simple
turkey and cheese sandwich into a chemistry set. Just reading the list of
ingredients -- I stopped counting at 119 -- is exhausting.

   And about that "bread made with whole grain": Is that the white wheat bran
that appears far down the list of the bread's ingredients, long after the
"enriched bleached wheat flour"? Or the malted barley flour, added to baked
goods mainly to keep them soft and moist? Or the wheat germ, of which the bread
contains 2 percent or less?

   -- Jennifer LaRue Huget

   reeceb wrote:

   My kids are 6, 7 and 8 and I've heard their cry for Lunchables many times.
What we've done is create our own "Lunchables" with healthy turkey, cheese,
crackers and fruit. We make the lunches together, and that seems to take some of
the sting out of not having the coolest lunch at school.

   drmary wrote:

   If the "wholesome" label causes parents to buy Lunchables rather than sending
McDonald's or money for chips, I can live with that. I know . . . folks are not
going to be making home lunches no matter what.

   Could Down Syndrome Disappear?

   That's the unsettling and provocative question posed in an article in the
Archives of Disease in Childhood. The study reports that, in the absence of
prenatal testing, scientists would have expected a 34 percent increase in the
number of babies born with the syndrome between 1989 and 2005. Instead, 15
percent fewer were born.

   As new blood tests allow for noninvasive screening during the first trimester
of pregnancy (as opposed to amniocentesis, which is administered well after a
woman's pregnancy has become evident to others), more women who learn that  they
are carrying a fetus that will develop Down syndrome  might opt to terminate
their pregnancies, according to the study. As it stands, 92 percent of women in
that situation opt to abort. More than 400,000 people in the  United States have
Down syndrome.

   -- Jennifer LaRue Huget

   anti-elitist wrote:

   My wife and I had the option of having the amniocentesis but decided it was a
waste and too risky, as the results would not have made a difference of whether
or not we would carry the baby full term. At some level, those who opt for the
test are more likely to abort based on unfavorable results.

   Also, Down syndrome has varying levels of affliction, and an amniocentesis
does not provide the parents with knowledge of how severely their child will
have the disease. Many who have the condition lead capable, happy, rich lives
that would have otherwise had been taken away had they been aborted.

GRAPHIC: IMAGE

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2009


                              196 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Local News

LENGTH: 909 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy fixes colorblind monkeys

BYLINE: JOE ROJAS-BURKE, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Vision disorders   | UW scientists insert a human gene into the
animals' eyes

   Gene therapy fixes

   colorblind monkeys Women

   are rarely

   colorblind

   JOE ROJAS-BURKE

   Scientists in Seattle have given naturally colorblind monkeys the ability to
see in full color by inserting a human gene into the animals' eyes. The dramatic
results boost the prospects for gene therapy as a cure for colorblindness and
perhaps other vision disorders in people --even adults.

   The findings run contrary to a long-held view that the brain can't readily
adapt to new forms of sensory input after a critical period of development
during the first months of life.

   "Never before in a gene therapy experiment was it possible to add something
new like this," says Jay Neitz, a professor at the University of Washington and
the study's lead author. "We are going to try to move down the road towards
making this something we can use to cure blindness" in other forms.

   About 10 million American men, roughly 7 percent of the male population, have
red-green colorblindness, the inability to see a difference between shades of
the two colors. The limitation is caused by mutations in genes for light-sensing
pigments that respond to red or green light. Such colorblindness is rare in
women because these genes are on the X chromosome. Women have two Xs and so have
better chances of getting at least one normal gene.

   In the new study, UW researchers, with colleagues at the University of
Florida and the Medical College of Wisconsin, trained a group of male squirrel
monkeys to perform a standard test of color vision. The animals received a sip
of grape juice as a reward for correctly pointing to shapes on a computer
display. As expected, the monkeys largely failed to see red or green shapes
--even after months of practice.

   Male squirrel monkeys are normally red-green colorblind because, like
colorblind men, they lack certain light-sensing pigments. The researchers
packaged the human gene for a light sensing pigment called L-opsin into a
harmless virus and injected trillions of copies of the virus around the retina
in the eyes of the monkeys.

   About 20 weeks later, the genes began to direct the production of the
color-sensing pigment at high levels in cone cells, the tapered, light-sensing
cells in the retina. And in daily vision tests, the monkeys gained the ability
to pick out red and green objects.

   Since the 1950s, scientists have generally assumed adult brains can't process
signals from the eyes that weren't present and helping to direct the brain's
development during the critical months after birth.

   "It's pretty amazing," says neuroscientist Bevil Conway, an assistant
professor at Wellesley College who is active in color-vision research.

   "The adult has, as we say, a cooked brain --it's gone through development and
it's finished. So how the hell is it doing this? It must be using the circuitry
that's already there."

   Conway says the results, published Wednesday in the online edition of the
journal Nature, are going to force neuroscientists to reconsider some of the
basic theory on how the eye and brain work together to give us color vision.

   "It does add a good bit of weight about the plasticity of the nervous system
in adapting to new opportunities," says Gerald Jacobs, a professor at the
University of California at Santa Barbara's Neuroscience Research Institute.

   Jacobs says he's not too surprised by the study because he and others have
already shown that the addition of a human photopigment can give mice a new
dimension of color vision. In those experiments, however, the mice were
genetically engineered to inherit the human pigment gene, leaving questions
about the need for sensory input during early brain development.

   But Jacobs says that all primates are born with an elaborate brain system for
processing color information from light-sensing pigments. Male squirrel monkeys
naturally have two types of color-sensing pigments, so the brains of the animals
in the experiment received color input during infant development, before
receiving the third type by gene therapy as adults.

   "The pathway is already there," Jacobs says. "What Jay and his colleagues did
was put in an array of photoreceptors that made the pathway work. Changing a
photopigment at the front will allow the nervous system to do new things."

   Jacobs says he's impressed most by the demonstration of the practical
possibility of using gene therapy to cure human colorblindness.

   That prospect remains years away, Neitz cautions. Because colorblindness is
not life-threatening or a cause of major disability, the risks of gene therapy
might not be worth taking. Gene therapy has triggered cancer and other
life-threatening complications in some of the few studies that have been
attempted in people.

   "We have some ideas about how to make it safer," Neitz says. "But there is a
big hurdle there, the safety hurdle."

   The monkey experiment might also contribute to work on more disabling forms
of blindness, Neitz says.

   "Some of the incurable blinding disorders are caused of some kind of loss of
light sensitivity of the retina." For example, the work could point to a gene
therapy approach to treating achromatopsia, a rare, inherited disorder that can
cause all three types of color-vision cone cells to fail.

   "I think this could be a first step to lots of different approaches where we
can cure blinding disorders in people," Neitz says.

   Joe Rojas-Burke: 503-412-7073;

   joerojas@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2009


                              197 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                          September 10, 2009 Thursday
                                 SOUTH EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. S-1

LENGTH: 1349 words

HEADLINE: YOUNG BROTHERS COPE WITH RARE DISEASE

BYLINE: Maria Sciullo, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   Valerie and Chris Grady want so much for their two young sons, but from the
outside looking in, it doesn't sound extravagant: To see their kids playing in
the yard, running around at school, learning to recite their ABCs.

   Yet it would take practically a miracle for that to happen, one they don't
plan to stop pursuing until there's nowhere else to go.

   Drew, 5, and Trent, 2, each inherited a gene that affects the body in
devastating ways. Their family struggles daily with the effects of the infantile
form of Batten disease, an extremely rare condition caused by mutations in the
soluble protein of cells in the body.

   At least nine different kinds of Batten disease exist, all with different
types of mutated genes, all fatal. Those affected in the early onset version
experience decreased brain volume, progressive deterioration of nerve and muscle
function, and often blindness.

   Life expectancy usually is late teens.

   Batten disease affects perhaps two to four children of every 100,000 live
births worldwide. There is no known cure, although expensive options exist in
pursuit of anything to at least slow the progress of the disease.

   The Gradys, who grew up in Bethel Park and live in Upper St. Clair, have had
long discussions on the pros and cons of stem cell treatments in China -- which
cost at least $30,000 per treatment, with four treatments in the cycle -- or
possibly participating in a gene therapy trial at Cornell University -- at a
cost of more than $500,000 per child.

   The Cornell study is currently $2.5 million short, said Mrs. Grady, so the
families of the five children accepted in November will have to make up the
difference.

   b> Insurance doesn't cover

   /b>

   Neither treatment is covered by insurance and both have risks. According to
Dr. Jon Cooper, head of the Pediatric Storage Disorders Lab at King's College in
London, another approach uses enzyme replacement but it has not been cleared for
trials involving humans.

   The everyday expenses also add up, and many necessary items -- such as the
special car seats at $1,000 apiece or a $300 pediatric life vest -- are not
covered by insurance.

   Even when equipment is covered, waiting for authorization can be frustrating,
Mrs. Grady said. A piece of equipment to help maintain Drew's gait when he
walks, she said, took 14 weeks to arrive by the time it was approved by the
insurance company.

   "Once you lose your gait, it's not coming back," she said. "I wish I could
have gotten it and battled with the insurance company later."

   Insurance did pay for a $2,000 motorized wheelchair but that, too, was a
back-and-forth struggle, she said.

   A general trust fund has been established for the boys' needs, and friends of
the family are organizing a fundraiser Sept. 27 at St. Valentine Catholic Church
in Bethel Park.

   "The church has graciously donated the use of the hall, and we're hoping to
pull in a thousand people," said family friend Sue Beeson, who is helping
arrange the pasta dinner.

   "Right now, we have 750, according to tickets."

   In addition to a full dinner, a ticket auction and raffle for gift baskets
will be held. The food is being donated by a local restaurant. Serving staff
from a church in the North Hills, where one the boys' relatives works, will
cross a bridge to help out that night.

   Co-workers at the Downtown printing company where Mrs. Grady works and Mr.
Grady's colleagues at Sto-Rox High School have contributed in ways big and
small, they said.

   One friend arranged a benefit golf outing, and a rock concert is being
discussed to raise money. One of Mr. Grady's colleagues is local rocker Joe
Grushecky, who has promised to arrange a benefit concert this winter.

   b> Typical to tragedy

   /b>

   Little more than two years ago, the Gradys were a typical young family with
typical concerns. Shortly after Drew turned 3, however, he began experiencing an
escalating series of seizure activity.

   Medication seemed to help, and adhering to a Ketogenic diet helped even more.
Such a diet is high in fat and low in carbohydrates and is used to control
seizures.

   Drew eventually underwent vagus nerve stimulation implant surgery, in which a
small battery sends electric impulses to the brain.

   Mr. Grady had experienced petite mal seizures as a child but outgrew them.
The family clung to the expectation that this would also be the case for Drew,
but his activity worsened.

   "We were in denial," Mrs. Grady said. "We were constantly thinking it was
something else."

   More trips to specialists provided little explanation. MRIs and other tests
showed that Drew had suffered brain volume loss, and he began having more than a
hundred seizures a day.

   "I began surfing the Internet for an hour and a half a night," said Mr.
Grady, a high school physical education teacher.

   Having another child provided a much-needed distraction from the constant
worry: "We are so blessed with him. I probably would have curled up in a ball,
but I had a 2-week-old baby I had to take care of when [Drew] started having
seizures," Mrs. Grady said.

   Drew had begun dropping things, tripping over his feet. The family was told
to take him to the Cleveland Clinic, where in March, they at last had a
diagnosis.

   "They had told us it was probably one of three things, and that [Batten] was
the worst," Mrs. Grady said, holding the slender blond child on her lap as the
family gathered around a table on the lawn of their home.

   Shortly after Drew's diagnosis, they had his younger brother tested. The
results were almost too much to believe.

   Trent has speech-delay issues and is learning American Sign Language. But for
now, he is a vibrant toddler, another towhead chasing neighborhood friends
across the driveway.

   He is not yet on any daily medication, but his brother takes three to prevent
seizures.

   Much of what has been done for Drew involves trying to halt the effects of
Batten disease. In Trent's case, given more time, the family hopes to be able to
forestall symptoms until an effective treatment is discovered.

   But naturally, they have fears. On the family's Web site,
www.gradysallstars.com, Mrs. Grady wrote in her blog:

   "It is heartbreaking to watch Trent push his brother's walker around, knowing
that one day it will be his.

   "When I thought of hand-me-downs, I was thinking shoes and clothes, not
wheelchairs and walkers."

   Next-door neighbor Chloe Kondrich, 6, bounded up to Drew and gave him a quick
kiss.

   "He's my boyfriend!" she said, running off.

   "Drew has one of the best support systems in Chloe," Mrs. Grady said,
producing a small scrapbook of photographs from the families' summer visit to
Myrtle Beach, S.C.

   Because swallowing can be difficult, Drew, who weighs 30 pounds, is scheduled
to have a feeding tube implanted in the near future.

   b> School days

   /b>

   He began kindergarten at a new school this year, accompanied on the bus by a
nurse to The Children's Institute in Squirrel Hill. Drew had been attending A
Child's Way in Lawrenceville, a program sponsored by the Mario Lemieux
Foundation. Trent, who is dropped off at in-home daycare, eventually will attend
A Child's Way.

   In addition to school, both boys attend physical and speech therapy sessions
as part of their long, busy days.

   Hockey holds special delight for Drew, who enjoys watching baseball and
football as well. His mother said that one of the most difficult aspects for him
in adjusting to his condition is his frustration: He sees other kids playing
ball and cannot join in.

   The family said the Penguins have arranged for Drew to meet the players, and
he was the guest of Mr. Lemieux for a Stanley Cup playoff game. The Washington
Wild Things baseball team also has pitched in; Drew threw out the first pitch at
a game this summer.

   "When he's with them [watching games, meeting players], he gets a whole
different face," said his grandmother, Beverly Sughrue, of Coraopolis.

   The family is hopeful, but it also knows the odds.

   "Research is out there, it's so important," Mrs. Grady said. "If it's not
something to help our kids, then the next generation."

   Contributions may be sent to Grady's All-Stars, 3325 Forest Road, Bethel
Park, PA 15102. For more information by phone, call 412-726-1090.

NOTES: Maria Sciullo can be reached at msciullo@post-gazette.com or
412-851-1867./

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Michael Henninger/Post-Gazette: Chris and Valerie Grady pose for
a portrait with their two children, Trent, left, 2, and Drew, 5, at their home
in Upper St. Clair. Trent and Drew both have Batten disease, which has no known
cure.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2009


                              198 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           September 8, 2009 Tuesday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1367 words

HEADLINE: Implant gives new hope to the blind

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   At first, sitting in church one Sunday, Michael Adler couldn't tell what the
whitish glow in front of him was.

   Adler, 49, had been legally blind since childhood, and his vision eventually
deteriorated to pretty much zero.

   But now, on the back of the pew in front of him, he saw something. And then
he realized: It was the pages of a hymnal. His new "eye" was starting to work.

   Two months earlier at Wills Eye Institute, surgeons had implanted a small
array of electrodes in the back of Adler's left eye - a speck of metal no bigger
than the word eye on this page. In the last few weeks - with the aid of a small
video camera in his sunglasses that transmits images to his retinal implant - he
has begun to gain some limited vision.

   "Every day, I can make out more than I could the day before," he said after a
round of follow-up tests at the University of Pennsylvania. "It's very weird
trying to get used to it."

   Surgeons have implanted the devices in the retinas of 32 people around the
world. All have a severe form of retinitis pigmentosa, an inherited disease that
causes retinal degeneration.

   Much like a cochlear implant enables a deaf person to perceive sound, the
retinal implant bypasses damaged cells in the eye, transmitting signals to the
same part of the brain that registers images in people with normal vision.

   "It's sort of like, all the phone lines are in place and you didn't have the
phone," said Julia Haller, ophthalmologist-in-chief at Wills. "This replaces the
phone."

   The resulting black-and-white images are very low-resolution, consisting of
just 60 pixels - far too fuzzy for users to pick out letters on an eye chart. To
Adler, a massage therapist who lives in Mantua, Gloucester County, the face of
his 9-year-old daughter looks like a bright, featureless oval.

   But he can see the outlines of doors and sidewalks, and he can pick out
plates on the dinner table.

   This type of surgery is just one of several futuristic techniques that
scientists are exploring to help the blind, advances that until recently were
only a dream.

   In younger patients with another type of blindness, researchers have had some
success with gene therapy, restoring a modest amount of vision by injecting
corrective genes. Two such efforts are under way at Penn: one in collaboration
with Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, the other with the University of
Florida at Gainesville.

   Elephant on a typewriter Other methods under scrutiny include stem cells,
which would regenerate the eye's rods and cones, and cortical implants, which
are a bit like what Adler has in his eye, but which are placed directly in the
brain, bypassing the eye.

   "The progress is remarkable compared to what it was five years ago," said
Andrew Mariani, a program director in the National Eye Institute's division of
extramural research. "What it will be in another five or 10 years, we can just
guess."

   Along the way, scientists are starting to learn new things about the brain's
plasticity - its ability to adapt.

   In blind people, especially those who lose their sight at an early age, parts
of the visual cortex are commonly borrowed to enhance other senses, said the
University of Southern California's Mark S. Humayun, a leader of the
retinal-implant project.

   So a big question is, when some sight is restored, are those parts of the
brain borrowed back? Humayun, a biomedical engineer and an ophthalmologist at
the Doheny Eye Institute at USC, plans to use brain scans to answer that
question.

   Another puzzle is why people with the implants are able to see much of
anything, because the implanted electrodes, though gossamer-thin, are still much
thicker than the natural machinery they replace.

   In the center of a healthy retina, the signal from each light-sensitive cone
cell is transmitted to one ganglion cell, and ultimately through the optic nerve
to the brain.

   In blind people with the implants, on the other hand, each electrode
stimulates 10 to 20 ganglion cells at once, Humayun said.

   "It's sort of like an elephant typing on a typewriter," said Tim Schoen,
director of preclinical research at the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which has
funded Humayun's work in the past.

   But it seems to work Yet in a limited way, it seems to work. Some patients do
better than others, but so far all 32 have been able to see something, according
to Second Sight Medical Products, the California maker of the device.

   It is called the Argus II, after the 100-eyed guardian of Greek myth.

   It was designed with the help of the U.S. Department of Energy, which has
contributed $51 million and technical expertise from its national labs. DOE
scientists are now working with the company to make a higher-resolution device
with more than 200 electrodes.

   The goal is to build an implant with 1,000 electrodes, though the department
has not committed funding beyond next year.

   Even the current 60-electrode device is a feat of engineering, not the least
because of where it has to perform: the warm, salty surroundings of the human
eye.

   Adler learned of the trial from the physicians at Penn's Scheie Eye
Institute, where he had been going for years.

   They felt that Adler had the motivation to cope with what would likely be a
bewildering new stimulus, and the energy to return for years of testing.

   But they warned him not to hope much.

   "Repeat after me: I don't have any expectations," ophthalmologist Samuel G.
Jacobson told him.

   The three-hour surgery was performed June 29 by Allen Ho and Carl Regillo,
surgeons at Wills Eye and professors of ophthalmology at Thomas Jefferson
University.

   Once Adler was under anesthesia, they opened his eyelids wide and deftly cut
through the conjunctiva, the membrane that covers the white of the eye. They did
that so they could place a thin belt, called a scleral buckle, entirely around
the eyeball.

   The buckle is used to hold a disk-shape receiver on one side of the eye.
Eventually, the receiver would accept signals from the camera and electronic
circuitry outside Adler's body.

   Then the surgeons performed a vitrectomy, making a tiny incision in the white
of the eye, suctioning out the jelly inside and replacing it with a saline
solution.

   Finally, they made another small incision in the eye and inserted the
electrode implant, which was connected to the receiver by a thin cable.

   The implant was then fastened to the center of Adler's retina with a
microtack.

   It took several weeks for his eye to heal.

   On Aug. 12, he returned to Penn to try on his custom sunglasses, equipped
with a camera the size of a pencil eraser.

   The switch was turned on, and at first, the sudden new stimulus was a bit
much.

   "It looked like I was staring into a flashlight," he said.

   The device was fine-tuned, and he returned the next week, Aug. 19, to take
home the glasses for good.

   By Aug. 22, he had started to get the hang of it, picking out blurry objects
on the dinner table, though he couldn't tell exactly what they were. The next
day he saw the hymnal at church.

   At Penn's Scheie building, where the circular concrete walls evoke the form
of a giant eye, he has been returning each Wednesday for tests with Jacobson and
Artur V. Cideciyan, a research associate professor of ophthalmology.

   In one test, he must find a white square measuring three inches across that
pops up in various spots on a computer screen.

   Most of the time he gets it right, successfully touching the square with his
finger, though his hand-eye coordination is a bit rusty from years of disuse.

   The implant device is small, providing only a 20-degree field of view, and so
he must swivel his head to see things. He is fully aware that the implant is
experimental, and that it may not ever make much difference in his day-to-day
life.

   Still, he is delighted. And Cideciyan said his performance may improve as his
brain trains itself to make sense of the newfound information.

   Last week, vacationing in Ocean City, N.J., with his wife and daughter, Adler
could see the lights on the boardwalk at night.

   As he walked to dinner one evening at Clancy's by the Sea, he saw what he
thought was the restaurant's dark doorway, though he had to ask someone to make
sure.

   "This is all new to me," he marveled.

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2009


                              199 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            September 7, 2009 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 844 words

HEADLINE: Congregation joins dragon boat race to help child

BYLINE: By David O'Reilly; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   As breezes rippled across the sunlit Schuylkill yesterday morning, sending
two 40-foot dragon boats tugging at their dock lines, Rabbi Lawrence Sernovitz
just couldn't hold back his feelings.

   "It's overwhelming what you have done together to support my family and my
son," he told the small crowd gathered around him at Lloyd Hall boat club on
Kelly Drive.

   Six months ago, the junior rabbi at Old York Road Temple-Beth Am in Abington
had never even heard of dragon boats.

   But at next month's Philadelphia International Dragon Boat Festival,
Sernovitz will squeeze into a slender, tippy reed of fiberglass alongside his
father, his brother, and 19 other men and women. At the sound of a horn, they
will flail their paddles 500 grueling yards upriver for the sake of his baby
boy.

   For Sam.

   Born one year ago, Samuel William Sernovitz failed to flourish, could not
keep his food down, shed no tears, "and really was in pain," his father
explained last week.

   Sernovitz and his wife, Rebecca, took Sam to a feeding specialist when he was
4 months old, only to learn he has familial dysautonomia: an exceptionally rare
and potentially life-shortening disease unique to Jews of Eastern European
ancestry.

   "My wife broke down," the rabbi recalled, but the news galvanized the
congregation.

   "As soon as we heard about it, we knew we had to do something," said Alison
Dryer, who, with friend and fellow congregant Peggy Robertson, conceived the
idea of assembling a team for this year's race on Oct. 3.

   The response was so great that they assembled two teams: "Hope United" and
"Hope United II." Each of the 40 paddlers is donating $118 - nearly $5,000 - to
the Familial Dysautonomia Foundation, which is funding research at New York
University Medical Center.

   "I've never, ever paddled," Pam Schuessler, 55, of Glenside admitted with a
nervous laugh yesterday morning. "In fact, I've only been in a boat once or
twice in my life." But when her friend Dryer told her of her plan, Schuessler -
who is not a member of Beth Am - "thought it sounded wonderful."

   Begun in China 2,000 years ago, dragon boat racing caught on in the West
about 20 years ago and has proved especially popular in Philadelphia. Next
month's competition will draw 152 teams and more than 4,000 paddlers to the
Schuylkill, according to Carol Lee Lindner, founder and director of the
festival.

   "Some of the teams are for charity," said Lindner, who has agreed to coach
the synagogue's teams, "but we don't keep track of how many."

   Western dragon boats typically hold 20 paddlers who sit two abreast and
stroke with what look like short paddles. A helmsman at the stern steers with a
long paddle while a drummer at the bow keeps time.

   "A Jewish congregation with an Irish drum in a Chinese boat," joked Mimi
Ferraro, the team's drummer and the synagogue's education director, as she
headed for the dock yesterday.

   Minutes later she was in command, her rabbi just one of 20 crew crouched on
the boat's hard, narrow benches and gripping paddles.

   "OK, friends, we're gonna do 10 hard, slow ones to get us out of here,"
Ferraro called out, and then banged on her broad, goatskin bodhran. "One! Two!
Count with me. Threeee. . ."

   Difficult to manage A happy, brown-eyed boy (his father calls him a "huge
flirt"), Sam Sernovitz is only the 647th person ever diagnosed with familial
dysautonomia, which until recently claimed the lives of most youngsters before
their fifth birthdays.

   "It is a neurological condition that affects the sensory and autonomic
nervous systems, and can cause severe gastrointestinal, cardiac, pulmonary,
orthopedic, renal and ophthalmologic problems," Sernovitz, wrote to the
congregation's 900 families soon after his son's diagnosis.

   Nowadays, more than half can reach age 30 thanks to therapies and surgeries,
but it is an extremely difficult disease to manage. Sam's feeding can take
hours, Sernovitz said, and there is still no known way to prevent it.

   But he said NYU Medical Center is preparing to test a gene therapy on adults
with dysautonomia that could relieve its symptoms.

   Although the Oct. 3 race will take place on a Saturday, the Jewish Sabbath,
Beth Am's senior rabbi, Robert Lieb, gave permission for Sernovitz to take part.

   "There is a Jewish principle that you may do certain work on the Sabbath to
save a life," he said, "and Rabbi Lieb decided this [fund-raiser] was about
saving lives."

   Team "Hope United II" looked better coming back down the river yesterday than
it did when it started an hour before. As it rounded the bend and Ferraro's
drumming echoed across the water, the paddlers were roughly in unison and their
strokes steady.

   "It doesn't matter if we come in first or third or whatever - we're going to
win," Sernovitz told them after they returned to shore. Then he let them in on a
secret.

   "For Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, I'll be talking about community - what it
means and how you find it in this day and age," he said. "I will be eternally
grateful for what you're all doing."

   Contact staff writer David O'Reilly at 215-854-5723 or
doreilly@phillynews.com.


CORRECTION-DATE: September 10, 2009

CORRECTION:

   A photo caption Monday with a story on two dragon boat teams associated with
Old York Road Temple-Beth Am wrongly stated the purpose of the teams'
fund-raising, which is to support the Familial Dysautonomia Foundation and not
the direct care of the son of Rabbi Lawrence Sernovitz. Sam Sernovitz is the
637th person diagnosed with familial dysautonomia. Also, the name of Rabbi
Robert Leib was misspelled.

GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2009


                              200 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                          September 2, 2009 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 025

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: Shire pushes quick OK for drug

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE McCONVILLE

BODY:

   Shire PLC has sent its Gaucher disease treatment to the Food and Drug
Administration for approval ahead of schedule.

   If approved for commercial use, Shire's velaglucerase alfa could be a new
treatment option for people with Type 1 Gaucher disease.

   Shire's push for faster-than-usual approval of the new enzyme-replacement
therapy was triggered by a worldwide shortage of the world's most popular
Gaucher disease treatment.

   Production of that drug, Cerezyme, stopped earlier this summer when
manufacturer Genzyme Corp. discovered a virus in its Allston manufacturing plant
where Cerezyme is made.

   In August, the FDA allowed Shire to distribute its not-yet-approved drug for
free to adults with type 1 Gaucher disease. The FDA granted the unusual approval
because adults with type 1 Gaucher disease were mostly prohibited from receiving
the limited supplies of Cerezyme.

   Shire Human Genetic Therapies President Sylvie Gregoire called yesterday's
new drug application submission ``an important milestone for Shire.''

   Shire's Human Genetics Therapies offices are located in Lexington.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2009
