
                              201 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                          September 2, 2009 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: Shire submits Gaucher drug to FDA

BYLINE: Robert Weisman,

BODY:

   British drug maker Shire PLC yesterday said it submitted a new drug
application with the Food and Drug Administration for velaglucerase alfa, its
enzyme replacement treatment for the rare genetic disorder Gaucher disease. FDA
approval would put the drug in head-to-head competition with Cerezyme, the
market leader for treatment of Gaucher, made by Genzyme Corp.

   The Cambridge biotech has been rationing Cerezyme for the past two months
because of a virus found in its Allston plant. In a statement, Sylvie Gregoire,
president of Shire's human genetic therapies division in Lexington, said her
company filed its application earlier than it previously had planned. She called
it ``an important milestone'' for Shire.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2009


                              202 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 31, 2009 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1011 words

HEADLINE: When milk threatens babies;
Patients gather in Boston for the largest clinical study ever of a rare disorder

BYLINE: By Carolyn Y. Johnson GLOBE STAFF, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   For three decades, Dr. Gerard T. Berry has studied a rare, potentially lethal
genetic disease that makes milk poison to an infant. Still, it's difficult for
him to know exactly what life will be like for 1-year-old Oliver Siminoff, a
ferocious crawler with a penchant for high-fives.

   The disease can be treated with a special diet, but patients like Oliver face
a wide gamut of future problems, ranging from menopause in their teens to
cognitive problems.

   ``That's almost the worst part. If a kid has other things, they know what's
going to happen. With him, it seems like a lottery,'' Jamie Siminoff, Oliver's
father, said during a recent appointment in Berry's office at Children's
Hospital Boston.

   In an attempt to unravel some of those unknowns, 35 patients came to Boston
this month for a two-day battery of tests and to meet with an international
panel of doctors, part of the largest-ever comprehensive clinical study of
adults with the disease, called galactosemia.

   The study - primarily funded by the patient advocacy group, Parents of
Galactosemic Children, and made possible by the willingness of patients to pay
their way to Boston - is just one example of the ways in which families and
patient groups are driving scientific research on rare diseases.

   ``Initially it was a wonderful thing just to find somebody who has the same
disease,'' said Mary Dunkle, vice president of communications for the National
Organization for Rare Disorders, an advocacy organization. ``Now, people have
done that and they're ready to move on to the next level: What can we do beyond
that? You get 35 people together in a room with a rare disease; that's a rare
thing, and you don't want to waste it.''

   There are more than 6,000 known rare diseases, defined as those that affect
fewer than 200,000 people in the United States. Last year, Children's Hospital
received a $25 million gift from the Manton Foundation for a center devoted to
studying these diseases, often caused by genetic abnormalities. But which of
these ailments gets the attention of researchers depends, in part, on the
dedication of families.

   For example, the Progeria Research Foundation, based in Peabody, has raised
money to fund clinical trials for progeria, a fatal disease that causes
accelerated aging in children.

   And families and foundations have supported a consortium of local researchers
and others working on gene therapies for Tay-Sachs disease with a $600,000
grant, which this month helped the researchers win a $3.5 million National
Institutes of Health grant to bring animal research to the stage where it is
ready for human clinical trials.

   ``There's a two-pronged approach: one is the support group so they can share
their individual experiences, while at the same time realizing that the funds
that are raised are going to try and help alleviate and target the disease,''
said Tom Seyfried, a biology professor at Boston College involved in the
Tay-Sachs Gene Therapy Consortium.

   Galactosemia, a rare metabolic disorder, affects about one in 50,000 children
and causes galactose, a sugar found in human and animal milk and other foods, to
build up in the blood, causing harm to the brain and other vital organs. If the
disorder is unrecognized at birth, infants often die.

   Because of screening that began about three decades ago, most babies with
galactosemia can be switched to foods that are safe - though they still suffer a
range of neurological or fertility problems that scientists are struggling to
understand.

   The disease affects so few children that little is known about the full scope
of its symptoms. When talking with families, doctors often must rely on
individual patients' experiences - a man in the Netherlands who fathered
children, a handful of women with the disease who were able to get pregnant, for
example.

   ``I would go to the pediatrician, and he would say to my mom and dad, how's
she doing? It's almost like they were trying to learn together,'' said Maureen
Bell, 37, who traveled from Philadelphia to participate in the trial at
Children's Hospital.

   Among the questions scientists hope to answer by studying Bell and the other
adults who came to Boston from across the United States is whether screening if
newborns has reduced the chronic complications of the disease.

   Some of the patients, including Bell, were born at hospitals where screening
was not done. Bell's condition was discovered only when her mother, about to
take her baby home from the hospital, noticed she was turning yellow.

   Bell said that she went through menopause - hot flashes and all - at age 18
and had learning problems throughout her childhood.

   And it was not until she was 18 that she first walked into a room where she
was not the only one with the disease. She is one of the older people with the
disease, probably because most of its victims used to die as babies.

   ``I was one of the luckier ones,'' Bell said. Aside from a slight tremor in
her hands, there is no sign of the disease to a casual observer.

   Young Oliver Siminoff seems to be doing well, too, but many of the cognitive
problems associated with the disease, including language difficulties, don't
emerge until a child is older.

   He underwent cognitive testing during his recent visit to Children's from his
home in California. Psychologist Susan Waisbren tested Oliver with simple tasks,
such as ringing a bell, putting a block in a cup, or finding a bracelet hidden
under a washcloth. His parents watched intently, cheering their son when he did
a difficult task correctly.

   Berry, the galactosemia specialist, is hoping that research - including work
with stem cells that the Siminoff family plans to fund - might elucidate some of
the biological underpinnings of the disease and help scientists understand
certain brain disorders.

   ``The lessons learned from this experiment of nature - this inborn error of
metabolism, galactosemia - may help us uncover some of the secrets of how the
brain functions,'' Berry said. ``And how it becomes dysfunctional when its wires
get crossed.''

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2009


                              203 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: MONKEYS HAVE TWO MOTHERS DUE TO CLONING TECHNIQUES

BYLINE: Rob Stein, The Washington Post

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Scientists have produced monkeys with genetic material from two
mothers, an advance that could help women with some inherited diseases have
healthy children but that raises safety, legal, ethical and social questions if
attempted in people.

   Using cloning-related techniques, the researchers developed a way to replace
most of the genes in the eggs from one rhesus macaque monkey with those from
another, fertilized the eggs with sperm, transferred the resulting embryos into
animals' wombs and produced four apparently healthy offspring.

   The technique was developed for women who carry disorders caused by defects
in a form of DNA passed only from females to their children, and the researchers
said they hoped their work will eventually translate into therapies for people.

   "We believe this technique can be applied pretty quickly to humans and
believe it will work," said Shoukhrat Mitalipov, of the Oregon Health & Sciences
University in Portland, who led the work published online Wednesday by the
journal Nature.

   Many scientists hailed the research as a technically impressive feat that
could help many families rid themselves of a variety of terrible disorders
caused by defects in genetic material known as mitochondrial DNA.

   "This is of great importance. This approach will be beneficial to many
families," said Jan Smeitink, a professor of mitochondrial medicine at Radboud
University Nijmegen in the Netherlands.

   But the work also raises a variety of potentially thorny ethical and legal
issues, including creating offspring with DNA from two mothers and a father.

   "With this you have potentially three genetic parents," said David Magnus,
director of Stanford University's Center for Biomedical Ethics. "This will
create the potential for legal and social conflicts."

   If applied to people, the work would also alter a family's genes in a
permanent way that would be passed down for generations, which would violate a
long-standing taboo in altering the so-called "germline" because of the
potential of unforeseen consequences. Some experts worry, too, that germline
genetic manipulation would give rise to a market in expensive elective genetic
enhancements.

   The researchers acknowledged the work might raise ethical questions, but said
those needed to be balanced against potential benefits.

   "We realize this is not just a simple form of gene therapy. This type of gene
therapy involves replacing genes in the germline, which, of course, will be
transmitted to next generations, which is a concern," Dr. Mitalipov said.
"However, we're talking about patients and birth defects that cause terrible
diseases due to these gene mutations. So the only way to prevent these birth
defects is to replace these genes."

   Mitochondrial DNA is found inside structures in cells called mitochondria,
which are often referred to as the power plants for cells because they provide
energy for cell growth and other functions. But defects in mitochondrial DNA can
cause disorders that occur in about one out of every 5,000 people. Defects in
this DNA may be involved in more common disorders like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's
and Huntington's diseases.

   For their experiments, Dr. Mitalipov and his colleagues extracted DNA from
the nucleus of monkey eggs, which contains the genes for most of a creature's
traits. The researchers then transplanted that DNA into eggs from other females
that had healthy mitochondrial DNA, but from which the nuclear DNA had been
removed.

   They then fertilized them in the laboratory with sperm from male monkeys and
transferred 15 of the resulting embryos into the wombs of nine females, which
gave birth to twins -- Mito and Tracker -- and two other offspring, named
Spindler and Spindy. So far, all the offspring appear to be healthy.

   Several experts said the work should be tried in people only after much more
research has been done to test its safety. "The No. 1 concern I would have is
safety," said Mark Rothstein, a bioethicist at the University of Louisville.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Oregon National Primate Research Center at Oregon Health &
Science University: Monkey twins Mito, left, and Tracker.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009


                              204 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            August 27, 2009 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A04

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: Lab Produces Monkeys With 2 Mothers;
Research May Help Women With Genetic Disorders but Raises Ethical Questions

BYLINE: Rob Stein; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists have produced monkeys with genetic material from two mothers, an
advance that could help women with some inherited diseases have healthy children
but that would raise a host of safety, legal, ethical and social questions if
attempted in people.

   Using cloning-related techniques, the researchers developed a way to replace
most of the genes in the eggs of one rhesus macaque monkey with genes from
another monkey. They then fertilized the eggs with sperm, transferred the
resulting embryos into animals' wombs and produced four apparently healthy
offspring.

   The technique was developed for women who have disorders caused by defects in
a form of DNA passed only from females to their children, and the researchers
said they hope the work will eventually translate into therapies for people.

   "We believe this technique can be applied pretty quickly to humans and
believe it will work," said Shoukhrat Mitalipov of the Oregon Health & Science
University in Portland, who led the work, published online Wednesday by the
journal Nature.

   Many scientists hailed the research as a technically impressive feat that
could help many families rid themselves of a variety of terrible disorders
caused by defects in genetic material known as mitochondrial DNA.

   "This is of great importance. This approach will be beneficial to many
families," said Jan Smeitink, a professor of mitochondrial medicine at Radboud
University Nijmegen in the Netherlands.

   But the work could also raise thorny ethical and legal issues, including
questions surrounding the creation of offspring with DNA from two mothers and a
father.

   "With this you have potentially three genetic parents," said David Magnus,
director of Stanford University's Center for Biomedical Ethics. "This will
create the potential for legal and social conflicts."

   If applied to people, the work would permanently alter genes for their future
generations, violating a long-standing taboo against tinkering with the
"germline" because of the chance of unforeseen consequences. Some experts worry,
too, that germline genetic manipulation would give rise to a market in expensive
elective genetic enhancements.

   The researchers acknowledged that the work might raise ethical questions but
said those must be balanced against the potential benefits.

   "We realize this is not just a simple form of gene therapy. This type of gene
therapy involves replacing genes in the germline which of course will be
transmitted to next generations, which is a concern," Mitalipov said. "However,
we're talking about patients and birth defects that cause terrible diseases due
to these gene mutations. So the only way to prevent these birth defects is to
replace these genes."

   Mitochondrial DNA is found inside structures in cells called mitochondria,
which are often referred to as the "power plants" for cells because they provide
energy for growth and other functions. But defects in mitochondrial DNA can
cause a variety of disorders that may occur in about one of every 5,000 people
and that can cause a wide spectrum of health problems, including stunted growth,
muscle weakness, blindness, deafness, mental retardation, diabetes, seizures and
dementia. Defects in this DNA may also sometimes be involved in more common
disorders including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases.

   For their experiments, Mitalipov and his colleagues extracted DNA from the
nucleus of monkey eggs; the nucleus contains the genes for most of a creature's
traits. The researchers then transplanted that DNA into eggs from other females
that had healthy mitochondrial DNA but from which the nuclear DNA had been
removed.

   They then fertilized the eggs in the laboratory and transferred 15 of the
resulting embryos into the wombs of nine females. Two twins were born -- named
Mito and Tracker -- along with two other offspring, Spindler and Spindy. So far,
all the offspring appear to be healthy.

   Several experts said the work should be tried in people only after much more
research has been done to test its safety.

   "The number one concern I would have is safety," said Mark Rothstein, a
bioethicist at the University of Louisville. "There's always a concern that a
facility might jump the gun and try to put it into use before safety has been
established."

   Even if further animal studies show that the approach is safe, attempts in
humans might still lead to defective embryos, others noted.

   "When it is attempted in humans, some abnormal embryos are bound to result.
If they are discarded, this will raise major ethical concerns for those who view
human embryos as nascent human beings, and by some who do not," said Cynthia B.
Cohen, a Georgetown University bioethicist. "Many in our society are reluctant
to see abnormal embryos created and then discarded."

   If it works, said Lori B. Andrews, who studies ethical and legal issues
raised by new reproductive technologies at the Chicago-Kent College of Law,
women who donated the mitochondrial DNA could seek visitation rights.

   "If the mitochondria donor (who is probably a young woman) is later
infertile, she might seek visitation to the child," Andrews wrote in an e-mail.
"After all, people didn't think surrogate mothers, who are not the nucleic DNA
donors, would want access to the couples' genetic child, but some have gone to
the courts for such access."

   Others worried about opening the door to other genetic manipulation.
"Unfortunately, we're likely to hear some people saying, 'Okay, we've done this,
so why can't we alter the DNA in the nucleus to, say, prevent a predisposition
to breast cancer? And if you do it for breast cancer, why can't we do it to weed
out a predisposition to baldness?' " said Marcy Darnovsky of the Center for
Genetics and Society.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2009


                              205 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            August 20, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: Shire plans to add 750 Mass. jobs

BYLINE: Robert Weisman,

BODY:

   Shire PLC plans to invest $460 million over the next eight years and hire 750
full-time employees in Lexington as its expands its Human Genetic Therapies
division, the British drug maker said yesterday.

   When it outlined the expansion plan in February 2008, the company said it
would invest $394 million and hire 680 workers at the Lexington-based unit.

   Shire also confirmed it has signed a 15-year lease with Patriot Partners for
a 160,000-square-foot building that will be constructed at 200 Patriot Way in
the Lexington Industrial Park. It will house offices and laboratories for
Genetic Therapies. Construction is to begin next year, and Shire plans to occupy
the building in 2012.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2009


                              206 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            August 18, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 785 words

HEADLINE: Cerezyme rival available in trials;
To offset drug deficit, FDA permits 2d plan for Gaucher patients

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   For the second time in two weeks, federal regulators have moved to counter
the ongoing supply shortage of Cerezyme, Genzyme Corp.'s treatment for Gaucher
disease, by letting doctors prescribe a rival drug before it has won approval
for commercial use.

   Protalix BioTherapeutics of Israel yesterday said the Food and Drug
Administration approved a plan, called a ``treatment protocol,'' allowing the
company to make its drug available on a wider basis in clinical trials. Protalix
is set to complete its trials of the drug next month and by year's end file an
application to market the product, called prGCD.

   ``This allows a solution for more patients to gain access to our drug under a
clinical trial setting because of the Cerezyme shortage,'' Protalix chief
executive David Aviezer said in an interview yesterday. ``We hope more patients
and physicians having a good experience with our drug now will help us when the
drug comes to market.''

   Earlier this month, the FDA approved a similar plan for velaglucerase alfa,
another rival Gaucher disease treatment that is in clinical trials. That
treatment was developed by British drug maker Shire PLC's human genetic
therapies division in Lexington.

   Both moves were prompted by the supply shortage of Cerezyme, the
market-leading drug for Gaucher disease. The treatment costs about $200,000
annually per patient.

   Genzyme halted production of Cerezyme and another drug, Fabrazyme, at its
Allston Landing plant for a month in June after discovering a virus in a
bioreactor used to make the products. The Cambridge-based biotechnology company
last month resumed manufacturing after sterilizing its equipment and
decontaminating the plant, but full-scale shipments of Cerezyme won't resume
until late this year.

   Meantime, Genzyme has been rationing Cerezyme, reducing doses to the least
vulnerable patients with Gaucher disease, a rare genetic disorder that causes a
build-up of fatty substances, enlarged organs, and lung and kidney ailments.
Earlier this month, the company said it would ship Cerezyme only for children
and the most severely affected adult patients until it can rebuild inventory,
citing a decision to discard any materials being used to make the drugs at the
time the virus was discovered.

   Patients with milder forms of the disease will have to decide whether to
experiment with one of the new drugs, available more widely through clinical
trials under the FDA's ``compassionate use'' standard, or take an ``enzyme
vacation'' until Cerezyme shipments resume and hope their symptoms don't
re-emerge, said Kevin Kline, a New Jersey property manager who has a mild form
of Gaucher disease and has been taking Cerezyme and a predecessor drug for 20
years.

   ``Each individual is affected by this disease differently,'' Kline said,
adding that he plans to wait for new batches of Cerezyme. ``There are a lot of
unknowns about changing drugs. But I imagine that some patients may opt to go
with the Protalix drug or the Shire drug. The question is whether they'll
qualify for the clinical trials.''

   Shares of Protalix surged 10.75 percent to $6.39 yesterday, a gain of 62
cents, on the Amex exchange. Genzyme shares edged down 27 cents, or 0.53
percent, to $50.32 on the Nasdaq exchange.

   Even as it works to end its production problems, Genzyme has applied to the
FDA for approval of its own treatment protocol that would enable it to treat
Gaucher disease patients with a new small-molecule oral treatment, called
Genz-112638, that is currently in clinical trials, said Genzyme spokeswoman Lori
Gorski.

   ``The question is how long will Genzyme's production problems last,'' said
Gary Nachman, analyst with health care investment bank Leerink Swann in New
York. ``This is an early Christmas present for these other companies who
otherwise would have to bring their drugs to market at a discount to grab
meaningful share.''

   Nachman said Shire will be most likely to benefit from Genzyme's problems,
potentially grabbing 25 to 30 percent of the Gaucher disease market, because the
properties of its enzyme replacement drug are similar to Cerezyme, which is
based on genetically modified hamster cells. Protalix, by contrast, is rolling
out a drug derived from genetically engineered carrot cells, the first of what
it hopes will be a line of drugs based on plant cells. At least initially,
doctors may be wary of unproven technology, Nachman said.

   Protalix's Aviezer, however, said his company's drugs may prove safer because
they won't be susceptible to the kind of animal-based viral infection that
occurred at Genzyme. ``Hopefully, this will be just the tip of the iceberg of
what we can do with our platform,'' he said.

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2009


                              207 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            August 15, 2009 Saturday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 290 words

HEADLINE: Japanese scientists report Parkinson's breakthrough They restore some
patients' motor skills by injecting virus into brains

BYLINE: McCLATCHY NEWSPAPERS

BODY:

   TOKYO - Scientists in Japan have succeeded in restoring the motor function of
patients suffering from Parkinson's disease by injecting their brains with a
virus with a built-in gene that has an enzyme to produce dopamine.

   Five out of six patients undergoing the first gene therapy in Japan have
shown some recovery in their motor functions, said Jichi Medical University, the
Shimotsuke-based school where the experiment was conducted.

   The university said it had confirmed the safety of the virus.

   Although the treatment is not ready to be used as a general therapy due to
the few number of cases to date, the outcome has the potential to dramatically
change the lives of Parkinson's disease patients.

   Dopamine deficit

   Parkinson's is an intractable neurological disease with symptoms that include
trembling in the limbs.

   The disease is believed to have been caused by a deficit of the
neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain's striatum. The current mainstay therapy
is the administration to patients of the drug L-dopa, a precursor of dopamine.

   However, as the disease progresses, the enzyme that produces dopamine from
the L-dopa decreases, thereby reducing the medication's efficacy.

   300 billion virusus injected

   The university research team, led by neurology specialist Prof. Imaharu
Nakano, incorporated a dopamine-producing enzyme within a virus and injected
about 300 billion of the viruses into the brains of the six patients between May
2007 and September 2008.

   The researchers studied the motor function of the patients six months later,
and found that five of them showed some motor function recovery.

   One patient who had been unable to move showed remarkable signs of recovery,
becoming able to perform normal daily activities, the hospital said.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2009


                              208 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            August 15, 2009 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST - WORLD

BYLINE: From news services

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   Hezbollah warns Israel

   The leader of Lebanon's militant Hezbollah warned Israel on Friday that his
fighters would hit Tel Aviv with rockets if Israeli forces attack Beirut or the
guerrillas' stronghold in its southern suburbs. Speaking on the anniversary of
the end of the 2006 Israel-Hezbollah conflict, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah said the
Shiite militants are now capable of striking any Israeli city.

   Taiwan typhoon death toll estimated at 500 - President Ma Ying-jeou of Taiwan
said that the death toll from Typhoon Morakot, which pummeled the island with
three days of rain last weekend, would probably reach 500, far higher than the
117 confirmed deaths announced the day before.

   Lockerbie figure drops appeal - The only man found guilty in the 1988
airplane bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, is dropping his appeal, his lawyers
said - removing an obstacle to his possible transfer to Libya but disappointing
activists who believe he is innocent. Abdel Baset Ali al-Megrahi's lawyer, Tony
Kelly, said his client, who is terminally ill with prostate cancer, filed papers
to drop his appeal because his health had deteriorated.

   Britain will rule former colony - Britain imposed direct rule on its former
colony of Turks and Caicos following corruption claims against the territory's
authorities. The British government said it had suspended the government and
legislature and put the London-appointed governor in direct charge of the
islands about 500 miles southeast of Florida.

   Parkinson's therapy touted - Jichi Medical University has succeeded in
restoring the motor function of patients suffering from Parkinson's disease by
injecting their brains with a virus with a built-in gene that has an enzyme to
produce dopamine, it has been learned. Five of six patients undergoing the first
gene therapy in Japan have shown some recovery in their motor functions, the
Shimotsuke, Japan-based university said.

   Canadian court upholds detainee ruling - Canada's Federal Court of Appeal
upheld a lower court ruling ordering the Canadian government to seek return of
the last Western detainee at Guantanamo Bay. Prime Minister Stephen Harper has
steadfastly refused to get involved in Omar Khadr's case, saying the U.S. legal
process has to play itself out.

   Senator in Myanmar - Days after the world slammed Myanmar for sentencing
Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi to more house arrest, U.S. Sen. Jim
Webb arrived in the military-ruled country's capital. The visit - the first in
more than a decade by a senior U.S. official - has drawn criticism from
activists who say it confers legitimacy on a brutal regime, but the Obama
administration gave the Virginia Democrat its blessing.

   Polio spreads in Nigeria - Polio, a dreaded paralyzing disease stamped out in
the industrialized world, is spreading in Nigeria despite efforts to stamp it
out. And health officials say in some cases, it's caused by the vaccine used to
fight it. So far, 124 Nigerian children have been paralyzed this year - about
twice those afflicted in 2008.

NOTES:  digest

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2009


                              209 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            August 15, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 007

LENGTH: 829 words

HEADLINE: AROUND THE WORLD

BODY:

   TAIWAN

   Typhoon death toll may exceed 500

   President Ma Ying-jeou sharply raised the expected death toll from Typhoon
Morakot yesterday to more than 500, amid mounting criticism of his handling of
the worst storm to strike the island in more than 50 years.

   The new estimate dramatically raised the previous toll by concluding that 380
of about 600 people living in the mountainous village of Shiao Lin in southern
Taiwan perished when flash flooding unleashed calamitous mudslides that buried
the community early Sunday.

   Criticism of Ma's handling of the Morakot disaster is rising quickly -- even
within Ma's own party and in media outlets normally friendly to the president.
Much of the criticism focused on comments he made Thursday to Britain's
Independent Television News in which he appeared to blame Morakot victims for
their own fate.

   "They were not fully prepared. If they were, they should have been evacuated
much earlier," Ma told an ITN reporter. "They didn't realize how serious the
disaster was." SCOTLAND

   Man convicted of 1988 bombing drops appeal

   The only man found guilty in the 1988 airplane bombing over Lockerbie,
Scotland, is dropping his appeal, his lawyers said -- removing an obstacle to
his possible transfer to Libya but disappointing activists who believe he is
innocent.

   Abdel Baset Ali al-Megrahi's lawyer, Tony Kelly, said his client, who is
terminally ill with prostate cancer, filed papers to drop his appeal because his
health had deteriorated.

   "His condition has taken a significant turn for the worse in recent weeks,"
the lawyer said.

   British broadcasters reported this week, without citing sources, that
al-Megrahi had been given just months to live and would be released early from a
Scottish prison on compassionate grounds.

   The former Libyan secret service agent was convicted for the December 1988
bombing of Pan Am 103, which killed 270 people -- most of them Americans,
including 38 from New Jersey. The United States has firmly objected to reports
that al-Megrahi might be released. PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES

   At least 13 are killed in Gaza shootouts

   Islamic radicals from an al Qaeda-inspired group battled Hamas security in
the Gaza Strip in shootouts that killed at least 13 people.

   The fighting began when Hamas forces surrounded a mosque in the southern Gaza
town of Rafah, where about 100 armed members of Jund Ansar Allah, or the
Soldiers of the Companions of God, were holed up.

   The confrontation was triggered when the leader of the group defied Gaza's
Hamas rulers by declaring in a Friday prayer sermon that the territory was an
Islamic emirate. CHINA Over 600 kids fall ill from lead poisoning More than 600
children have been sickened with lead poisoning in a northern Chinese province
where authorities shut a smelter this week thought to have caused the
contamination, state media reported.

   More than 80 percent of the 731 children living in the two villages near the
Dongling Lead and Zinc Smelting Co. in Shaanxi province have tested positive for
lead poisoning IRAN Threats intensify among rival political parties Rival camps
within Iran's corridors of power intensified their threats against each other,
signaling potentially dangerous clashes within elite circles and the security
establishment.

   Hard-line clerics close to President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad called for prominent
reformist Mehdi Karroubi to face trial for disclosing allegations of jailhouse
rape and torture inside the country's prisons.

   On the opposing side, a group of former reformist lawmakers issued a letter
demanding that Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, be brought under
investigation by the Assembly of Experts.

   ENGLAND Direct rule enforced on Turks and Caicos Britain imposed direct rule
on its former colony of Turks and Caicos following corruption claims against the
territory's authorities.

   The British government said it had suspended the government and legislature
and put the London-appointed governor in direct charge of the islands about 500
miles southeast of Florida.

   JAPAN Parkinson's patients regain motor function

   Jichi Medical University has succeeded in restoring the motor function of
patients suffering from Parkinson's disease by injecting their brains with a
virus containing a built-in gene that has an enzyme to produce dopamine.

   Five out of six patients undergoing the first gene therapy in Japan have
shown some recovery in their motor functions, the university said.

   The university said it had confirmed the safety of the virus.

   The outcome has the potential to dramatically change the lives of Parkinson's
disease patients. Parkinson's is an intractable neurological disease with
symptoms that include trembling in the limbs. NIGERIA Polio's return possibly
linked to vaccinations Polio, the dreaded paralyzing disease stamped out in the
industrialized world, is spreading in Nigeria. And health officials say in some
cases, it's caused by the vaccine used to fight it.

   So far, 124 Nigerian children have been paralyzed this year.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2009


                              210 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             August 14, 2009 Friday
                                 CITY-C Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; P-com Biz; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Shire looking beyond attention-deficit drugs

BYLINE: By Miriam Hill; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C. is hoping that one day soon investors will pay less attention to
its attention-deficit drug franchise.

   The company's drugs in this category, which include Adderall XR and Vyvanse,
accounted for about one-third of Shire's second-quarter sales. That figure at
one time was as high as 50 percent.

   But even though the company has diversified its revenues, attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder treatments remain so dominant that after Adderall XR
faced its first generic competition in April, Shire's second-quarter sales
shrank 19 percent from a year ago.

   Chief executive Angus Russell, who is based at the Wayne U.S. headquarters of
the British company, thinks that performance signals success. Second-quarter
sales of Adderall XR, after all, fell 77 percent in the last year, but growth in
the rest of the portfolio led to a $44 million quarterly profit. Investors,
however, have yet to decide whether the company has overcome the
patent-expiration hurdle.

   Shares have traded the last year between $31.66 and $54.03. They closed
yesterday at $50.56, up 35 cents.

   About six years ago, Shire overhauled its business model, a remake that
Russell said has worked. Shire dropped in-house research and development because
it requires squadrons of expensive scientists whose efforts often fail.

   "You're just kind of drilling holes, and a lot of them come up dry," Russell
said in an interview.

   Instead, Shire buys drugs from other companies after they have showed some
promise in human testing. Case in point: A 2005 partnership with New River
Pharmaceuticals to develop Vyvanse eventually led Shire to buy the company for
$2.6 billion in 2007, just a few months before the drug went on the market. In
the first half of this year, Vyvanse generated $335 million in sales, a 120
percent yearly increase, according to data provider IMS Health.

   In 2005, Shire bought Boston's Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. for $1.6 billion
and now markets several of its drugs, including Replagal for Fabry disease and
Elaprase for Hunter syndrome.

   At the time of the acquisition, Transkaryotic was losing money and employed
390 people. Russell told the company's employees that Transkaryotic reminded him
of Shire in its early days and predicted it would soon be profitable.

   "They all thought I was crazy," Russell said. Today, Transkaryotic is earning
money and employs 1,000 of Shire's total 3,700 employees worldwide. About 700 of
those work in Wayne.

   The sales of those drugs are tiny compared with the ADHD franchise. Replagal,
for example, reported just $44 million in sales in the second quarter of this
year. The disease it treats, Fabry, is a rare genetic disorder, believed to
affect 5,000 to 10,000 people in developed countries. Fabry causes abnormal fat
deposits along the walls of blood vessels that can lead to heart and kidney
problems.

   The company hopes to have the drug, now marketed abroad, approved quickly in
the United States, because manufacture of a rival drug has been temporarily
halted.

   Sales of treatments for rare disorders are unlikely ever to rival those of
ADHD drugs, but Russell likes the category because only a few doctors treat each
disease, so Shire can maintain a lean sales force. Shire's sales team for
Lialda, an ulcerative colitis treatment, consists of 120 people, for example.

   "I like to say that we're in the 'ist' business," Russell said. Consumers who
take Shire's drugs almost always first see a specialist, a psychiatrist in the
case of ADHD, or a gastroenterologist in the case of Lialda.

   Larger companies such as GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca recently have
decided that buying promising treatments instead of developing them in-house can
save them money. That leaves Shire competing with giants who can bid up prices
of attractive assets.

   Russell relies on Shire's ability to move more quickly than larger companies.

   "Often, we're giving them an answer by the time big pharma is having its
first committee meeting," Russell said.

   Despite Shire's efforts to diversify its portfolio, Wall Street remains
convinced that attention must be paid to the company's ADHD drugs.

   Sanford Bernstein analyst Jack Scannell said generic competition threatened
the ADHD franchise in more than one way. Because insurers now have a cheaper
alternative, Shire has had to lower prices on Vyvanse to keep it on the lists of
drugs insurance will pay for. Scannell estimated that the average price paid for
a Vyvanse prescription fell from $93 to $88 between the first and second
quarters of this year.

   "Shire is difficult to value given its unusual business mix, lumpy profits in
2009 and 2010, and uncertainties for the ADHD franchise," Scannell said in an
Aug. 6 investor note.

   Shire maintains that Vyvanse delivers steadier relief of ADHD symptoms than
alternatives.

   The company also continues to give investors what they most crave. Later this
year, Shire expects to start selling Intuniv, an ADHD drug that, unlike others
in its category, is not considered addictive and will not be regulated as
strictly by the Drug Enforcement Administration. That means patients will be
able to get refills without getting a new prescription from a doctor, a time-
and money-saver in today's hyperactive world.

    Shire's Attention Dilemma

   Second-quarter sales

   of Shire drugs. Adderall XR (below), Vyvanse (right), and Daytrana treat
ADHD. Generic versions of Adderall became available in April. In millions of
dollars:

   Drug            2008     2009    % chg.

   Adderall XR (ADHD)    $296     $67    -77.3%

   Vyvanse (ADHD)        65    114    75.2

   Daytrana (ADHD)        23     15    -34.1

   Lialda/Mesavant        32      55    70.6

   Pentasa             45      54    20.5

   Fosrenol           42     50    17.0

   Xagrid             21     20     -2.9

   Elaprase           81     85     5.6

   Replagal           45     44     -0.7

   Other             126    125      -0.6

   Total Revenue           776    630    -18.8SOURCE: Corporate reports,
StreetAccount, Bloomberg L.P., BernsteinResearchContact staff writer Miriam Hill

   at 215-854-5520 or hillmb@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2009


                              211 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                             August 14, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 420 words

HEADLINE: 6 hours of sleep? It's not enough;
But it is for a select few with a rare gene mutation

BYLINE: Elizabeth Weise

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO -- Scientists have good and bad news for hard-driving people
who boast they need only six hours of sleep a night.

   The good news is a few may be right:  Researchers at the University of
California-San Francisco have identified a family with a genetic mutation that
causes members to require only six hours of sleep a night.  The bad news? The
gene is  rare in humans; it's found in fewer than 3% of people.

   So almost everyone who says he needs only six hours of sleep is probably
kidding himself. And the consequences of chronic sleep deprivation are serious,
says Clete Kushida, president of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine and
director of Stanford University's Sleep Medicine Center. Sleep deprivation has
been linked to an increase in motor vehicle accidents, deficiencies in
short-term memory, focus and attention. It's also tied to  depressed mood and a
decrease in the ability to control appetite.

   The family members -- a mother and daughter with the gene mutation -- were
discovered by researchers at UCSF  studying circadian rhythms, the waxing and
waning biochemical cycles that govern sleep, hunger and activity.  Neither woman
needed more than six to 6 1/2 hours of sleep a night, and yet both were
well-rested, healthy and energetic.

   "One of them is over 70, always traveling internationally and extremely
active. She dances three or four nights a week," says Ying-Hui Fu, a professor
of neurology at UCSF.

   When scientists examined the pair's DNA, they found a mutation in a gene
called DEC2, which governs cell production and circadian rhythm.

   The mutation seems to result in people who need much less than the normal
eight to 8 1/2 hours that most humans require for well-rested functioning,
according to the  paper, which is published in today's  edition of the journal
Science. The research by Fu and her colleagues determined that humans and mice
that carry the mutation get more intense sleep, as measured by slow-wave
electrical activity in the brain, and so they need less of it.

   Fu estimates that only about 3% of the population is likely to have this gene
and cautions that most people who habitually get less than eight hours of sleep
a night are only building up a large, and dangerous, sleep debt.

   Fu says her lab is investigating whether it might be possible to mimic the
effects of the gene with therapeutic compounds, but she cautions the research is
only at the very beginning. For now, the only real answer to true productivity
is to sleep as much as your body needs, she says.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2009


                              212 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            August 11, 2009 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 772 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis finding gave CWRU prof an early boost

BYLINE: Kaye Spector, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   This year marks the 20th anniversary of the discovery of the gene mutation
that leads to cystic fibrosis. Mitch Drumm, who holds a doctorate in human
genetics and has been a professor of pediatrics and genetics at Case Western
Reserve University's School of Medicine since 1992, was part of this landmark
finding while at the University of Michigan.

   We recently spoke with Drumm, who continues research into the causes of CF,
the most common inherited fatal disease, which occurs in an average one out of
2,500 live births. The chronic disease affects the lungs and digestive system.

   Q: You were a young man when a collaboration between the lab you worked in
and a research group in Toronto discovered the gene mutation that causes CF.
Pretty heady stuff for someone so early in his career. What was that like?

   A: I just didn't have anything to compare it with at the time. It was my
introduction into the science. And a lot of the importance of the discovery
wasn't really clear until after the fact.

   Q: How did you wind up doing research in a lab that made such an landmark
finding?

   A: When I was a graduate student, we had to do rotations through the
department, and Francis Collins (former leader of the Human Genome Project and
now director of the National Institutes of Health) asked me to work in his lab.
What started out as me and a technician eventually turned into 20 people working
on a gene-hunting technique that Collins had developed. The CF project I got to
take on as my own.

   It was fun, just great to work on something that had an application.

   Q: Has your perspective of the gene discovery changed over time?

   A: Yes, probably quite a bit. When we found the gene, the hope was that it
was going to give us some immediate insight into how we were going to change
things. Instead, it gave us insight into how complicated the thing is. It showed
us there's an awful lot we didn't know.

   Q: The discovery raised hopes that the disease would soon be eliminated
through gene therapy. So far, gene therapy for CF hasn't paid off. What else was
gained?

   A: At that point, there weren't all that many genes that had been identified.
Those that had been discovered had been because we knew what protein had been
screwed up, or other causes. With cystic fibrosis, we only knew that it fell in
families. This was the first disease where family information was used to find
the gene. People said, hey, this is a realistic thing. We can do it for other
diseases.

   Q: Biochemist John Riordan said this in Science magazine about the discovery
of the CF gene: "Science has benefited more from the CF gene than CF has
benefited from the science." What do you think?

   A: That's probably true. We've learned so much more about how this gene
works. That knowledge has spilled over into a lot of different fields: diabetes,
airway diseases, digestive system disease. This disease affects major organ
systems in the body. It's really taught us about a lot of different things.

   Q: Why did you come to CWRU?

   A: My postdoctoral work was done at University of Michigan, and I needed a
"real" job. I was still enamored with cystic fibrosis but really wanted to
restrict geography because I wanted to be near my family in New Philadelphia,
where I grew up.

   Case and the group at Rainbow [Babies & Children's Hospital] really impressed
me. They have a long and impressive history in CF in both clinical care and
research. That was the way. The beauty of what we have here is the clinician who
sees the patient and has incredible insight for researchers into what works in
the real world. There's a lot of cross-fertilization between these two groups
and interaction. It's a very symbiotic relationship, I think, and one that very
few centers in the nation have.

   Q: Can you share what your current research focuses on?

   A: It's still geared to CF. There's two facets: One is working with a group
in North Carolina, collecting DNA and clinical information on patients around
country. We're looking at patients with CF from the mildest to most severe form,
and comparing their DNA.

   The other area is to use mouse models to study the physiology of the
processes involved in CF by turning on and off different body systems. We are
looking at the effects on the lungs, pancreas, intestines, pituitary gland and
others and using mice to isolate the effects of CF.

   Q: What do you do to relax?

   A: In the spring, I like to run in the track and field program for the CYO of
a local parish, St. Basil the Great. I take 100 kids on runs through the
Metroparks two times a week.

   This interview was condensed and edited. To reach this Plain Dealer reporter:
kspector@plaind.com, 216-999-3904

GRAPHIC: PHOTO COURTESY: CASE WESTERN RESERVE UNIVERSITY Mitch Drumm, professor
of pediatrics and genetics at Case Western Reserve University's School of
Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2009


                              213 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 10, 2009 Monday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: Clinical trial of Alzheimer's gene therapy moves forward

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Researchers at the University of California San Diego will soon launch the
second-phase clinical trial of a promising gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease,
one that attempts to boost the survival and functioning of brain cells.

   The scientists are seeking qualified study volunteers.

   In earlier animal and human safety trials, a gene therapy drug called
CERE-110 was injected into patients' brains, initially via modified skin cells,
later using a harmless viral carrier. CERE-110 carries a gene that promotes
long-term production of nerve growth factor (NGF), a natural molecule that helps
brain cells live and function longer.

   "NGF is known to support the survival and function of the neurons that
deteriorate in Alzheimer's disease," said Dr. Michael Rafii, an assistant
professor in UCSD's department of neurosciences. "These neurons produce a
chemical called acetylcholine, which is important in memory and cognitive
function. The hope is that restoration of this system's function may improve
memory in Alzheimer's patients."

   Alzheimer's is a degenerative neurological disorder that affects
approximately 5 million Americans; more often women than men. As the population
ages, the number of people with Alzheimer's grows. It is projected to more than
double to 11 million by 2040.

   The phase 2 trial will be conducted at 12 U.S. sites, including the
Shiley-Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at UCSD. The local study will
involve 50 volunteers between the ages of 50 and 80 with mild to moderate
Alzheimer's symptoms. The study will be randomized and blind, with half of the
participants receiving CERE-110 and the other half receiving a placebo. Once the
study is completed in 2012, if the results are promising, participants in the
placebo group will be eligible to be treated with CERE-110.

   For more information about the study or participating, visit the Alzheimer's
Disease Cooperative Study Web site at adcs.org/studies/ngf.aspx or call the
National Institute on Aging's Alzheimer's referral center at (800) 438-4380.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: A healthy neuron boasts multiple connections via
fibrous axons to other nerve cells. Alzheimer's disease causes affected neurons
to shrink, lose connections and function, and eventually die. In this image, the
blue traces an electrical signal as it moves through synapses to the yellow
neuron.; PHOTOBY: Michael A. Colicos / UCSD

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2009


                              214 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 800 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme rival gets positive test results;
US to allow enzyme replacement therapy

BYLINE: By Robert Weisman, Globe Staff

BODY:

   British drug maker Shire PLC stepped up the pressure on Cambridge
biotechnology company Genzyme Corp. yesterday, reporting positive test results
for a competitor to Genzyme's drug for Gaucher disease and disclosing that US
regulators will let doctors prescribe the rival drug before it is approved for
commercial use.

   Supplies of Genzyme's enzyme replacement therapy Cerezyme, currently the only
drug on the market to treat the rare genetic disorder, were interrupted in June
when a virus was detected in the company's Allston Landing plant.

   While the plant resumed production last week after the decontamination of its
bioreactors, Genzyme, the state's largest biotechnology company, will continue
rationing drugs to the least vulnerable patients until late this year, when new
batches of the drugs can be shipped and inventories return to their full
strength.

   Shire's competing drug, velaglucerase alfa, could be administered to some
Gaucher disease patients in a matter of weeks, following Food and Drug
Administration approval of a company plan for introducing the drug, called a
treatment protocol. The agency solicited the protocol, a relatively uncommon
arrangement that allows doctors to prescribe drugs for up to 12 months before
they have received FDA approval. A treatment protocol is typically reserved for
situations such as supply disruptions, where there are acute medical needs.

   The early rollout of Shire's drug could give the company a leg up in its
efforts to grab a share of the market for Gaucher disease treatments. But the
company had planned to submit a new drug application to the FDA even before
Genzyme's supply interruption.

   ``We're just responding to the patient need at this point, which is what
matters most,'' said Sylvie Gregoire, the president of Shire's human genetic
therapies division in Lexington, which produces velaglucerase alfa, and other
enzyme replacement drugs. ``That's what the FDA wants. If this turns into an
opportunity for us, that's fine.''

   Genzyme officials declined to comment yesterday. The company's shares shed
2.91 percent, or $1.51, to $50.38 on the Nasdaq exchange. It was the second
consecutive session of retreat for Genzyme shares, pushing its stock down 10.8
percent since Thursday.

   The first drop came Friday, when the company disclosed that federal in
spectors will be paying another visit to the Brighton facility because of
concerns that previously identified production problems there hadn't been
``fully or adequately'' addressed by Genzyme.

   Shares of Shire, meanwhile, edged up 0.65 percent, or 29 cents, to $45.10 in
Nasdaq Composite trading yesterday.

   Gaucher disease is an enzyme deficiency in which fatty substances accumulate
in the spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and sometimes, the brain, causing
bruising, enlarged organs, and lung and kidney ailments. It affects only about
5,700 people worldwide. But the treatment for it, which is often subsidized by
governments or insurance companies, costs approximately $200,000 per year per
patient, bringing the potential market for drug makers to about $1.2 billion.

   In addition to Shire, two other drug companies, Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
of Switzerland, and Protalix BioTherapeutics Inc. of Israel, are developing
drugs to treat Gaucher disease.

   Genzyme is likely to keep the lion's share of the market in the near future,
but finds itself under increasing regulatory and competitive pressure, said
Christopher J. Raymond, senior biotechnology analyst for financial services firm
Robert W. Baird & Co. in Chicago.

   ``They've had a string of setbacks,'' Raymond said of Genzyme, citing the FDA
inspection and the intensifying competition. ``The situation has deteriorated
since we first learned about the problems in Allston. I still have the utmost
confidence they will get these problems fixed, but there's a risk that the FDA
might not get back in the plant on a timely basis or might find something else
that they don't like.''

   On the competitive front, Shire, which has nearly 1,000 employees in
Lexington and Cambridge, yesterday reported positive results from the first of
three phase 3 studies of veraglucerase alfa.

   The data were consistent with previous studies that helped convince the FDA
to accept the company's treatment protocol that will allow doctors to prescribe
the drug before it wins final approval by the agency.

   Shire said it began a ``rolling submission'' of its new drug application last
Wednesday, three weeks after it received fast-track designation from the FDA.
The designation enables companies to file sections of the application as they
become available, and allows the agency to review those sections before the
entire application is filed. Shire said it expects to complete the application
by Sept. 30.

   Robert Weisman can be reached at weisman@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2009


                              215 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             August 3, 2009 Monday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 467 words

HEADLINE: Medical students get white coats;
Soon-to-be doctors now will look the part

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Students at both New Orleans medical schools are heading into the new
academic year with symbols of their profession: white coats.

   LSU School of Medicine gave white coats to 177 second-year students Saturday
during a ceremony at Xavier University's University Center. Speakers were the
dean, Dr. Steve Nelson, and Dr. Angela Johnson, an assistant professor of
medicine.

   The 177 first-year students at Tulane University School of Medicine will get
theirs today in a 10 a.m. ceremony in the New Orleans Hilton's Grand Ballroom.
Dr. Norman McSwain, a surgery professor and renowned trauma surgeon, will be the
principal speaker.

   This year, Tulane marks its 175th birthday. Scheduled to cut an anniversary
cake at the event is Dr. John Sabatier, a member of the medical school's Class
of 1938.

   . . . . . . .

   FILM CONFERENCE: Screenings, panel discussions and a picnic at Mardi Gras
World are scheduled for the national conference of the University Film & Video
Association that will be held Tuesday through Saturday at the University of New
Orleans' Performing Arts Center.

   About 400 people are expected. Information, including a registration form and
conference schedule, is at www.ufva.org.

   . . . . . . .

   SCHOLARSHIP ESTABLISHED: A $100,000 memorial scholarship has been established
at UNO's Lester E. Kabacoff School of Hotel, Restaurant and Tourism
Administration.

   The gift in memory of Randall Knowles, who was not a student in the school,
was established by his father, Dr. Ralph Knowles of Pensacola, Fla., because he
wanted to do something meaningful to honor his son, UNO spokeswoman Johanna
Schindler said.

   Recipients will be selected based on criteria that include academic
performance, work record and financial need.

   . . . . . . .

   MEDICAL HONOR: Dr. Keith Van Meter, chief of emergency medicine at LSU Health
Sciences Center, has received the highest honor from the Undersea and Hyperbaric
Medical Society.

   The Albert R. Behnke Award recognizes contributions involving undersea or
hyperbaric medicine. In hyperbaric medicine, oxygen at a level higher than
atmospheric pressure is used to treat problems such as carbon-monoxide poisoning
and breathing disorders.

   Van Meter's principal research has involved the use of the technique in swine
models to treat cases of cardiac arrest in children and people involved in
traumas.

   . . . . . . .

   PROMOTIONS: Bruce Bunnell has been named director of the Tulane Center for
Gene Therapy. He also is a pharmacology professor and chairman of the
gene-therapy division at the Tulane National Primate Research Center.

   --  Dr. Prescott Deininger has been named director of the Tulane Cancer
Center and to the Joe W. and Dorothy Dorsett Brown Foundation Regents Chair in
Molecular Cancer Pharmacology.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3317.

CORRECTION:

   First name incorrect:  A story in Monday's editions, based on information
from Tulane University School of Medicine, misstated the first name of a
participant in its White Coat ceremony on Monday. His name is Dr. Joseph
Sabatier Jr. (8/4/2009)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2009


                              216 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              July 24, 2009 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 21A

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: EXERCISING HIZZONER;
SCHAEFER'S PHYSICAL THERAPIST A GRANDSON OF THE EX-GOVERNOR'S HIGH SCHOOL GYM
TEACHER

BYLINE: Laura Vozzella, laura.vozzella@baltsun.com

BODY:

   William Donald Schaefer's legs were failing him, but his stubbornness was
reliable as ever.

   People were telling the former Baltimore mayor, Maryland governor and
comptroller to get physical therapy. He brushed them off with an old story,
about how he'd hated being pushed in the gym as a kid at City College.

   Gym teacher Philip Axman would order the young, height-fearing Schaefer up a
rope.

   "I'd be halfway up and say, 'I've got to get out of here,'" Schaefer, 87,
recalled recently.

   Axman would bark: "Get up there! Get up! Go!" Schaefer, terrified, would
climb.

   Schaefer reached great political heights after graduating from City in 1939.
He also grew rather used to getting his own way. When doctors and aides urged
him about a year ago to get help strengthening his legs, Mr. Do It Now said:
maybe later.

   He made a couple grudging visits to a clinic at Charlestown, the Catonsville
retirement home where he lives. But he wouldn't go back. Nurse Patti Marchitto
arranged a house call. But she said the "meek" therapist was no match for
Patient Annoyed.

   "Governor Schaefer is, first of all, very clever and very theatrical,"
Marchitto said. "You want to do something, like get him dressed. He'll jump in
the bed. He'll outwit you somehow."

   Schaefer stood his ground - and started losing his ability to walk. A long
corridor stands between his sixth-floor apartment and the elevator. "He was
completely done in, if not in a wheelchair, by the time he got to the elevator,"
Marchitto said.

   Another therapist made a house call. This one managed to get Schaefer up, out
of his chair and walking the hallway before he knew it. He had a way with
Schaefer - and, perhaps, something else. Something genetic.

   The therapist was the grandson of Schaefer's old gym teacher.

   Philip Axman's family was aware that he'd taught somebody famous at City, but
it wasn't Schaefer. It was Garry Moore, the future game show host then known as
Garrison Morfit. Philip Axman even appeared in 1962 on I've Got A Secret. His
secret: He'd flunked Moore for cutting gym.

   But Philip Axman never mentioned teaching Schaefer. His grandson, Harry
Axman, only learned that after a few visits with patient Schaefer.

   "I found out that he graduated from City College in 1939," Harry Axman said.
"I said, 'My grandfather, I'll bet, was your physical education teacher - Philip
Axman.' Governor Schaefer said, 'He was a little tough guy. He made me climb the
ropes.' He remembered him right away."

   Marchitto was stunned.

   "I just stood there, frozen," she said. "Imagine - what are we talking about,
70 years later? - the grandson of the P.E. teacher who never gave up on this
body is working this body."

   Schaefer and Harry Axman met at the apartment to share the story with me.
Schaefer recalled the elder Axman and the business with the rope. "You didn't
mess around with him. You stayed in line."

   Then, deadpan, Schaefer told Harry Axman that he's not as handsome as his
grandfather.

   Harry Axman worked with Schaefer two to three times a week for three months.
Schaefer, a shrewd deal-maker in office, did lots of bargaining. For more time
between exercises. For political impressions - Axman does a mean Ronald Reagan
and Bill Clinton - between sets. Axman decided the best strategy was to be firm
but fun.

   "Both of us have a very dry and large sense of humor, and it was very
friendly," said Axman, 52. "And after we got to the fun part of it, I was able
to get him to work on some exercises. ... His fall frequency was much reduced
and he was able to walk further distances."

   Schaefer had a setback in May, when he got a pacemaker.

   "He had lost some strength from being in the [hospital] bed," Marchitto said.
"He has been doing much better. He is amazingly alert and witty."

   He spends time reading books. (Several at once, including a biography of
Winston Churchill and Stephen King's horror novel Cell.) He listens to records.
(From Eddy Arnold to speeches by Churchill.) He has many visitors, including
former Govs. Marvin Mandel and Bob Ehrlich.

   But ask Schaefer how he spends his days, and he's all mock maudlin.

   "I come out of the bedroom about once a day. Eat. Sleep. Eat some more. Sleep
some more.

   "Every day I exercise," he added, drumming his fingers on the arms of a
chair. "I do this 20 times."

   Axman, who was since left Charlestown for another job, has visited a few
times. On Christmas, he came by to give his fellow Civil War buff some relic
bullets and buttons he'd framed.

   When Axman returned two weeks ago, Schaefer moved from the kitchen to the
living room so they could sit down. Schaefer used a walker to get there, but
Axman wasn't looking. Later, the therapist asked, "Did you walk from the kitchen
yourself, or with your walker?"

   If Schaefer's legs were again letting him down, his wit was not.

   All he'd say was, "Yes."

   Laura Vozzella's column appears Fridays. Her e-mail is
laura.vozzella@baltsun.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 Physical therapist Harry Axman, left, with William Donald Schaefer at the
Charlestown retirement home where Mr. Schaefer lives.
 Gene Sweeney Jr./Baltimore Sun photo

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2009


                              217 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright  2009 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            July 15, 2009 Wednesday
                           4 State / Suncoast Edition

SECTION: TAMPA BAY; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: UF WINS $26 MILLION HEALTH RESEARCH GRANT

BYLINE: SHANNON COLAVECCHIO

HIGHLIGHT:

   Its goal is to lessen the time between research and application.

BODY:

   The journey from a researcher's petri dish to a patient's hospital bed can
take years, if it happens at all. Federal health officials are so confident the
University of Florida can help accelerate the process, they are awarding $26
million to the Gainesville research institution.

   UF officials on Tuesday announced the five-year National Institutes of Health
grant, which will fund a collaboration that is expected to boost economic
development while improving the state's health care system - and UF's national
reputation.

   "Grants like this bring dollars from outside the region, outside the state,
into Gainesville and the state, and that creates jobs," said Dr. David Guzick,
senior vice president for health affairs and president of the UF & Shands Health
System.

   UF is the only university in Florida to secure the prestigious research
opportunity. The NIH has given similar grants to 39 other institutions including
Yale and Harvard since the federal initiative began three years ago.

   The grant will support multidisciplinary research in fields such as gene
therapy, aging and infectious diseases. The idea is to have researchers and
experts from various fields working together from the beginning to ensure that
medical discoveries can be used to treat patients as quickly as possible.

   "There is a critical need to improve the way in which scientific discoveries
are translated into practical applications for the treatment of human disease,"
said Dr. Peter W. Stacpoole, who will lead the research efforts through the UF
Clinical and Translational Science Institute.

   The initiative involves 12 of UF's 16 colleges in addition to the Institute
for Food and Agricultural Sciences, Shands HealthCare and the North
Florida/South Georgia Veterans Health System.

   "The link between discovery and health is often left out," Guzick said. "One
of the goals of NIH is to ensure that the research it funds will ensure the
economic well-being of the nation. That's what this is about."

   For example, Guzick said, researchers discovered the early makings of a
vaccine for the HPV virus that causes cervical cancer. But turning that
discovery into a widely available vaccine required clinical research and trials
and a plan for overcoming initial public resistance through education and
outreach.

   The federal dollars come at a critical time for UF, the state's largest and
oldest research institution. Like the state's other public universities, UF has
faced tens of millions of dollars in budget cuts.

   The grant is likely to help UF leverage other grants - funding discoveries
that might lead to revenue-generating products and spinoff companies, said UF
spokeswoman Janine Sikes.

   Guzick said he saw the NIH grant's ripple effect at the University of
Rochester, where he was dean of the medical school when it received a similar
NIH grant in 2006.

   "More jobs are developed, there's more of an eye toward technology and
commercialization," he said. "That leads to building, and that helps the
economy."

   Shannon Colavecchio can be reached at scolavecchio@sptimes.com or (850)
224-7263.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2009


                              218 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            June 24, 2009 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Living - How We Live

LENGTH: 1212 words

HEADLINE: Lovin' chubby babies has evolutionary

BYLINE: Chris Spitzer Joe Rojas-Burke Don Colburn Joe Rojas-Burke Chris Spitzer
Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   basis

   Seeing big eyes and chubby cheeks triggers a hardwired response in the
brain's social bonding region, University of Pennsylvania neuroscientists have
shown, and the perception of cuteness may be an evolutionary development to get
adults to pay attention to children.

   The researchers asked adults to rate the attractiveness of pictures of
infants that had been digitally manipulated to appear more or less babylike.
Rounder heads, smaller mouths and larger eyes were consistently ranked cuter and
also caused stronger activity in the brain.

   The link between the appearance of babies and motivation to provide
caregiving was first proposed by ethnologist Konrad Lorenz more than 60 years
ago. Recent advances in brain-imaging technology have allowed researchers to
identify the biological mechanism responsible. The study appears in the
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   The response to the visual form of babies actually shapes the world we live
in. Popular cultural icons such as Hello Kitty and the Volkswagen Beetle have
similar characteristics, so they demand people's attention, a trick that
advertisers have used for years.

   Know a baby that's not so cute? Don't worry. Cuteness is just one of several
factors that determines our caregiving response, so even homely babies will get
their share of love.

   -- Chris Spitzer

   Doctors fail to report some poor test results

   Don't assume no news is good news from your doctor. Primary care offices
failed to inform the patient of an abnormal finding about 7 percent of the time
--or in 1 of every 14 abnormal tests --in a new study.

   Researchers reviewed records about more than 5,400 randomly selected patients
at two dozen West Coast and Midwest primary care practices. They found no
indication that a patient had been told about the result in 135 of 1,899 blood
tests or cancer screenings that came back abnormal. Failures were equally common
whether offices had fully electronic medical records or all-paper records, but
practices using a combination of paper and electronic systems performed
significantly worse.

   The study, appearing in the Archives of Internal Medicine, noted that medical
offices performed much better if they followed a few simple steps, such as
routing all test results to the responsible physician, requiring the physician
to sign off on all results and telling patients to call after a certain time if
they have not received their results.

   -- Joe Rojas-Burke

   Many kids not always wearing bike helmets

   Helmets save lives when kids on bicycles crash, the University of Michigan
reports after a national poll on children's health.

   OK, you knew that. But the poll also found that even in places where bike
helmets are required, only 54 percent of parents report that their children
always wear a helmet when biking.

   Nationwide, about 100 kids a day are treated in hospital emergency rooms for
bicycle-related head injuries.

   Federal traffic safety officials estimate that if all bike riders 16 and
younger wore a helmet, that would prevent 40,000 head injuries and 50,000 scalp
and facial injuries a year.

   Only 21 states, including Oregon, have bike helmet laws, although some
localities in another 16 states have such laws. The details and age limits vary.

   The Oregon law, which took effect in 1994, requires bike riders younger than
16 to wear a helmet. The law also applies to in-line skates, roller skates,
skateboards and nonmotorized scooters.

   For more information on Oregon's bike helmet law and tips for choosing a
helmet: oregon.gov/DHS/ph/safekids/helmets.shtml

   -- Don Colburn

   Nipple piercings may impair breastfeeding

   Women with nipple piercings may face at least some risk of being unable to
breastfeed later in life.

   Australian researchers reported three cases in which women couldn't express
milk from one breast, apparently because milk ducts became blocked after a
piercing.

   The women, ranging in age from 25 to 37, produced minimal amounts of milk
from the pierced breast despite frequent pumping and seeking help from a
lactation consultant. While one woman had obvious scarring from an accidental
tearing out of a nipple ring, and another had once suffered an allergic reaction
to her piercing, the third had no previous complications.

   Until now, breastfeeding advocates such as La Leche League have assured women
that "there is no evidence to suggest that a woman's pierced nipples will have
any effect on her ability to breastfeed."

   Since women with piercings typically have no trouble breastfeeding, the risk
of lactation complications probably is small, the authors of the report in the
Journal of the American Medical Association said this week. But the risk is
significant enough to deserve more attention, they said, especially given the
growing popularity of body piercings.

   -- Joe Rojas-Burke

   HIV's hideout found in body's memory T-cells

   Current medications are successful in controlling HIV, the virus that causes
AIDS, but are unable to completely remove it. But in work published this week,
researchers may have found HIV's hideout in the human body, taking a step toward
treatment that would eradicate the disease from an infected person.

   A study conducted at the University of Montreal and the Vaccine & Gene
Therapy Institute in Florida, an expansion of Oregon Health & Science
University, identified a reservoir of HIV concealed in memory T-cells, which are
part of the body's immune system. Antiviral drugs don't target these cells,
allowing a small amount of the virus to thrive even as it is removed from the
other parts of the body.

   The researchers suggest a new treatment that includes proven antiviral drugs
along with a medicine that specifically targets the infected T-cells. They
believe the combined effects might be able to remove every trace of the disease,
and hope to begin testing the new therapy using animal models.

   -- Chris Spitzer

   Pregnancy seen as risk in contracting swine flu

   Flu can be especially dangerous during pregnancy, especially during the third
trimester. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health
Organization recently warned that pregnancy may be a risk factor for contracting
H1N1 swine flu, which has reached pandemic levels.

   According to the CDC, 20 recent H1N1 infections have broken out in pregnant
women in the U.S. (15 probable cases and five confirmed cases). Of those, three
women were hospitalized and one died. A woman's immune system is somewhat weaker
during pregnancy. That means those who become infected with flu are more likely
to develop serious complications, such as pneumonia.

   The medications Tamiflu and Relenza are relatively safe for use in pregnant
and breastfeeding women, according to an analysis from the top research group in
the world on pregnancy and toxic exposures.

   The Motherisk Program at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto studies
the delicate issue of which medications are safe for use during pregnancy and
which environmental exposures are likely to harm a fetus. In the new issue of
the Canadian Medical Association Journal, researchers concluded that despite
minimal data, Tamiflu does not appear to cause birth defects. Relenza also
appears to be safe, although there is less evidence. Both Tamiflu and Relenza
are considered safe for use during breastfeeding.

   -- Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2009


                              219 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 15, 2009 Monday
                               STATE/ROP EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 099

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: It's all relative -- in families, reruns and repeats

BODY:

   Letters, I get letters, and this week's mailbag

   includes queries about Jack Bauer's family tree, the return of "Mad Men,"
self-contained repeats and more.

   Blood relations?

   Dear Alan: Please correct me if I am wrong, but in season one of "24," when
we are aware of Jack Bauer's marriage -- wasn't Kim the daughter of his wife and
not his "blood" daughter? If so, then Kim would be his stepdaughter. If Kim is
not his biological daughter, then I do not see how gene therapy could possibly
be effective in saving his life. Am I missing something?

   -- Stuart B. Grayson, Springfield

   Alan says: Your memory is faulty. In the first season, Jack and his wife,
Terri, were going through a rough patch in their marriage, but Kim was
definitely Jack's biological daughter. Somehow, she failed to inherit any of his
street smarts (or smarts, period).

   Time to get 'Mad'

   Dear Alan: The wife and I just finished watching "Mad Men" season 1 on DVD.
After watching the episodes, I was extremely happy to find your original reviews
on your blog.xA0;

   Unfortunately, I didn't realize that AMC was re-running season 2 on Sunday
nights. Do you know if AMC plans to re-run season 2 again prior to the start of
season 3? Will it be available On Demand? Or will I have to wait until July 14
for the season 2 DVD?

   -- Frank Cangelosi, Laurence Harbor

   Alan says: AMC announced last week that season 3 of "Mad Men" would debut on
Aug. 16, and you'll have three ways to catch up on season 2 between now and
then. The season 2 DVD set comes out July 14. Season 2 will be available On
Demand starting July 20 (season 1 is On Demand right now), and AMC will do an
all-day season 2 marathon Aug. 10, starting at 7 a.m.

   Done-in-one is fine by him

   Dear Alan: The reruns that are self-contained get my attention. I hate it
when I am looking at a rerun and don't know what happened in the past or when
the program ends, and I have to look at the next one. In the summer, I have
other things to do and I miss the outcome.

   To expand on my thoughts, I don't even like it in the winter on first runs.
Sure, have the same format, but please, have them self-contained!

   -- Alfred Krzywosinski, Toms River

   Alan says: And here we have the flip side of last week's letter, which
complained that the "Law &amp; Order" shows (self-contained) are rerun
everywhere, while "Homicide" (partly serialized) is hard to find if you don't
have a DVD player (and maybe a Netflix subscription).

   Based on which shows perform well in reruns and which don't, Alfred's would
appear to be the majority opinion. The only drama repeats you tend to see on the
broadcast networks are shows like "House" and the CBS crime procedurals, which
are usually at least 90 percent self-contained, and those are the shows that
tend to be sold into syndication.

   Much as people like myself tend to get really passionate about dramas (like,
for instance, "Mad Men") that are more rewarding when you see every episode, the
highest-rated ones tend to be the likes of "The Mentalist," which give you all
you need to know within that hour.

   The vanishing

   Dear Alan: I have been an avid viewer of "Without A Trace" for the past few
years and am extremely disappointed at the show's cancellation. Whom can I
contact at CBS to voice a complaint about this?

   -- Lynn DiGiacomo, Nutley

   Alan says: Not surprisingly, I've gotten a lot of letters about "Without a
Trace," which was, by far, the highest-rated show not returning next season. Its
cancellation reflects the way the networks are trying to grapple with the
flagging economy. While its numbers were still strong, it was a fairly expensive
show after seven seasons (shows cost more the longer they're on), and CBS didn't
own it the way it owns the "CSI" shows and therefore wouldn't be getting any
money from syndication or DVDs if they kept it on.

   You can send an e-mail to audsvcs@cbs.com to express your frustration; they
compile a report on all viewer mail and pass it up to the programming
executives.

   Too short a season

   Dear Alan: What's with "My Boys" "season" (if you can call it that) being
nine episodes long? Same thing last year. Why bother! Any idea?

   -- Emma Shelby, Montclair

   Alan says: Keep in mind that many cable series only run 13-episode seasons,
so nine isn't that much shorter. And with the bad economy, we're seeing a number
of shows get shorter-than-normal orders to save money. "My Boys" isn't one of
TBS' biggest hits; this is a compromise to keep the comedy (which was
much-improved during this nine-episode run versus the previous season) on the
air in some form.

   Alan Sepinwall may be reached at asepinwall@starledger.com, or by writing him
at 1 Star-Ledger Plaza, Newark, N.J. 07102-1200. Please include your full name
and hometown.

GRAPHIC: Kim Bauer (Elisha Cuthbert) is, unfortunately, the biological daughter
of "24" hero Jack Bauer (Kiefer Sutherland). Kelsey McNeal/fOX

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2009


                              220 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                              June 8, 2009 Monday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: ARKANSAS

LENGTH: 1650 words

HEADLINE: Families buck up after rare diagnosis Diets, insurance, finances
affected

BYLINE: BY CAROLYNE PARK ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Sarah Shillcutt of Jacksonville was just 10 days old when she was diagnosed
with a rare genetic disorder that can cause mental retardation and seizures
unless treated with a strict, low-protein medical diet.

   Now 13, she opts for a simple explanation when people ask about her unusual
eating habits.

   "I tell them it's a food allergy," Sarah said. "It's just easier to say
that." But it's very different from a food allergy. Sarah has phenylketonuria -
pronounced fenl-kee-toh-NOOR-ee-uh - also known as PKU.

   It's a disorder that keeps the body from fully breaking down an essential
amino acid called phenylalanine, found in protein in most foods including meat,
poultry, fish and dairy products.

   For those with the disorder, phenylalanine builds up in the body and becomes
a toxin that can damage the brain unless a special diet is followed.

   About one in every 14,000 babies is diagnosed with the disorder, according to
the National PKU Alliance.

   It's just one of about 7,000 rare diseases affecting nearly 30 million
Americans, according to the National Institutes of Health. A disease is
considered rare if it affects fewer than 200,000 people in the United States.

   While each disease affects a relatively small number of people, rare diseases
as a whole have far-reaching impact, said Mary Dunkle, vice president of
communications for the National Organization for Rare Disorders.

   "When you think of them all together, it's a lot. It's basically one in 10
people in the United States, an additional 30 million people in Europe and many
more around the world," she said.

   Families coping with such diseases often face similar challenges, Dunkle
said. Those may include trouble finding specialists knowledgeable about their
particular diseases, limited - if any - treatment options, and resistance from
health-insurance programs to cover those treatments.

   They face high medical costs throughout their lives, and in many cases find
there's no current research into their disorders, eliminating hope for new
treatments or cures, she said.

   Getting a rare-disease diagnosis is usually a major shock, and families
search for answers, Dunkle said.

   "A lot of times people call us right after they get a diagnosis. They're
still reeling from the fact that they've been told they have this disease that
they don't know how to pronounce the name, they've never heard of it before, and
nobody in their family knows what they're talking about," she said.

   "A lot of times with rare diseases, patients and family members really have
to become knowledgeable about the disease, and they have to become advocates for
themselves or for their loved one if they're able." DIAGNOSING THE DISORDER

   Dr. Robert Guthrie of Buffalo, N.Y., first developed the current
phenylketonuria screening test in the early 1960s. Guthrie, who was born about
88 miles northeast of Bentonville in Marionville, Mo., had a son who was
mentally retarded and a niece who was diagnosed with phenylketonuria when she
was 13 months old.

   All states and U.S. territories now screen newborns for the disorder using
his test, which involves analysis of a dried blood spot, usually taken with a
pinprick to an infant's heel.

   It was the first disorder for which anybody screened newborns and is
considered "one of the greatest public health successes of the 20th century,"
having prevented thousands from becoming mentally retarded, according to the
federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

   Arkansas has been screening for phenylketonuria since 1967, said Dr. Bob
West, deputy chief of family health at the Arkansas Department of Health. It's
one of 29 rare but treatable genetic disorders the state screens for, along with
hearing tests.

   The department doesn't track phenylketonuria cases, but it's estimated that
about 100 people in the state have the disorder. About two or three new cases
are diagnosed annually, West said.

   Sarah's mother, Holly Johnson, said she'll never forget the day she got the
call from Arkansas Children's Hospital. It was a scary time. Sarah was her first
child, and suddenly she was diagnosed with an incurable, lifelong disorder
Johnson had never heard of.

   "You don't know what it is. It's extremely overwhelming," she said. "The next
day I went to the library at UAMS, and for two days looked up everything I could
find." She read article after article about the high risks of brain damage and
short life spans associated with the disorder.

   "Just horrible stuff was all I could find," Johnson said.

   But doctors at Children's Hospital reassured her that Sarah could live a long
and healthy life as long as her phenylalanine level was closely monitored and
she stayed on a strict, low-protein diet throughout her life.

   For the first two years of her life, Sarah went to the hospital weekly for
testing. She then went every other week until she was 4, and monthly after that.

   Sarah now goes to the genetics clinic twice a year.

   "She's doing very, very well," Johnson said.

   GETTING COVERAGE

   People must inherit a deficient gene from both parents to have
phenylketonuria. The disorder can be mild or severe, said Dr. Stephen Kahler,
director of the genetics clinic at Children's Hospital.

   Since much of the brain damage from the disease occurs early in life, it's
important that newborns be diagnosed and treated early.

   "It's extremely serious in young children," said Kahler, also a pediatrics
professor at the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences. "A child who is
untreated in the first year of life may lose 50 IQ points." Doctors once thought
it was OK for people with phenylketonuria to come off their medical diets at
school age, but now recommend they stay on them their entire lives.

   Risks of mental retardation lessen as patients get older, but high
phenylalanine levels can cause other problems, including impaired
decision-making ability or movement problems.

   Women with the disorder have to be on the diet when they become pregnant or
their babies will be born highly retarded with small brains, Kahler said.

   Sarah takes 11 pills each day and drinks a special metabolic formula three
times daily. She's on a medication called KuVan that was approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration in 2007 as the first prescription drug for
phenylketonuria.

   "KuVan has allowed some kids to increase their natural protein intake, maybe
double it," Kahler said. "It gives them a much greater variety of foods to
choose from, but it doesn't work for everybody." Hopes are that medical research
into gene therapy will one day lead to a cure, he said.

   In the meantime, people with the disorder and their families continue to cope
with day-to-day challenges. One of those is cost, Johnson said. It's an
expensive disorder.

   The metabolic formula Sarah drinks daily costs about $75 to $80 a can, and
the KuVan is about $11,500 a month.

   Before Sarah was on KuVan, Johnson said, they had to order special
low-protein foods from medical food companies that make things like low-protein
pasta, biscuit mix and "mock-chicken" nuggets. Such foods cost them about
$10,000 annually.

   Johnson said she's fought with health-insurance companies since Sarah was
born. Many won't cover the formula or the special foods, calling them
"nutritional supplements." At one point, Johnson quit her job for nearly two
years so the family could qualify for the state Medicaid program because it was
the only way they could get coverage for the foods.

   Frustrated, she worked with then-Sen. John Brown, R-Siloam Springs, to get a
state law, Act 1113 of 1999, requiring insurance companies to cover such foods.

   `A NEW NORMAL'

   Sarah recently went to Space Camp at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in
Huntsville, Ala., and starts ninth grade at eStem High Public Charter School
this fall. She loves reading and the color blue and enjoys playing golf, running
and riding her bike.

   While she can eat more foods now, like many teenagers, she's a picky eater.
She doesn't eat meat, describes milk as "disgusting" and doesn't like ice cream
or the way peanut butter sticks to the roof of her mouth.

   Her favorite sweets are Jolly Rancher candies - every flavor except blue
raspberry.

   "She's just not real keen on trying new foods," Johnson said.

   Christine Brown, executive director of the Tomahawk, Wis .- based National
PKU Alliance, knows the challenges of the disorder well.

   Two of her three sons - Connor, 3, and Kellen, 18 months - have
phenylketonuria.

   Brown got the call about Connor, her second child, about a week after he was
born.

   "We were completely overwhelmed," Brown said. "I just remember sitting in a
rocking chair with this newborn baby and just sobbing, and feeling like I had
done this to him because it was genetic - so it was something my husband and I
had passed on to him." She worried about all the things her son would never
experience. It made her realize how food-focused American culture and traditions
are.

   "You go through a grieving process, where you start wondering, `What is he
going to eat the night of his prom? What is he going to eat when he goes to his
first birthday parties? He can't have hot dogs, he can't have cupcakes, he can't
have apple pie on the Fourth of July," Brown said. "It was really
heart-wrenching." But as time passed and she learned more about the disorder,
she learned to adjust.

   Her sons take their formula daily, and since they live in a rural area, she's
learned to take their blood samples at home to send in for lab testing.

   The alliance she leads was founded last year to provide a broad voice for
people with phenylketonuria, and works to raise awareness about the disorder,
provide education and advocacy, and raise research funds.

   "It's like with anything else, when you're hit a blow and you find out the
life that you thought you were going to lead isn't what's in store for you, you
learn to cope and you learn to find the silver lining," Brown said. "You just
learn to live a new normal."

   This article was published 06/08/2009

CORRECTION-DATE: June 10, 2009

CORRECTION:

   The Democrat-Gazette wants its news reports to be fair and accurate. We
correct all errors of fact.

   If you know of an error, write: Frank Fellone Deputy Editor P.O. Box 2221
Little Rock, Ark. 72203 or call 378-3475 during business hours Monday through
Friday.

   KUVAN, the first prescription drug for the rare genetic disorder
phenylketonuria, is a specialty drug that is covered by the policies of most
health insurance companies. Also, a program by KUVAN manufacturer BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. offers financial assistance for families who don't have
insurance that covers the drug. An article in Monday's editions about rare
diseases omitted information about how patients afford the drug.

   This article was published 06/10/2009

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2009


                              221 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 6, 2009 Saturday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-6

LENGTH: 297 words

HEADLINE: `There is no limit';
Promising breakthrough announced at Salk

BODY:

   With the president in the Middle East, another icon of American industry
pushed into bankruptcy and California approaching financial chaos, the
breakthrough in stem cell and genetic therapy announced this week by scientists
at La Jolla's Salk Institute was easy to overlook. But its importance -- and its
potential -- cannot be overstated.

   Salk's Juan-Carlos Izpisua Belmonte reported that, after two years of effort,
his team had figured out how to use non-embryonic stem cells and new gene
therapy techniques also developed in Salk labs to fix a defective gene in
diseased cells taken from patients with a type of anemia that can lead to bone
marrow failure, leukemia and other cancers.

   "We have cured a cell," Belmonte said. "In theory, we could transplant it
into a human and cure the disease."

   Theory, of course, is not reality. The next hurdle -- and it is a big one --
is to see if cured cells can be transplanted back into patients and reproduce
themselves to cure the disease without inducing new cancers. The team has
already been awarded a $6.6 million grant from The California Institute for
Regenerative Medicine to continue the work.

   All of this is very good news.

   It shows that the $3 billion gamble that California voters took in 2004 in
approving the statewide initiative to fund stem cell research was worth taking.
Without it, projects like Belmonte's might be halted or delayed for lack of
funding.

   And while we support embryonic stem cell research, this breakthrough also
gives new hope that alternative techniques that do not destroy human embryos can
be increasingly important.

   The promise is perhaps best summed up in the words of Inder Verma, another
Salk scientist. If this new approach can be proved in people, he said, "then
there is no limit to what we can do."

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2009


                              222 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 1, 2009 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: `We have cured a cell,' report says;
Scientists at Salk find success in gene therapy; work remains

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: LA JOLLA

BODY:

   LA JOLLA -- Scientists at La Jolla's Salk Institute for Biological Studies
say they've taken a significant step toward using stem cells and gene therapy to
cure a genetic disease.

   The team led by Salk Professor Juan-Carlos Izpisua Belmonte corrected a
defective gene in cells taken from patients with Fanconi anemia, a disease that
can lead to bone marrow failure, leukemia and other cancers.

   Their work, published online yesterday by the journal Nature, offers the
first proof that the technology can work in human cells -- though more work
remains for it to be tried in patients.

   "We haven't cured a human being, but we have cured a cell," Belmonte said.
"In theory, we could transplant it into a human and cure the disease."

   The researchers received a $6.6 million grant from California's stem cell
institute last month to continue the work. One big remaining problem is
preventing the reprogrammed cells from inducing tumors.

   Belmonte said the work has taken a little more than two years already. Many
of the techniques the team used are relatively new, he said, so it took time to
learn how to make them work efficiently.

   The approach involved taking hair or skin cells from patients with Fanconi
anemia, then using a series of steps to correct the gene defect and reprogram
the cells into induced pluripotent stem cells -- cells created synthetically
from skin or other cells.

   They used gene therapy techniques developed in the lab of Salk Professor
Inder Verma, and also collaborated with researchers at the Center of
Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, Spain, and CIEMAT in Madrid, Spain.

   "If we can demonstrate that a combined (stem cell and) gene therapy approach
works in humans, then there is no limit to what we can do," Verma said.

   The scientists said the cells that resulted from their work were
indistinguishable from human embryonic stem cells or induced pluripotent stem
cells from healthy donors.

   The remaining work will include improving the technology to produce
transplantable cells. Belmonte said many labs are working on ways to address the
cancer risk the cells pose.

   "It's been 10 years since human stem cells were first cultured in a Petri
dish," Belmonte said. "The hope in the field has always been that we'll be able
to correct a disease genetically and then make (stem cells) that differentiate
into the type of tissue where the disease is manifested and bring it to clinic."

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2009


                              223 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: COVINGTON PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 664 words

HEADLINE: Race for a Miracle gets under way June 7;
Mandeville girl, 5, has Batten Disease

BYLINE: By Margaret Schonberg, Contributing writer

BODY:

   Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation is hosting a Race for a Miracle. It is also
a race against time. Funding is desperately needed to finance clinical trials
for children affected by Batten Disease.

   Race for a Miracle will take place on June 7 in honor of National Batten's
Day. It will be held at the Abita Trailhead, with race day registration and
number pickup beginning at 7 a.m. A one-mile fun run/walk will start at 8 a.m.,
with the 5K run/walk to follow.

   Mary Payton Vigil, the 5-year-old daughter of Joe and Nikki Vigil of
Mandeville, was diagnosed with Late Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis in
January 2008. The inherited, progressive, neurodegenerative disorder also is
known as Batten Disease. The non-profit Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation was
founded in March 2008, to provide funding for treatment and research, to help
raise the public's knowledge about the disease and to help give emotional and
financial support to the families whose lives are affected by the disease.

   About 200 children in the United States affected by the disease suffer mental
impairment, seizures, continued vision loss and decreased motor function
ability.

   "The Mary Payton Miracle Foundation is raising awareness of Batten Disease to
help fund a treatment that is now available for children affected by LINCL,"
said Nikki Voelkel, event chairwoman.

   "Cornell Medical in New York has agreed to start treatment on five children
at a cost of $500,000 per child. The treatment must be privately funded and has
proven to stop the progression of the disease. We are racing against time to
raise the funds in order to get Mary Payton Vigil into this treatment program
before it's too late."

   Dr. Ronald Crystal, chairman of the genetic medicine department at Cornell
University, has helped to develop the FDA-approved gene therapy treatment that
would make the brain cells normal and stop the disease's progression. Time is
critical because once a certain point of regression has been reached, treatment
is no longer feasible.

   "MPMF helps families with children afflicted by Batten Disease by providing
financial support for medical care, medications, medical equipment and quality
of life items," Voelkel said. "We also are there to support families as they go
through a very difficult challenge fighting this disease. MPMF provides hope and
helps to make connections with top research personnel for possible involvement
with treatment options."

   The foundation will host an after-race party for participants and their
families that will include plenty of kid-friendly activities. Johnette Downing
will sing and there will be face painting, a beauty tent and the Tumble Bus.
State troopers will have both squad cars and motorcycles on display.

   Entry fees are $10 for those 16 and younger, $20 for 17 and older and $60
maximum per family. The fee for race day only without a T-shirt is $15. Checks
should be made payable to Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation, c/o 15th Street
Flyers, 49 Karen Drive, Covington LA 70433. Participants also can register in
person on or before May 30 at Franco's, Pelican Athletic Club, Varsity Sports,
2021 Claiborne Street, and Premiere Chiropractic, all in Mandeville, at Gilboy's
in Covington, or online at www.active.com. Applications also are available at
www.15thstreetflyers.org or www.marypaytonsmiracle.com.

   Non-participants wanting to attend post-race festivities may pay $5 admission
at the gate.

   Call Diane Weiss at 893.3684 or 504.460.2991, Nikki Voelkel at 807.5064 for
race information. For information about Batten Disease, go to www.bdsra.org

   Those not participating in the race but who would like to make a donation may
send them to Mary Payton's Miracle Foundation at P.O. Box 35, Mandeville, LA
70470-0035. E-mails can be sent to info@marypaytonsmiracle.com

   The organization also has scheduled its second annual "Miracles Can Happen"
benefit for Oct. 9 at Benedict's Plantation. The fundraiser will include music
by 4 Unplugged and both a silent and live auction.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2009


                              224 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              May 31, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: Funeral Notice;
REEDER

BODY:

   Chester Joseph Reeder III, "Tootie", age 25, a native of New Orleans, LA and
a resident of Houston, TX, departed this earth and entered eternal rest with the
Lord on Tuesday, May 26, 2009 at 6:29 pm. Son of Ms. Deborah C. Reeder and Mr.
Chester Reeder, Jr. Brother of Kayla Elan Clark. Stepson of Andrew Sylve and
Donna Duffard. Grandson of Louise A. Clark and the late Willie "Bill" Clark,
Sr., Mary "Mae" and Chester Reeder, Sr. Also survived by his godparents and a
host of aunts, uncles, cousins, other relatives and friends.

   Relatives and friends of the family, also pastor, officers and members of
Beulah Baptist Church, priest and parishioners of St. Joan of Arc Catholic
Church and all neighboring churches, employees of 1st Data - TRS Recovery of
Houston, TX, LA Gene Therapy and Cancer Research Consortiums (LSU, Tulane and
Xavier), LSU Health Sciences Center, The Quality Group, staff and class of L.E.
Rabouin School, class of 2002 James Lewis Extension, class of 1998, McDonogh #35
Class of 1978 and the Gert Town Community are invited to attend the Funeral
Service at Greater King Solomon Baptist Church, 3305 Audubon St., New Orleans,
LA on Monday, June 1, 2009 at 11:00 am; Visitation will begin at 9:00 am. Rev.
James N. Dorsey, officiating. Interment: Providence Memorial Park.

   In lieu of flowers, the family request monetary donations to be sent to
Crimestoppers, P. O. Box 55249, Metairie, LA  70055 or call (504) 837-8477.

   Arrangements by DW Rhodes Funeral Home, 1728 N. Claiborne Ave.; Please visit
www.rhodesla.com to sign the guest book.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2009


                              225 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 27, 2009 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Editorial

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: THE SWINE FLU Preparing ourselves for the next epidemic

BODY:

   JAY NELSON  IN MY OPINION

   THE SWINE FLU Preparing ourselves

   for the next epidemic

   W hile it's still hard to tell just how big the H1N1 (also known as swine
flu) outbreak will be, it has already highlighted some urgent needs for our
country. We must continue to improve our methods for rapidly detecting and
tracking outbreaks. We must improve communications between international,
national, state and local health officials. We must also use our limited
research resources to improve and speed up vaccine development.

   As a scientist who has devoted most of my professional career to researching
infectious disease, I know there is still an enormous amount of work to
accomplish before the next epidemic comes.

   How serious is the threat? Consider this: Each year up to 20 percent of the
American population gets the common flu. More than 200,000 people are
hospitalized due to complications and about 36,000 people die annually from
flu-related causes. Now imagine the impact and casualties from a more serious
outbreak.

   In the case of H1N1, we have seen federal, state and local officials respond
quickly and effectively to communicate risks, offer disease-prevention
strategies and provide treatment to those who have been exposed. However, few
Americans are aware of ongoing, behind-the scenes efforts to protect us all from
the next big outbreak.

   This past month, the Pacific Northwest took a significant step in protecting
residents against infectious disease threats. In mid-April, the National
Institutes of Health announced the establishment of a regional biodefense
center, based here in Portland but serving the entire region.

   The purpose of the Pacific Northwest Regional Center for Excellence for
Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases is to combat emerging or re-emerging
infectious diseases that threaten human health. As part of this mission, we
specifically plan to improve protection for those most susceptible during an
outbreak: those with weakened immune systems such as the very young, the sick
and the aging.

   As the lead institution for these studies, Oregon Health & Science
University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute has already taken great strides
in this mission. In eight years since we were established, we have uncovered new
information about the aging immune system that will help us create vaccines to
protect the most susceptible members of the public. We have also demonstrated
how the smallpox vaccine provides a lifetime of protection instead of just a few
years' worth as previously thought --a finding of utmost importance in the face
of the ongoing global terrorism threat.

   The swine flu epidemic may turn out to be the warning we needed to get
ourselves ready and rapidly respond to some urgent needs for our country --needs
that must be acted upon quickly. There is much work to be accomplished before
the next epidemic.

   Jay Nelson is director of OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute and
director of the Pacific Northwest Regional Center for Excellence for Biodefense
and Emerging Infectious Diseases.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2009


                              226 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                             May 20, 2009 Wednesday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; DAILY CHECKUP; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1142 words

HEADLINE: SETTING TREATMENT IN MOTION. Parkinson's drugs are effective, but
their power can fade; now, a technique called deep brain stimulation is
advancing

BYLINE: BY KATIE CHARLES

BODY:

   Setting treatment in motion

   The specialist: Dr. Ron Alterman on Parkinson's disease and deep brain
stimulation.

   As the director of functional and restorative neurosurgery at Mount Sinai,
Alterman performs minimally invasive operations that seek to normalize brain
activity .

   One of these surgeries, deep brain stimulation (DBS), involves implanting
electrodes to treat disorders such as tremors, Parkinson's disease and dystonia.

   The big story:

   This year, the Journal of the American Medical Association published the
results of a large study done in the VA system comparing Parkinson's patients
who received the best drug treatments to patients who received deep brain
stimulation. "The patients who received surgery did better than the patients who
did not," says Alterman.

   "This randomized, double-blind trial is the best proof we have that surgery
does a better job than medicine alone when treating some PD patients."

   Who's at risk:

   Upwards of 1 million Americans are living with Parkinson's disease, a
chronic, progressive illness that affects the nervous system and impairs
movement.

   "Basically everybody in the general population is at risk," says Alterman.
"Parkinson's is the second most common neurodegenerative disease in humans,
after Alzheimer's."

   The major risk factor is age. "The average age of onset in the U.S. is 62 -
though as we know from Michael J. Fox, people can develop it at a younger age,"
says Alterman.

   Men are at a slightly higher risk than woman.

   The symptoms mostly result from a lack of dopamine, a chemical messenger, in
the brain. This occurs when the brain cells that make dopamine die or cease to
function.

   No one has been able to identify the root cause, however.

   Parkinson's has been associated with rural living, so some hypothesize that
well water or other environmental factors may put people at risk.

   Signs and symptoms:

   The disease develops gradually . "The cardinal features of Parkinson's are
tremor, stiffness (doctors call it rigidity) and bradykinesia, which refers to
slowed movements," says Alterman. "But one doesn't have to have all three
symptoms to be diagnosed." As Parkinson's progresses, it can lead to problems
with walking, balance, sleeping and memory, which can look a lot like
Alzheimer's.

   Patients and family members often notice that the symptoms are worse on one
side of the body than the other.

   "The disease usually affects both sides of the body, but in an asymmetric
way," says Alterman. "It tends to start on one side, and that side typically
remains worse than the other."

   For some patients, the disease starts as a little tremor in the hand, or a
rubbing motion between the thumb and forefinger that is known as "pill-rolling."
Some people lose the automatic motion of blinking and develop a mask-like stare;
others have trouble speaking.

   There are also some non motor symptoms of Parkinson's, like sleep problems,
intestinal problems and a reduced sense of smell.

   "Parkinson's is diagnosed with a clinical test: giving the patients some
levodopa [a drug also called L-dopa]. If they get better, it's probably
Parkinson's," says Alterman.

   Traditional treatment:

   Patients often receive immediate and dramatic relief from drug treatment, and
in many cases doctors can control symptoms for many years with medications
alone.

   However, the drugs' effectiveness often diminishes over time.

   "Medications are the mainstay of Parkinson's treatment," says Alterman. "That
works for most patients for the fi rst five to 10 years." Then the drugs'
efficacy starts to fade . "Instead of the four to six hours of relief they're
supposed to get, they might get one hour," says Alterman. What's more, the
snakelike bobbling that is one of the most distinctive markers of Parkinson's,
called dyskinesia, is actually a side effect of the drugs, not a symptom of the
disease. "At that point, medications alone aren't going to be able to provide a
satisfactory quality of life," says Alterman.

   Deep brain stimulation is an option for patients with moderately advanced
disease who are not responding to medication. About 20% to 25% of Parkinson's
patients are good candidates for this surgery. "Deep brain stimulation
essentially is a pacemaker for the brain," says Alterman.

   "The response rate is better than 90% in properly selected candidates. The
results are noticed immediately, and they appear to be long-lasting, suppressing
the dyskinesias and improving motor function for five years or more."

   The surgery is done in two stages. First, electrodes are placed in the brain,
and then the pacemaker is inserted under the skin of the chest ; an extension
cable runs under the skin from the top of the head to the chest to connect them
. "We can change the device's setting to suit the patient's needs," says
Alterman. "What we're doing is modulating brain function, working with the brain
to restore more normal function."

   Research breakthroughs:

   Already in use for tremor, Parkinson's disease and dystonia, deep brain
stimulation was recently approved in the U.S. for patients with obsessive
-compulsive disorder.

   "Doctors hope that it will be approved for epilepsy within the year," says
Alterman.

   While deep brain stimulation is very effective in treating the symptoms of
Parkinson's disease, it does not prevent the disease from progressing. "We're
hoping that gene therapy or stem-cell therapy will one day be able to halt or
reverse the ravages of Parkinson's disease and make deep brain stimulation
obsolete," says Alterman. "But until then, DBS is a very effective therapy for
Parkinson's patients who are having diffi culties with medications alone."

   Questions for your doctor:

   Alterman advises patients with Parkinson's to ask, "Am I a good candidate for
deep brain stimulation?" If not, ask why.

   Complications are uncommon but can be very serious.

   Ask, "How many times have you performed this surgery, and what is your
complication rate?" The success rate and risks can vary widely from surgeon to
surgeon, so you want one who has a proven track record.

   What you can do:

   Get informed

   There are very active and strong advocacy groups for Parkinson's disease,
including the Parkinson Alliance (parkinsonalliance.org) and National
Parkinson's Foundation (parkinson.org). The informational Web site wemove.org
also maintains enlightening overviews about movement disorders, including
Parkinson's disease.

   Be a self-advocate

   Some neurologists might not mention deep brain stimulation as an option.
Bring it up with them, and get a second opinion. "Don't assume that if your
doctor isn't mentioning it, that you're not a good candidate," says Alterman.

   BY THE NUMBERS:

   About 1 million Americans are affected by Parkinson's disease.

   40,000-50,000 cases of Parkinson's are diagnosed every year.

   62 is the average age of onset in the U.S.

   20%-25% of patients with Parkinson's are candidates for deep brain
stimulation.

   Source: Dr. Ron Alterman

GRAPHIC: Dr. Ron Alterman implants electrodes that act as "a pacemaker for the
brain." Photo by Jeanne Noonan

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2009


                              227 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 442  words

HEADLINE: Kids go to bat for ailing brother of classmate; Funds sought to help
boy with rare illness

BYLINE: Stefano Esposito, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   With glitter sticking to her tiny fingers and dress, 5-year-old Tova Kaplan
took a break from her work at Oscar Mayer Magnet School on Friday to urge people
to help the brother of one of her classmates.

   "Could you really help this boy Jasper because he's very sick?" the
3-foot-tall preschooler said. "You can give me a little money or a lot of money.
It's up to you."

   In the coming days, Chicagoans will see the fruit of Tova's work -- and that
of hundreds of other students at schools throughout the city -- in the shape of
brightly decorated fund-raising cans displayed in businesses across Chicago.

   It's all to help raise $2.5 million for 4-year-old Jasper Duinstra, of
Chicago, and up to four more children suffering from a rare neurological illness
that usually is fatal by age 12.

   Jasper's family and friends are pinning their hopes on the promising results
of some recent gene therapy clinical trials in New York that appeared to slow
the progression of Jasper's sickness, Batten disease. The Duinstras -- who moved
here from the Netherlands in 2007 -- say government funding won't become
available soon enough to fund Jasper's participation in the trials. So they have
to rely on private donations.

   Jasper's problems began last year, when he started having seizures.

   "We thought he had juvenile epilepsy that he would outgrow," said his mother,
Sieglinde Duinstra, 38.

   But Jasper's symptoms only got worse. By February, he could no longer walk
without help. After a battery of tests at Children's Memorial Hospital, Jasper
was diagnosed in March with Batten disease. Duinstra was certain Jasper's
neurologist would say it was a manageable condition that might mean her son
would eventually need a wheelchair. Instead, the neurologist delivered the
devastating news that her son's disease had no cure.

   "It became the darkest of darkest days," Duinstra said.

   But parents at Oscar Mayer -- where the Duinstras' 6-year-old son attends --
restored a glimmer of hope.

   They began researching online and found out about the clinical trials in New
York. And then the parents got the idea for a citywide fund-raiser.

   On Friday, dozens of children spent the morning at Oscar Mayer gluing colored
tissue, sequins and animal cutouts onto fund-raising cans.

   "I put some glue on and some sparkles on and some tissue paper because I
wanted it to look nice, so people think it's for somebody who is very
important," said Sofia More, 5.

   As the kids worked, Jasper's grateful mother looked on.

   Though she says her son is getting progressively sicker, she remains
optimistic.

   "I must," she said. "I have no other choice."

   To make a donation, log on to www.jasperagainstbatten.org.

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: John J. Kim, Sun-Times; Preschoolers at Oscar Mayer Magnet School,
2250 N. Clifton, decorate fund-raising canisters Friday.
Color Photo: Jasper Duinstra

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              228 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              May 17, 2009 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 442  words

HEADLINE: Kids go to bat for ailing brother of classmate; Funds sought to help
boy with rare illness

BYLINE: Stefano Esposito, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   With glitter sticking to her tiny fingers and dress, 5-year-old Tova Kaplan
took a break from her work at Oscar Mayer Magnet School on Friday to urge people
to help the brother of one of her classmates.

   "Could you really help this boy Jasper because he's very sick?" the
3-foot-tall preschooler said. "You can give me a little money or a lot of money.
It's up to you."

   In the coming days, Chicagoans will see the fruit of Tova's work -- and that
of hundreds of other students at schools throughout the city -- in the shape of
brightly decorated fund-raising cans displayed in businesses across Chicago.

   It's all to help raise $2.5 million for 4-year-old Jasper Duinstra, of
Chicago, and up to four more children suffering from a rare neurological illness
that usually is fatal by age 12.

   Jasper's family and friends are pinning their hopes on the promising results
of some recent gene therapy clinical trials in New York that appeared to slow
the progression of Jasper's sickness, Batten disease. The Duinstras -- who moved
here from the Netherlands in 2007 -- say government funding won't become
available soon enough to fund Jasper's participation in the trials. So they have
to rely on private donations.

   Jasper's problems began last year, when he started having seizures.

   "We thought he had juvenile epilepsy that he would outgrow," said his mother,
Sieglinde Duinstra, 38.

   But Jasper's symptoms only got worse. By February, he could no longer walk
without help. After a battery of tests at Children's Memorial Hospital, Jasper
was diagnosed in March with Batten disease. Duinstra was certain Jasper's
neurologist would say it was a manageable condition that might mean her son
would eventually need a wheelchair. Instead, the neurologist delivered the
devastating news that her son's disease had no cure.

   "It became the darkest of darkest days," Duinstra said.

   But parents at Oscar Mayer -- where the Duinstras' 6-year-old son attends --
restored a glimmer of hope.

   They began researching online and found out about the clinical trials in New
York. And then the parents got the idea for a citywide fund-raiser.

   On Friday, dozens of children spent the morning at Oscar Mayer gluing colored
tissue, sequins and animal cutouts onto fund-raising cans.

   "I put some glue on and some sparkles on and some tissue paper because I
wanted it to look nice, so people think it's for somebody who is very
important," said Sofia More, 5.

   As the kids worked, Jasper's grateful mother looked on.

   Though she says her son is getting progressively sicker, she remains
optimistic.

   "I must," she said. "I have no other choice."

   To make a donation, log on to www.jasperagainstbatten.org.

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: John J. Kim, Sun-Times; Preschoolers at Oscar Mayer Magnet School,
2250 N. Clifton, decorate fund-raising canisters Friday. ;
Color Photo: Jasper Duinstra ;

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2009


                              229 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              May 11, 2009 Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 995 words

BYLINE: By S.I. Rosenbaum, Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   PROVIDENCE - In a lab overlooking the Seekonk River, a muscle twitches. It's
only about four millimeters long, and its cells have never grown inside a human
body. It's barely strong enough to bend a pair of plastic pins.

   But in that tiny muscle, and in thousands of others like it grown in
laboratories, researchers see a possible way to speed a cure for Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, or DMD, a fatal disease that eats away at muscle tissue.

   The hope is that lab-grown muscles will allow scientists to test treatments
much more quickly and accurately than ever before.

   If it works, it will be thanks in part to an alliance of three people: a
Brown University research scientist, a tenacious medical doctor, and a mother
who wouldn't give up on her child.

   ``This could change the whole landscape of the disorder,'' said Christine
McSherry of Pembroke, whose son, Jett, 13, has the disease.

   When Jett was diagnosed at 5 years old, doctors told McSherry he'd probably
die by 15. The genetic disease, which affects mostly boys, is progressive. There
is no cure.

   When she asked what could be done, ``They said, `Absolutely nothing,' '' she
recalled.

   The answer infuriated her. ``As soon as someone says `There's nothing you can
do, there's no hope,' my intuition is to say, `That's not true,' '' she said.

   At first, like many other parents, she concentrated on possible cures, like
stem cell research and gene therapy. ``But then I realized, what is that going
to do for us if we can't take care of these kids today?'' she said.

   She formed a nonprofit, the Jett Foundation, to help fund DMD research and
began to seek out doctors who were aggressively treating the disease's symptoms.
At a conference in 2006, she met Dr. Brian Tseng. A molecular biologist as well
as a doctor, Tseng specialized in DMD, and his attitude toward treatment was in
step with McSherry's. The two struck up a long-distance correspondence.

   When Tseng was approached last year to join Harvard Medical School's faculty
and start a DMD clinic and lab at MassGeneral Hospital for Children, McSherry
used her foundation to help fund the clinic.

   At the clinic, Tseng equips patients with the wheelchairs, ventilators, and
other devices that help them cope. But the parents he sees are always looking
for alternative treatments. ``They'll try anything anyone tells them, they're so
desperate,'' Tseng said.

   DMD is a difficult disease to study, because of the lack of good clinical
models. Mice that are genetically engineered to have DMD are easy to study, but
don't become weak the same way people with DMD do. ``You're trying to figure out
how to rescue a mouse that's not crippled to begin with,'' Tseng said.

   There are also genetically engineered dogs with the disease, and unlike mice,
they have all the outward symptoms. Yet experimenting with them is prohibitively
costly.

   But now, there may be another way - and it's taking shape in Brown professor
Herman Vandenburgh's lab.

   Along with nurturing the growth of tiny muscles for testing, the lab is
developing a machine that will eventually function like a high-precision robot
eyedropper and camera. It will pick up minute amounts of drugs or other
substances and inject them into bumblebee-size plastic cups, arranged in a grid
with 96 cups to a tray, and document the effect immediately.

   Inside each cup will be one of the tiny human muscles, cultured in
Vandenburgh's lab from people who have a form of muscular dystrophy.

   Each mini-muscle is stretched like a hammock between two plastic posts. Zap
the muscle with electricity and it twitches.

   The amount of force it exerts can be measured extremely accurately, so it's
easy to tell exactly how strong the muscle is - and the effect of various
treatments.

   Because Vandenburgh's device will be able to test thousands of mini-muscles
at a time, it will be easy to do a large-scale study of how a particular
substance affects them. And, said Vandenburgh, the results are more accurate
than traditional laboratory tests.

   Vandenburgh - who started working on growing muscle tissue in the 1990s, as
part of an experiment run by NASA - is the first to grow functional muscles that
work the same way as muscles in the human body, said James Tidball, a researcher
at UCLA.

   Vandenburgh and Tseng met in 1991 and kept in touch. Last year, when Tseng
arrived in Boston, he drove to Providence to hear Vandenburgh talk about his
work with his company, Myomics Inc., which he formed in 2003.

   ``My jaw hit the floor. I was speechless,'' said Tseng. ``I saw the advent of
a paradigm shift on how we really treat boys with DMD.'' He and Vandenburgh went
out for a few beers and planned their collaboration.

   The work has impressed others.

   ``Being able to use human muscles is a huge step forward,'' said Rachelle
Crosbie, a DMD researcher at UCLA. ``It's very difficult to grow fully
differentiated skeletal muscle fibers,'' Crosbie said. ``Heck, I'd totally like
to use that.''

   Said UCLA's Tidball, ``I think it could be extremely useful not just for
Duchenne but any muscle disease.''

   Myomics Inc. is already testing substances on a limited scale to see whether
they harm or strengthen the mini-muscles. Promising substances will move ahead
to a human trial; Tseng hopes to begin by the end of the year.

   Meanwhile, McSherry's nonprofit is raising money - via gold tournaments and
barbecues - to cover the $150,000 for the screening process and $600,000 for
human trials. The West Coast-based Quest Foundation has pledged $30,000 in
matching funds.

   The process may seem expensive, but for drug research it's incredibly cheap,
she said. And the payoff could be priceless. She hopes that by keeping children
with DMD healthier for longer, they will be able to benefit more from eventual
gene-therapy or stem-cell treatments.

   Vandenburgh's work has changed the way she looks at her son. Now, she's
planning for his college education and career. ``I see so much more of his
future,'' she said.

   S.I. Rosenbaum can be reached at sirosenbaum@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2009


                              230 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 10, 2009 Sunday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. G-5

LENGTH: 8407 words

HEADLINE: PASSAGES;
DEATH AND FUNERAL NOTICES

BODY:

   BLAIR, NELSON ASTIN 1925 to 2009 Nelson Astin Blair died on April 28, 2009,
at San Diego Hospice with his family by his side after a six month battle with
lymphoma. He was born to Mamie Kate Astin and Luke Blair on November 27, 1925
and raised on a farm in Danville, Virginia. During World War II, Nelson joined
the Navy at age 17, participating in the V-12 program at Emory and Henry College
and Rennselaer Polytechnic Institute. He rose to the rank of Master Chief before
receiving his commission, and retired as a Lieutenant Commander after 32 years
of service. His Navy service included participation in the Japanese Occupation
Force, the Korean War, and Cold War operations with the transport and patrol
aviation communities.

   He graduated with a B.B.A. from the University of Hawaii. On April 28, 1962,
in Honolulu, Hawaii, Nelson married the love of his life, Elizabeth "Bettie"
Minor, who preceded him in death in 2003. Nelson and his wife brought up three
children in their long-time hometown of Kailua, Hawaii. Following his time in
the Navy, Nelson enjoyed a successful career with United Services Life Insurance
and Bankers Securities as both salesman and regional manager for Hawaii and the
Pacific Rim, receiving multiple awards as the company's top salesman. Nelson was
also a 32nd degree Mason with the Scottish Rite Temple. Nelson moved to San
Diego in 2003 to be with family after his wife's passing. He served as a valued
volunteer at Scripps Memorial Hospital La Jolla, and enjoyed spending time with
his grandchildren. Known for his wisdom, tenacity and wit, he will be greatly
missed by family and friends. Nelson is survived by his children, Dr. Elizabeth
Blair (Gregory Morin) of Chicago, Rebecca Blair Harutunian (Hon. Albert
Harutunian III) of San Diego, and Comm. John Blair (Margaret) of San Diego;
along with five grandchildren. A Memorial Service will take place at the Fort
Myer Old Post Chapel followed by interment with Full Military Honors at
Arlington National Cemetery. Memorial donations may be made to the Intrepid
Fallen Heroes Fund, Attn: Contributions, One Intrepid Square, West 46th Street
and 12th Avenue, New York, NY 10036, or San Diego Hospice Foundation, 4311 Third
Avenue, San Diego, CA 92103.

   BURLESON, JAMES ALAN James Burleson, formerly of San Diego, died April 26,
2009. He is survived by Kellilyn Marble and Andrew Danly; four grandchildren;
sister Judith Richerzhagen; and additional loved ones. Please visit
www.legacy.com for complete obituary.

   CHEW, ROSEMARY (WERT) Rosemary Chew (Wert) passed away April 18, 2009, in San
Diego, CA. She was born August 10, 1935, in Portland, OR, the daughter of Edward
H. Chew and Christina Deis Chew. She grew up in Coronado and graduated from
Cathedral Girls' High School in San Diego. A resident of San Diego County for
nearly 70 years, she was a mother, homemaker and office manager for K-Mart
stores. A true Matriarch, Rosemary was the heart of a large and diverse family.
Fair minded and generous, her door was always open, and she was a source of love
and support for all who knew her. She is preceded in death by her sister,
Barbara Jean Chew (Wert) on October 31, 2008, and survived by siblings, Edward
Howard Chew Jr. of San Clemente and Helen Wursch-midt of Orangevale; six
children, John L. Wert Jr. of San Diego, Victoria Wert of San Diego, Christina
Wert Cornell of Orange, TX, Deborah Wert of San Diego, Richard V. Wert of San
Diego, and Laura Wert Valona of Menifee; twelve grandchildren, Jill Sult Romero,
Jared Sult, Joey Garcia, Sonia Garcia, Christopher Gergen, Andrew Roberts, Sarah
Roberts, Priscilla Wert Klein, Richard Wert, Samantha Wert, Marissa Tydingco
Kulin, Charlene Tydingco, and eight great-grandchildren, including two on the
way. Family and friends will gather at 3:00 p.m. on May 23, 2009 at Rosemary's
home to celebrate her life. To honor her four year battle with cancer, we ask
that, in lieu of flowers, donations are made in Rosemary's name to The American
Cancer Society.

   CLONTS, DARLENE JOYCE We will love you forever Darlene lost her courageous
battle with cancer on May 1, 2009, at age 75. She will be dearly missed by
husband, Bryan; brother, Dallas; sisters, Delois and Delpha; sons, Bill, Robert,
and Marcus; daughter, Connie; stepdaughter, April; 13 grandchildren; three
great-grand-children, and countless friends. Born in Kansas, she made her home
in San Diego County for over 50 years. She devoted her life to family. She loved
going to sporting events, dancing, and thrift store shopping. She never met a
stranger. Please join us in celebrating her life. Services will be held May 16,
2009, at 1:00 p.m. at Living Hope Christian Fellowship, 9455 Los Coches Road,
Lakeside, California, 92040. In lieu of flowers, donations may be made on
Darlene's behalf to: St. Jude Children's Research at the following: www.stjude.
org/donate.

   COFRANCESCO, Sr., JOSEPH (JOE) MICHAEL Joseph (Joe) Michael Cofrancesco, Sr.,
passed away quietly and peacefully surrounded by his family on Sunday, May 3,
2009. Joe was born on a farm in Throopsville, New York, on September 2, 1918,
and was one of eight children born to Michael and Sarafina Cofrancesco of
Naples, Italy. After graduating from a one room schoolhouse, Joe's love for
music flourished and he started a band playing guitar, harmonica, and accordion.
His band performed at square dances and was known throughout upstate New York.
Later, he married his sweetheart Ann and shortly after, began raising a family.
Joe spent his early years working the family farm and later developed skills as
an electrician, television repairman, car mechanic, and barber. He started a
furniture business in Port Byron, New York, with his sister and brother and in
1955, moved his family to California. Joe settled in San Bernardino with his
family and became a successful businessman. He was one of the owners of Eastside
Maple Furniture Shop in San Bernardino and in 1975 moved to Poway and opened
North County Furniture. He owned and operated mobile home parks in San
Bernardino County and dabbled in real estate. Joe supported his community and
was one of the founders of the Poway Bocce Club where he served two terms as
President. He was also a member of the Sons of Columbus. Joe is remembered by
all who knew him as a kind, considerate, and generous man who always had a smile
for everyone. He was an avid gardener and provided fruit and vegetables to
family and friends for over 60 years. Even if you did not know him, you would
leave his house with a bag of fruit or vegetables. In true Italian fashion, he
was happiest if you would sit down and share a meal with him, hungry or not.
Everyone who knew Joe loved him and said he had a heart of gold and a wonderful
sense of humor. He was a loving husband, father, grandfather, great-grandfather
and a devoted brother whose spirit of strength, support, and counsel will be
greatly missed by each and every one of his family members. Joe leaves behind
his beloved wife of 61 years, Ann Cofrancesco of Poway; his daughters, Rita
Cofrancesco of Encinitas, Sara and husband Jim Cowell of Yucaipa, and Elaine
Cofrancesco and husband Roger Nedrow of Rancho Bernardo; his sister, Mary
Guiffrida of Poway; brothers, Eugene Cofrancesco and wife Margaret of San
Bernardino, Louis Cofrancesco of Highland; grandchildren, Aaron Cowell of
Oregon; Jonathan and wife Melissa Cowell of San Diego, April and husband Robert
Ghionzoli of Texas, Amber Cofrancesco and partner Britney Gonzalez of Poway,
Brandon Cofrancesco of Poway; great-granddaughter, Lilia Cowell of San Diego;
and many other relatives. Family and friends are invited to a Memorial Mass on
Friday, May 15, 2009, at St. Michael's Church in Poway at 10:30 a.m. A private
interment will be held at a later date. Arrangements are by Poway-Bernardo
Mortuary in Poway. In lieu of flowers, anyone desiring to give a remembrance may
make a donation in Joe's name to the Sharp Hospice Care Foundation - P.O. Box
3739, La Mesa, CA 91944-3739 or www.sharp.com/hospice.

   CRAIG, VALERIE KOPECKY 1926 to 2009 Valerie Kopecky Craig died peacefully at
her home on the evening of April 22, 2009. Mrs. Craig had suffered from
Alzheimer's Disease for years. Valerie was the only daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zeno (Elsie Prosek) Kopecky and was born in Chicago, Illinois, on July 29, 1926.
She attended the University of Chicago and graduated with an MBA in 1948. While
in college, she met and married fellow student Harmon Craig. They moved to La
Jolla in 1955 when Mr. Craig accepted a position at Scripps Institution where he
eventually became a professor. Craig, a geochemist and oceanographer, died in
2003 in La Jolla, CA. In early years, Mrs. Craig raised three daughters, while
being an essential part of her husband's fifty year scientific career. In 1972,
she co-authored a paper on Greek marbles that received international attention,
and throughout the duration of their marriage she traveled and worked by her
husband's side. Valerie was part of many oceanographic expeditions and worked in
China, Africa, and all over the Pacific Ocean and islands collecting data. She
was cheerful, brave, resourceful and indefatigable. Her husband's biographer
Karl Turekian observed: "In everything he did he was accompanied and encouraged
by his wife, Valerie. Her patience with Craig's perennially searching mind, his
friends with diverse qualities and interests ... made the Craig enterprise one
of inevitable success." Valerie will be deeply mourned by all who knew her. Her
personality and enthusiasm were both gentle and contagious. Her positive
attitude, and the humor and grace which endured through her years of decline,
were an inspiration to all who cared for her. She loved her husband, her family
and friends, politics and was deeply committed to supporting many charities.
Those who loved her will never forget the sound of her laughter. Mrs. Craig is
survived by three daughters including Claudia Craig Marek of Los Angeles, four
grandchildren, her brother Zeno Kopecky Jr. of Portland, OR, and brother-in-law
John Craig of Maryland. She leaves eight nieces and nephews and a cousin, Vera,
in the Czech Republic. Memorial donations in Mrs. Craig's honor may be made to
the Shiley Marcos Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, http://adrc.ucsd.edu/ or
the charity of your choice.

   DOYLE, LAURIE GAIL May 24, 1956 to May 5, 2009 Visitation: Monday, May 11,
2009, at El Camino Memorial La Mesa Chapel, 8:30 a.m. to 10:30 a.m. Memorial
Service: Monday, May 11, 2009, at 11 a.m. Ascension Lutheran Church, 5106 Zion
Ave., San Diego. Please visit our online obituary at El Camino Memorial La Mesa
Chapel.

   EGEBERG, MARY JANE MOYER Mary Jane Egeberg, 89, formerly of San Diego, passed
away on Sunday, April 26, 2009, at Chapel Pointe in Carlisle, PA. She was born
on August 16, 1919, in Anderson, Indiana. She joined the Navy in February 1944
and was stationed in San Diego, CA, where she met and married Lansing Egeberg on
September 13, 1945. They lived in San Diego from 1969 to 1978. Lansing passed
away in 1993. She is survived by her two daughters, Christine Pearson and her
husband Ron of San Diego, and Kathryn Gatrell and her husband Cloyd of Carlisle,
PA, eight grandchildren, and 15 great-grandchildren. Burial will be in East
Maplewood Cemetery, Anderson, Indiana. In lieu of flowers, we ask that her
family and friends donate to their local Hospice or the charity of their choice.
To sign the guest book visit www.hoffmanroth.com.

   FLOOD, CAROLYN ROGERS Carolyn Rogers Flood passed away on April 15, 2009 at
the age of 67, after a long battle with cancer. Born on August 9, 1941, in
Rochester, NY, to Beatrice and John H. Rogers, she was the second of four
children. A graduate of Irondequoit High School, she has a Bachelor's degree
from Chatham College, PA, and a Master's degree from International University,
San Diego. A respected and admired teacher and administrator, she recently
retired after more than 30 years in the Rancho Santa Fe school district where
she was named County Teacher of the Year. She brought joy and a love of learning
to countless children and most recently served as a BITSA mentor to new faculty.
Carolyn is preceded in death by her husband of 44 years, R. Robert Flood, and
their daughter Lisa Carrillon. They are now joined together again in Heaven. A
Memorial Service will be held on Saturday, June 20th, at 1 p.m. at La Jolla
Presbyterian Church, where she was an active member and sang in the choir. In
lieu of flowers, donations may be made to Sharp Hospice or La Jolla Presbyterian
Church.

   FREUNDEL, MARK JASON Mark Jason Freundel, 57, died of respiratory failure in
San Diego on March 16, 2009. He was a quality assurance professional in software
development who had lived in the area since 1982. He will be remembered as a
kind and generous relative and friend by all whose lives he touched. Mark was
born in Washington, DC, on May 30, 1951, to Milton and Bernice W. Freundel, and
grew up in DC and abroad. He graduated from AIS (New Delhi) in 1969, MIT in
1973, and University of Maryland Law School in 1976. Mark worked in DC and San
Diego in information technology, and was employed by MacDonald, Dettwiler &
Associates through 2008, and by L3 Corp. at the time of his death. Mark was an
enthusiastic tournament bridge player, holding the ACBL rank of Silver Life
Master. He also participated for 23 years in Fantasy Adventure Role-Playing
System, developed by Martin Measel. Mark is survived by his father, of
Washington, DC, and his sister Jane Freundel Levey, niece Emily S. Levey, and
nephew Alexander Freundel Levey, all of Chevy Chase, MD. A Memorial gathering to
honor Mark will take place on Sunday, June 14th, 2 to 4 p.m., at Adventures in
Bridge, 4659 Mission Gorge Place, San Diego. In lieu of flowers, the family
suggests donations to American Diabetes Association, PO Box 11454, Alexandria,
VA 22312.

   GARRETT, LEOLA DORIS July 14, 1924 to April 4, 2009 One more angel has
entered Heaven. Doris was born the last of 16 children and raised in St. Louis,
MO. Throughout her life she was a high achiever, whether it was graduating at
16, singing on the radio, Sunday mornings, with her church choir or balancing
home and career. It was through her church activities she met and married Lloyd
Garrett. They settled in San Diego in 1950. Doris' long and rewarding career
with Pacific Telephone & Telegraph Co., starting as an Operator, Office
Supervisor, VP Board Staff member and Supervisor of the Coin Phone Collection
and Maintenance Dept. Southern Region. Lloyd preceded Doris in death in 1971.
She is survived by her companion of 30 years, Darrell Starkey, and her daughter
Jan Garrett. Her wisdom, mischievious sense of humor and love of life will be
deeply missed by family and friends. Per Doris' request, there will be no
Services.

   HARRIS, SANDRA (SANDY) A longtime Pacific Beach resident, and lover of
animals, Sandra (Sandy) Harris passed away quietly in her home, on Sunday, May
3, 2009. She was known by all for her humor, determination and never ending love
of the ocean. Her friends and family will miss her always. In lieu of flowers,
donations may be made to Vitas Hospice Services of San Diego.

   HARWELL, JOHN Feb. 27, 1962 to April 19, 2009 John was born in Chula Vista
and raised in Sonoma, CA. He was president of Bluewater Pool and Spa in San
Marcos for the past 10 years. He passed away in Port Angeles, WA. In San Diego
county, he is survived by Don, Valerie and James Harwell. He will be buried on
June 8, 2009, in Sonoma, CA. Services will be conducted by Duggins Mortuary,
800-480-1993.

   HOPPHAUS, BETTY E. Betty E. Hopphaus, a beautiful woman of wit, love, and
steadfast prayer, was born to Ada and Thomas Fuller on July 1, 1916, in
Leamington, Ontario, Canada. The family moved seven years later to Detroit,
Michigan. In 1946, Betty married Naval Officer and former POW, Philip Feldscher.
They came to San Diego permanently in 1958, where she was active in PTA, Scouts,
and church, serving as a deaconess of First Presbyterian Church. After the loss
of her first husband in 1983, Betty married David Hopphaus in 1991. They enjoyed
traveling extensively across the United States, parts of Europe and Australia.
On May 4, 2009, Betty went to be with her Lord. She is survived by her husband
David; son, Tom Feldscher and his wife, Debra; son, Don Feldscher and his wife,
Helen; grandchildren and great-grandchildren, as well as a large extended
family. All will miss her deeply. Service will be May 11th, 11:00 a.m., at
Emmanuel Faith Community Church, 639 E. Felicita Ave., Escondido, CA 92025. In
lieu of flowers, Betty requested donations to Emmanuel Faith Community Church.

   JOHNSTON, MARY TRENDLE Mary Trendle Johnston, 89, died peacefully in her home
on April 24, 2009.

   Born in Detroit, Michigan, she is the daughter of George W. Trendle, Sr., one
of the founders of the first radio station in Michigan, WXYZ: "The Last Name in
Radio." Her father, believing that children needed heroes, created The Lone
Ranger, Sergeant Preston of the Yukon, and The Green Hornet for radio and later
for television. Mary touched many lives through her decorated cakes and her
embodiment of the philosophy of unconditional love. She always made everyone
feel important. Mary was active in a variety of civic activities since arriving
in San Diego in 1948. She was secretary and greeter for the Alvarado Estates
Community Association, secretary of PEO Chapter K, and drove Meals on Wheels for
over 20 years. She was active in PTA's at Hardy Elementary, Horace Mann Junior
High, and Crawford High School. She was a trustee of the Finegold School in
Millerton Lake, CA. She participated in Girl Scouts and Indian Maidens with her
daughters; Little League and Ozzie's Band with her sons. A member of Faith
(College Park) Presbyterian Church for 50 years, she served as Deacon and Sunday
School teacher. A genuinely happy person, a loyal friend, a consummate helper,
many people who met her considered her to be a second mother. She lived as she
taught: forgive each other, laugh at the world, have fun, and help someone else.
She is survived by her brother, George W. Trendle, Jr. from Honolulu, HI, and
her children, Mary Kay Johnston, Billy St. John (Bill Johnston), George
Johnston, and Ann Johnston. She also has seven grandchildren and 13
great-grand-children. A Memorial to celebrate Mary will be held on Saturday, May
16, 2009, at 10 a.m., at Faith Presbyterian Church, 5075 Campanile Drive, San
Diego, 92119. Thanks Mom!

   LANGLEY, CONRAD A. CAPT USN (RET) Conrad A. Langley, Jr., 61, died on May 5,
2009. The eldest son of Conrad Sr. and Mary Langley, he was born on October 1,
1947, in Bossier City, Louisiana. He grew up in Bossier City / Shreveport, LA.
Conrad taught high school for a few years after graduating from McNeese State
University in Lake Charles, LA. He joined the Army in June 1972 and transferred
to the Navy in 1974 where he began a lengthy and notable career as a Naval
Aviator. He began his naval career as a flight instructor in Corpus Christi, TX.
In 1977, he transferred to San Diego and began a long and distinguished
affiliation with the S-3A (Viking) community, which at the time, was one of the
Navy's newest and most sophisticated tactical aircraft. He amassed more than
5200 hours flying the S-3A, an incredible feat very few have equaled. He
completed tours of duty with 3 S-3A squadrons, which included many extended
overseas deployments, and eventually commanded his own squadron in 1991. Later
assignments included Operations Officer aboard an aircraft carrier and
Commanding Officer, Sea Control Wing, US Pacific Fleet, where he was responsible
for all S-3A squadron activity in the Pacific Fleet. He served as Chief of Staff
to a Battle Group Commander and Commanding Officer of a major shore facility. He
retired from the Navy in 2002 after 28 years of active service. Conrad fought a
long and valiant battle with lung cancer. His great strength and will kept him
active until just weeks prior to his death. Conrad and his wife enjoyed
traveling and saw much of the world together. He loved to sail and had navigated
waters all over the world. His other great passion in life was golf. Those who
loved and admired him and were honored to call him friend encompass a very large
group. If legacy is defined by friendship and the influence one imparts on
others, then Conrad's legacy is immense. Survivors include his wife, Martha
Shively of San Diego; mother Mary Langley of Houston, TX; aunt Vivian Langley of
Lake Charles, LA; sister Ona Thacker and family of Houston, TX; sister Angelique
Nathan and husband of Walled Lake, MI; brother John Langley and family of
Daphne, AL; and cousin Dendy Talbert of San Diego. In lieu of flowers memorial
donations may be made to the Oncology Gift Fund, Naval Medical Center San Diego,
34800 Bob Wilson Drive, San Diego, CA 92134 or the San Diego Hospice Foundation,
4311 Third Avenue, San Diego, CA 92101 or online at www.sdhospice.org. Services:
Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery, Point Loma, on May 28th, at 11:00 a.m.

   LITRENTA, PETER L. San Diego loses prominent career Naval Officer, public
affairs and civic leader, businessman, and beloved friend, father and husband.
Peter passed away peacefully in his home in Coronado on April 22, 2009
surrounded by his loving family. Peter was born in Racine, Wisconsin, April 25,
1942. He graduated from the University of Notre Dame with a BA in Communications
in 1964 and received an MA in Public Relations from Boston University in 1972.
While stationed in San Diego in 1965, he met his future wife, Linda. It was a
fairy tale love affair, and they were married four months later. Peter and Linda
celebrated their 43rd wedding anniversary this past December. A 25-year career
naval officer, Captain Litrenta directed the U.S. Navy's public affairs
activities in the Mediterranean and the Pacific and coordinated community
relations for the Navy in San Diego. Rear Admiral James Thorp IV, USN said,
"throughout his life, his devotion to family, community, Navy and nation served
as an inspiration to countless uniformed and civilian personnel. He lived his
life by the simple principle of doing the right thing." His career would include
several brushes with history, ranging from the Gulf of Tonkin incident to the
terrorist bombing of the Marine barracks in Beirut. Litrenta organized the news
bureau in Beirut and was spokesman for the Marines when they landed in 1982. He
directed the public relations and media activities for the first U.S. Navy ship
visit to China in 47 years. In 1986, he developed and implemented the SAN DIEGO
RALLY AGAINST DRUGS, which mobilized over 35,000 people to parade down Broadway.
Upon retirement in 1989, Litrenta became Vice President for Communications and
Military Affairs at the Greater San Diego Chamber of Commerce. He then joined
the America's Cup Organizing Committee in charge of media and community
relations. In June 1992, Litrenta was selected to direct the activities of the
San Diego Port Tenants Association. He joined Manchester Financial in March of
1996. Litrenta became chairman of the San Diego Port Tenants Association and
upon relinquishing that post, was elected Director Emeritus. During a ceremony
marking the transition, Litrenta was commended by representatives of the
California State Legislature, the County of San Diego, the City of San Diego and
the Port of San Diego for his "outstanding community service, leadership, and
unselfish commitment to numerous non-profit and charitable organizations." He
formed his own successful one-man consulting firm, Integrity-Ink, in 2002.
Litrenta served as president of the San Diego Fleet Week Foundation and was
inducted into the Fleet Week Hall of Fame. He helped spearhead efforts to bring
the USS Midway to San Diego and was a member of the Mayor's BRAC Task Force. He
served as a board member of the San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce as
Chairman of Military Affairs, the San Diego USO, the San Diego Convention and
Visitors' Bureau, the USS Midway Museum, the San Diego Taxpayers Association,
and the Holiday and Poinsettia Bowls. Litrenta was President of the Coronado
Schools Foundation and as a member of the Coronado Rotary, organized "Team Pete"
for the Relay for Life in Coronado and led his family and friends in the fight
against cancer. "Pete's love for his family and his commitment to honor, duty
and country, have been an inspiration and privilege for me to share this last
twenty years," said Dale Vandergaw, his close friend, "I will always treasure
his warmth, kindness, humility and friendship. Pete was truly a unique and
special man that made a difference in many lives." Papa Doug Manchester said,
"Peter was a great public affairs advisor and communicator, and had a great
insight and wisdom about people and their behavior. He had an ability to connect
with people, and not just in his many different professions; but his warmth and
integrity set Peter apart as a trusted colleague and friend. He not only worked
side by side with me during the planning and construction of the Manchester
Grand Hyatt, but also continued to be by my side as a lifetime friend. I will
truly miss him." One of Peter's great joys was serving on the team selection
committee for the annual Holiday Day Bowl Game, "Peter loved college football,
especially Notre Dame, his alma mater. His great vision and insight, while still
on active duty in San Diego, led to the unique partnership and relationship the
Pacific Life Holiday Bowl enjoys with the Navy and Marine Corps today,'' said
Bruce Binkowski, Executive Director of the Pacific Life Holiday Day Bowl.
Litrenta is survived by his wife Linda, his daughters Danielle, LyAnne (David
Barnes), and Katie (Scott Hart), one grandson, Tyler Hart, and his brother David
Litrenta of Racine, Wisconsin. He was preceded in death by his brother, Edward
Litrenta. A Memorial Service will be held at 11:00 a.m. on May 18th on board the
USS Midway Aircraft Carrier Museum. Donations in Peter's name may be made to the
USS Midway Museum, 910 N. Harbor Dr, San Diego 92132, or the Coronado Relay for
Life, 2655 Camino del Rio N, Ste. 100, San Diego 92108.

   LYNCH, RAYMOND "RAY" June 20, 1932 to April 30, 2009 Ray Lynch, 76, of El
Cajon, passed away on Thursday. Survivors include his wife of 52 years, Peggy
Lynch; daughter Peggy R. Kent; son Eddie Lynch; four grandchildren and one
great-granddaughter; sister Mary Edith Moore; brother Donald Lynch; and several
special nieces and nephews. Private Memorial will be held at a later date.

   MARRA, PETER S. June 15, 1918 to April 27, 2009 Peter Marra entered eternity
with family by his side. Born and raised in NYC, he studied at Cooper Union and
New York University, earning two engineering degrees. He became a Navy Seabee in
1943 and was assigned to the 133rd Naval Construction Battalion that fought at
Iwo Jima. After the war, he supervised the design of the port of Monrovia,
Liberia. He married Gloria Chistoni on September 13, 1947. Peter joined a New
York civil engineering firm in 1949 and later settled his family in North
Caldwell, NJ. In 1959, he founded his own firm and served as engineer for three
towns in New Jersey. After 30 years, he sold the business and, in 1998, Peter
and Gloria moved to San Diego. From his home, Peter organized an extensive
writing and petitioning campaign to get the Presidential Unit Citation (PUC)
awarded to the 133rd NCB, for its valor at Iwo Jima. In February 1997, he
published an article in Naval History, "Iwo Jima Seabees Stay Unsung," arguing
that while other units at Iwo Jima received the PUC, the 133rd, enduring the
highest casualty count of any Seabee unit in history, did not. Despite his
efforts, the PUC was never granted. Peter is survived by his wife, Gloria, son
Ken, daughter Janice Gruter, and six grandchildren Noelle, Jennae, and Dianne
Marra; and Derek, Lindsay, and Lauren Gruter. A noon Funeral Mass will be
celebrated Tuesday, May 12th, at St. Gregory the Great Catholic Church in
Scripps Ranch. Interment will follow at Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery.

   McCARRON, PATRICK FRANK May 12, 1936 to April 27, 2009 Patrick McCarron, 72,
died on April 27th at his home in Bullhead City, Arizona. He was born on May 12,
1936, in Los Angeles. Pat served as a Paratrooper in the 82nd Airborne Division
in the Korean War. He retired from San Diego Cement Masons Union in 1992. Pat
was preceded in death by his sister, Dottie, and his brother Larry. He is
survived by his wife, Jackie, of 14 years and his younger sister Mary Lou. Pat
also leaves behind nine children from his previous marriage to Diane (Calvert).
Pat had 21 grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. Memorial Service will be
at Desert Lawn Cemetery in Mohave Valley, AZ, on May 16th.

   MOIR, Jr., JAMES James Moir Jr. passed away on April 16, 2009, in Washington
State. Jim was born in Darby, PA, on February 13, 1949. He was the beloved son
of James Sr. and Marlys (Marty) Moir, loving husband of Leslie Moir, stepfather
to Jason Wheeler (Sarah Sutherland Wheeler), Nathan Wheeler, and Kellen Wheeler.
He was the beloved brother of Gail (Carlo) Gibellato of Sylvania, OH, and Vicki
(Steve) Perry of Vista, CA. He will also be missed by many nieces and nephews.
Jim graduated from Heidelberg College in Ohio, and received a masters degree
from the University of New Mexico. He worked as a compliance engineer for
several companies throughout the U.S. His hobbies included wood working and
stained glass, but his passion was playing the bag pipes. Jim played at
competition level with many pipe and drum groups, and loved playing for his
family and friends. Memorial Services will be held on Tuesday, May 12th, at 7:00
p.m., at the La Jolla United Methodist Church, 6063 La Jolla Blvd., La Jolla,
CA.

   NEEB, LEWIS HERMAN Captain Lewis Herman Neeb, USN (Ret) passed away
peacefully in his sleep on March 18, 2009, in Cincinnati, Ohio. He entered the
Navy as a "90 Day Wonder" from Notre Dame after graduating from Arizona State
Teachers College. Captain Neeb participated in the Pacific Campaign of World War
II aboard the wooden hulled ship PCS-1404. He attended submarine school in 1948
and began submarine duty in the Pacific Fleet aboard USS Redfish (SS 395), USS
Tang (SS 563), and his first command USS Seafox (SS 402). Following graduate
school at Stanford University, his tours included command of Submarine Division
11 and COMSUBPAC Staff in Pearl Harbor, Submarine Squadron 14 in Norfolk and
Joint Strategic Target Planning Staff at Offutt AFB outside Omaha, Nebraska.
Captain Neeb commanded USS Paul Revere (APA 248) and Submarine Squadron III in
San Diego. After retiring from the Navy, Captain Neeb worked with Viking
Industries and eventually became its President. Every time Captain Neeb went to
sea, his wife of over 50 years, Bess Herron Neeb (passed away in 2003) of
Superior, Arizona, purchased rental property in San Diego resulting in Captain
Neeb being landlord to over 80 tenants when he passed. Captain Neeb was a member
of San Diego Yacht Club, the Navy League and the Submarine Veterans of
Cincinnati. Captain Neeb is survived by his sons, Lewis Herman Neeb, Jr. of
Carlsbad, CA, and Commander John Gilcher Neeb, USN (Ret) of Cincinnati, OH; his
grandchildren, Courtney Goodwin of Stafford, VA, John Neeb, Jr. of Cincinnati,
OH, Trevor Neeb and Gabriel Neeb of San Diego, and great-grand-daughters,
Elizabeth, Katelyn and Samantha Neeb of Cincinnati, OH. Captain Neeb will be
interred in the Neeb family plot in Spring Grove Cemetery in Cincinnati.

   PAITZ, CHRISTA H. ZANDER Christa H. Zander Paitz, 70, was born to the late
Helmut and Scharlotte Zander, July 4, 1938, in Leegerbruch Osthavelland,
Germany. Christa spent most of her young life in Germany before moving to
California in 1970. She worked most of her career at Bank of America where she
advanced through pure determination and dedication to Vice President of
Operations before retiring in 1998. She later returned to work at Gene Therapy
Systems before moving to Solomon Interior Design. She had a passion for cooking,
interior decorating and gardening. She had the ability to bring everything she
touched come to life. Christa is survived by her brother, Wolfgang Zander; her
children, Ronald Vargo, Christina Picotte and M. Peter Paitz. She is also
survived by two grandchildren and special partner, James Tilley. In lieu of
flowers, the family is requesting that donations be made to St. David's
Episcopal Church. A Service will be held at 1:00 p.m., Saturday, May 16, 2009,
at St. David's Episcopal Church.

   PETERSON, PATRICIA M. SAN MARCOS, CA She was born May 18, 1931, in Chicago,
IL. On May 2, 2009, she went home in peace and repentance to be with her Savior
Jesus Christ. She was 77. She was the mother of Claudette Tabler-Guthrie of
Fallbrook, CA, and Robert Peterson of Pasadena, CA. She will be missed by her
devoted husband, Stan. With her death, it has broken his heart. He will miss her
most in their total love and sacred allegiance to each other. Private Services
will be held at the Columbarium in Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery. Thanks be
to God for all prayers from the Anglican Church of the Resurrection (Fr. Eric
Menees) and so many others within the Communion of Saints. Also, the faithful
services of Elizabeth Hospice and the San Marcos Cottage. She also loved the
Salvation Army. Glory too, must be given to the Divine Mercy of the Holy Trinity
and the Blessed Virgin Mary. Arrangements by CSI in Vista, CA.

   ROBERTS, WILLIAM FREDERICK "BILL" April 18, 1924 to May 5, 2009 Bill passed
on to his new life on Tuesday, May 5, 2009, at the age of 85.

   Having been born in Red Lodge, Montana, he then traveled with his family
westward to Los Angeles, California, in 1929 where he and his sister Eleanor
were raised by his parents Fred and Edna. He graduated from Garfield High School
in Los Angeles in 1941 then from California Technical Institute in Pasadena in
1945 with a degree in Engineering. He was in the Navy during World War II, from
which he retired with the rank of Lieutenant. He was employed in the engineering
field for several years before becoming a stockbroker for the remainder of his
career. He retired in 1990. Bill married Emelia May (Emily) Salmon in 1952, and
they had four children whom they raised in Whittier, California. In 1998, they
moved to Valley Center, California, for their retirement years. Bill was
preceded in death by his oldest son Ronald. He is survived by his wife, Emily;
his children, Vivian, Norman, and Lorraine; his grandchildren, Joshua, Kristen,
Rachel, Ronald, and Noah; and great-grandchildren, Jacob, Hayley, and Mara. A
Memorial Service will be held Wednesday, May 13th, at 1:00 p.m., at McLeod
Mortuary, 1919 E. Valley Parkway, Escondido, CA 92027. In lieu of flowers, the
family kindly suggests donations in his memory to the Alzheimer's Association
and/or American Heart Association.

   ROBINSON, EDWARD FRANCIS Edward F. Robinson, 72, born January 6, 1938, and
passed away on April 29, 2009. Born in Omaha, NE, he grew up in Missouri, Texas,
and California. Ed enlisted in the Army at 16. He traveled through the U.S.,
Europe and Asia, served in Vietnam and awarded medals and citations. He was a
self-taught historian and artist with showings in Japan and San Diego. His last
time-line project was of and displayed by San Diego. He is survived by his
loving daughter, Mary, his son-in-law Doran, grandson Chico, and his wife,
Billie Jo. Donations: Veterans Museum of San Diego or, because he was a lifelong
animal lover, to the San Diego Dept. of Animal Services.

   ROCKWELL, FAY ALBERT "ROCKY" Sept. 27, 1922 to Nov. 17, 2008 Fay Albert
"Rocky" Rockwell died November 17, 2008, in Palm Desert, CA, due to brake
failure of his motorhome. He was 86. Rocky was born in Brownsdale MN, to Paul H.
and Gertrude Rockwell on September 27, 1922. On December 15, 1942, he joined the
U.S. Navy and served 3-1/2 years in World War II. In 1960, Rocky married Della
Jessee Boehler and in 1969 they moved to Pt. Loma. He worked at National Steel
Shipyards and later at Century 21 Rockwell Realtors in Hillcrest, CA. Rocky was
a very loving and attentive husband and stepfather. He is survived by his wife,
Della; his stepson, Edward Boehler and wife, Diane, of Ocean Beach, CA; four
brothers, Paul Rockwell and wife, Wanda, of Westerville, OH; Ross Rockwell and
wife, Lois, of Austin, MN; Guy Rockwell and wife, Marcella, and Harry Rockwell,
all of Brownsdale, MN. His sister, Norrine Rockwell Monsen, her husband, Harold
Monsen and Rocky's parents preceded him in death. Rocky was a true gentleman and
he will be missed by all who knew him. Services will be at St. Peter's by the
Sea Lutheran Church, 1371 Sunset Cliffs Boulevard, Pt. Loma, on May 13, 2009, at
2 p.m. Burial at Brownsdale, MN. Blessed is his memory!

   ROSS, R. COLBY JR. Colby Ross passed away May 1, 2009, at his Leucadia home
of 40 years. He was born February 6, 1931, in Los Angeles, CA, only son of Ralph
and Nora Ross. A graduate of Black-Foxe Military Institute in Los Angeles, Colby
then attended, and was graduated from the United States MilitaryAcademy at West
Point in 1954. Following military service in Germany, Colby settled in Southern,
CA, where he established a career in manufacturing, later founded Display
Devices, Inc. and raised his family. In 1953, prior to the Army vs. Navy
football game standing next to a tarp covered crate and before the entire corps
of cadets, Colby was asked to announce the surprise capture of Navy's mascot
"Billy" a goat. He recently said of the event, "To this day I've not seen such
spontaneous, unbridled joy in one place." An inspired Army team went on to win
the game. Colby's life was greatly influenced by his passion for his country and
politics. Such was his love for his family and moments shared enjoying the
performing arts, chatting with old and new friends, sipping vodka martinis and
watching the "ponies" race each summer at Del Mar. Colby is survived by his
Swiss bride, "the love of his life" of 40 years; Claudine Schupbach Ross, his
children, Lansing, Colette, Colby III, Jesse and Juliette; grandchildren, Colin,
Bevin, Adria, Jansen, Mason and a grandson on the way, as well as an extended
Swiss family of a brother, sisters and nieces and nephews. Our "Papa" will be
greatly missed. The family has asked that in lieu of flowers to please consider
a donation, in Colby's honor, to Casa de Amparo: www.casadeamparo.org.

   SELIS, ROBERT Our beloved Dr. Robert Selis died peacefully at home on May 4,
2009. He was surrounded by his loving wife of 30 years, Julie Selis, and all
eight of his children. Known best for his wonderful sense of humor and love of
life, Dr. Selis showed compassion to all who knew him. As a dentist, his
patients adored him and thought of him as a friend first, and not many people
can say that about their dentist. Bob loved to laugh and the image of him taking
off his glasses to wipe tears of laughter from his eyes will always stay in our
hearts. Bob was born in Payne, Ohio, on August 22, 1935, as a first generation
American to Gabrielle and Hubert Selis who emigrated from Belgium. From the age
of 10, Bob knew he wanted to become a dentist. He attended Wabash College in
Indiana and transferred to New Mexico A & M to finish his college education. Bob
then attended dental school at St. Louis University and upon graduation,
enlisted in the Navy. As an officer, he served as a dentist at the Naval
Training Center in Point Loma. In 1958, Bob married Sally Conley and together
they had eight beautiful children. Dr. Selis practiced dentistry for 49 years in
San Diego. He served on the Dental Peer Review Board for over 15 years and
taught dentistry at the University of Southern California. Bob flourished
through his passion as a gifted, one-of-a-kind dentist. He took his time with
patients, listened carefully to their problems and life stories, told jokes to
put them at ease and gave shots that were never felt. Many patients became
family friends. "Doc" was respected by his peers, loved by his patients and had
a devoted staff who would do anything for him. In 1980, Bob married Julie Anne
Ruth. Together they loved their horses, camping, Hawaii, the Eastern Sierras,
their home in Bishop, road trips in the motor home and living life with
laughter. Whatever they did, they did together. Bob loved to fish, especially
fly fishing for trout. Fishing brought him great peace, if not so many fish. He
was the life of the party, as his friends and children will attest to. His
dearest friendships span over 45 years. Three years ago, Bob sold his practice
and attempted to retire, but his family, friends and patients would not let him
off so easily. Part time, Dr. Selis continued to practice dentistry at his
Mission Valley office as well as the Mammoth Lakes Hospital. Bob is survived by
his wife, Julie; his children, Gabrielle Xavier, Lee Posnock, Eve Selis-Gulotta,
Jeanne Selis, Camille Hill, Peter Selis, Dan Selis, and Joe Selis, as well as
his sister, Virginia Cole and her husband Bill of Mishawaka, Indiana. "Daddy
Bob," as his 24 grandchildren called him, also had three great-grandchildren.
Nieces and nephews Trace, Renee, Dawn and Billy, Jr. will miss him dearly. It
has been an honor to be a part of Bob's life. He was a special man and great
personality who left imprints on all our hearts. Bob's legacy was to treat
people with dignity, kindness and laughter which is exactly how he fought
against pancreatic cancer. Our hearts are broken, but our lives are filled with
amazing memories of laughter, love and twinkling blue eyes. You were adored and
will forever be missed, Bob, and we are so very grateful for the time we had
with you.

   A Celebration of Life Service will be held at the Catamaran Hotel, 3999
Mission Blvd., San Diego, on the bay side lawn on Friday, May 15, 2009, at 3
p.m. The web link to view photos is www.eveselis.com/DrSelis. In lieu of
flowers, donations are asked to be made in Bob's memory to the American Cancer
Society.

   SILVERNAIL, EDITH ALICE KANAGY Edith Alice Kanagy Silvernail passed away
peacefully at her home in Santee, CA, on April 22, 2009, at the age of 92,
following her brave and graciously fought battle to overcome cancer. Survived by
her beloved brothers, Lewis Kanagy and Warren Kanagy; sister-in-law, Dorothy
Menard Kanagy; son, Lowell Silvernail II; son-in-law, Joel Mur; daughters,
Rosamond Silvernail Burger and Joanne Silvernail Nivison; daughter-in-law,
Janice Johnson Silvernail; grandsons, Michael Nivison, Lowell Silvernail III,
Seth Silvernail and Luke Burger; granddaughter-in-law, Juliana Gaspar
Silvernail; nephew, Dale Kanagy and nieces, Linda Kanagy Ibe and Isobel Kanagy
Hausotter. "Dede" will be deeply missed but with us always in our hearts,
forever young. Born at the family homestead on the range in Washington state to
Rosamond Stripp Kanagy and Henry Cowles Kanagy on September 3, 1916, she was
raised in San Diego and was a member of the Hoover High School class of '33, the
first to attend all three years in the new school. She enjoyed staying in touch
with her former classmates through her membership in the "Hoover Firsts" who met
regularly through the years. She had wonderful times with her many dear friends,
especially her Rummikub pals, at Cameron's Mobile Estates. Edith had a green
thumb and tended her garden at 92, was a talented seamstress, enjoyed dancing
well into her late eighties and leaves behind, her valid California driver's
license and red hot Chevy Malibu. Edith lived a life of service dedicating
herself to her adoring family and her community. As a young mother, she taught
Sunday School and supported her children's many activities sewing costumes, cool
sports shirts and prom dresses, chaperoning special activities and serving
frequently as "room mother" and on the P.T.A. boards of all of their schools.
Edith was a founding member of the San Diego Children's Hospital and Health
Center Auxiliary and served as a volunteer for 40 years from 1953 to 1993; a
charter member of the La Mesa Kiwanis Club where she was active for 24 years;
delivered meals as a Meals on Wheels volunteer for 23 years and enjoyed her
participation in social and charitable projects as she served on the boards of
many more organizations including the Tuesday Club at Cameron's. A Memorial
Service will be celebrated at 11 a.m., on Saturday, May 30, 2009, at Santee
United Methodist Church, 8964 N. Magnolia Ave., Santee, CA 92071. Please join us
in remembering Edith by visiting her online guest book and sharing your thoughts
and fond memories.

   STEVENSON, WILLIAM CAMERON William Cameron Stevenson passed from this life on
May 1, 2009. He was born in Los Angeles on August 1, 1928, the youngest of five
children. Bill committed most of his life to his Catholic faith, beloved wife
Pat, and his sons; boating and golfing were his favorite pastimes. Bill was a
Knight in the Equestrian Order of the Holy Sepulchre of Jerusalem, a member of
Elks, and a member of the Knights of Columbus. He was a cherished father to sons
William, John (Connie), Patrick, Robert (Judy), Michael (Jennifer), and James
(Lori), and "Papa" to eight grandchildren and five great-grand-children. Devoted
to his special fiancée Grace and dear sister Dorothy, Bill was predeceased by
wife Patricia and siblings Thomas, Helen and Laura. We know they must be
rejoicing in heaven together! Rosary: 7 p.m., May 12th, Goodbody Mortuary, 5027
El Cajon Blvd., S.D. Mass: 11 a.m., May 13th, St. Therese Catholic Church, 6016
Camino Rico, S.D. Donations: St. Therese Youth Building Fund, 6016 Camino Rico,
S.D. 92120 or the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, 9150 Chesapeake Drive, Suite 100,
San Diego, CA 92123.

   SULLIVAN, SUZY 1919 to 2009 Suzy Sullivan was born a shining light to doting
parents on August 6, 1919, in Porirua, New Zealand. She died peacefully in her
home on April 28th surrounded by her family. Beatrix Suzanne Bothamley was
working as a nurse when handsome U.S. Marine William Sullivan swept her off her
feet. Following their marriage in 1943, Suzy made her way to the U.S. by Navy
ship with fellow wartime brides. As Bill forged a career in the military, Suzy
was an exemplary Marine wife, moving with him around the world with their
children in tow, always the loving mother, gracious hostess and community
organizer. They retired to Vista, CA, in 1971, where Suzy quickly became a
valuable resource for many community efforts. The Boys & Girls Club of Vista,
the Friends of the Library, Daughters of the British Empire, North Junior Court,
Vista Rotary, Country Friends and the ESL program, and so many more all
benefited from Suzy's tireless fundraising, organizing and time. In 1994, she
was named Woman for the Year by the Salvation Army of San Diego County for her
many good works. She loved her community as family and was honored to make a
difference. Suzy was an avid bird watcher, gardener and scuba diver. She was
full of adventure and loved to travel the world. Her last dive was while
celebrating her 86th birthday in La Paz, Mexico. The always beautiful and
elegant Beatrix Suzanne Sullivan was preceded in death by her devoted husband
William, her son William Joseph, and her daughter Barbara Erin. Her daughters,
Westley and Michele, six grandchildren, eight great-grandchildren, nieces and
nephews and many loving friends survive her. All will dearly miss her company. A
Memorial Service for everyone who loved her will be held on Saturday, May 23rd,
2:00 p.m., at All Saints Episcopal Church in Vista, followed by a gathering at
Suzy's home.

   SUTTON, MARIA M. Mrs. Maria M. Sutton passed away on Friday, May 1, 2009, at
Balboa Naval Hospital. Maria was born in Hong Kong, China, and came to America
in 1959 and moved to San Diego in 1966. She was well known for her cooking
skills. She had touched many lives and acquired many friends, and will be missed
by all. She is survived by her long-time companion Jim Abel; her sister
Elizabeth Tsoi; brother-in-law, Kin Tsoi; and her nephew, Michael Tsoi and his
wife Angel, and great-niece Jade. Her Funeral Services will be held at 9 a.m. on
Monday, May 11, 2009, at Goodbody Mortuary, 5027 El Cajon Blvd., San Diego
California. Maria will be buried with her late husband at Fort Rosecrans
National Cemetery, at 2 p.m. of the same day.

   VERDUGO, ELIZABETH M. Beautiful daughter born on May 10, 1956, to Larry
Verdugo Jr. (deceased) and Adella E. Murray of Chula Vista, died peacefully on
April 14, 2009, at the age of 52. Elizabeth has two brothers, Larry Verdugo III
(deceased) and Robert J. Verdugo of El Cajon; two sisters, Sandra Verdugo of
Chula Vista and Bennie Jean Foster (Martin) of Spring Valley; one daughter,
Christina M. Verdugo-Pazera of Las Vegas, NV; one niece, Adella M. Foster; two
nephews, Larry Verdugo IV and Robert J. Verdugo II of Spring Valley; and two
great-nephews, Jesse Ray and Juliano Martin Nunez also of Spring Valley.
Elizabeth attended Harborside Elementary and Castle Park Junior and Senior High
School. Elizabeth worked for Remax Elite in Las Vegas where she was very
successful. She had achieved multimillion dollar producer many times.

   Happy birthday, Lizzie. We miss you Sissie and will see you again. Beautiful,
beautiful you. In lieu of flowers, please send donations to: Nathan Adelson
Hospice in memory of Elizabeth M. Verdugo, 3391 N. Buffalo, Las Vegas, NV 89129.

   WARNER, ARTHUR B. "BARNEY" Arthur B. "Barney" Warner died April 26, 2009, in
Colorado. He grew up in Minnesota, lived in La Jolla and Lakeside from
1956-1985, then Fresno and finally, Colorado. He and his late wife, Judy, raised
four daughters, Julie, Barbara, Marcia and Betsy. He was a World War II Black
Cat pilot, champion athlete and sailor and brought the first coin-operated
laundries to the West Coast. Services and inurnment: June 6, 2009, in Minnesota.
Guestbook at Legacy.com.

   IN MEMORIAM

   KOTARSKI, JAN Eleven years have past since you left us. Yet your name is
still spoken. You are not forgotten. Your Friends

   MERCHANT, HORTENSE (TATO) Happy Mother's Day, Mom. Always and Forever, Your
Loving Family

   NOTICE: Death and Funeral Notices submitted may be used in print or digital
form in any publication or service authorized by The Union-Tribune Publishing
Co. E-mail notices to: funeralnotices@uniontrib.com or fax to: 619-293-1462

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2009


                              231 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                               May 8, 2009 Friday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: Looking back, years after Penn gene-therapy death

BYLINE: By Marie McCullough; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   After almost a decade of reflection, University of Pennsylvania researcher
James M. Wilson says problems with the gene-therapy experiment that killed an
Arizona teenager were "absolutely unacceptable" and ultimately "my
responsibility."

   "I have tried to admit where I did wrong, where I fell short," Wilson, 53,
said this week in his first media interview about Jesse Gelsinger's death in
September 1999. "I have tremendous regrets about what happened. I feel
absolutely awful about what it has done to the family, to this university, to
the field."

   Gelsinger's death set off years of government investigations, congressional
hearings, and efforts to improve human-subject protections, while the much-hyped
but unproven field of gene therapy shriveled and retrenched. In recent years, it
has just begun to report some success.

   Wilson is still a gene-therapy researcher at Penn, but his well-funded
laboratory is focused on the basic test-tube and animal studies that he now says
should have been done a decade ago. Recently, he has been giving cautionary
lectures to colleagues at Penn and elsewhere on the "lessons" he learned from
the tragedy that reshaped his career.

   In February, he detailed those lessons in a commentary that he had agreed to
write as part of the U.S. Department of Justice's 2005 legal settlement with
him, his two primary co-researchers, and their institutions. That settlement
slapped a $517,000 fine on Penn, along with research restrictions, but it did
not require admissions of wrongdoing.

   "I think it's a 6,000-word apology," Wilson said of his six-page commentary.
It was published in Molecular Genetics and Metabolism because the relatively
little-known journal agreed to give him all the space he wanted.

   That apology was not unqualified. In carefully parsed, often convoluted
sentences, Wilson contended, as he always has, that Gelsinger's fatal immune
response was unforeseeable and that previous volunteers had no serious adverse
reactions to the therapy. Federal investigators disagreed.

   Gelsinger's father, Paul, who became a champion of stronger protection of
human subjects, dismissed Wilson's piece.

   "I don't see it as an apology at all," he said from his Tucson, Ariz., home.
"The only thing he regrets is that Jesse died. But he has never accepted
responsibility for that. There's never been an acknowledgment of wrongdoing."
(Penn settled with Paul Gelsinger for an undisclosed sum within two months of
the death.)

   Colleagues, in contrast, commended Wilson.

   Paul Lanken, a Penn professor of medicine and bioethics who invited Wilson to
lecture to medical students in January, said: "He came across as a sincere
person who has done a lot of reflection. He acknowledged his shortcomings."

   Penn bioethicist Art Caplan said Wilson's self-critique was unusual, if not
unheard of, in the staid forum of scientific literature.

   "I've never seen anything like this - this sort of putting on a hair shirt
and saying, 'Here's what I learned' and 'Don't go down a path that leads to
problems I encountered.' "

   Wilson's latest hard-earned lesson appears today in the influential journal
Science. He urges stem-cell scientists not to rush prematurely into human
testing - as he and other gene-therapy researchers did.

   "The death of an 18-year-old, Jesse Gelsinger, in a gene-therapy clinical
trial that I led . . . initiated a chain of events that seriously derailed the
field," Wilson wrote.

   Jesse Gelsinger was exuberant and fun-loving, despite a genetic defect that
caused his rare liver-enzyme disorder. His own illness was controlled with diet
and drugs, but his heart went out to parents of babies with a deadly form of the
disease. His desire to help find a cure, his father said, prompted Jesse to
volunteer for Wilson's trial.

   At Penn, he was given trillions of transporter molecules - inactivated cold
viruses - that carried a normal gene into his liver in hopes of replacing the
defective gene.

   But the transporters, called a "vector," triggered an immune reaction so
devastating that Gelsinger's organs failed.

   Wilson had much less contact with volunteers than the other primary
researchers, Steven Raper of Penn and Mark Batshaw of Children's National
Medical Center in Washington. However, Wilson was the high-profile head of
Penn's gene-therapy institute, and he had applied to the Food and Drug
Administration for permission to test the experimental treatment on humans.

   When Gelsinger became the world's first gene-therapy victim, Wilson was at
the eye of the regulatory and media storm.

   His apparent lack of sympathy did not help. After the Justice Department
settlement, for example, Wilson issued a short statement through Penn that said
he would continue to devote himself to his lab research; he didn't mention
Gelsinger.

   This week Wilson said: "There isn't a day goes by that I don't think about
it. It was humbling for me in many ways, including sort of a realistic
reassessment of what we know and don't know - what we really know. It led to a
dramatic change in the way I approach this field and focus our work."

   Wilson's 90-person lab, which has $11 million in grants from federal and
private sources, is focused on finding better, safer "vectors" to ferry
therapeutic genes into cells. A handful of vectors existed in 1999. Since then,
his lab has discovered more than 100 that it ships worldwide to researchers
studying genetic diseases of many organs.

   Human trials using some of the new vectors are now being planned. Wilson, who
is banned from conducting human research until next year, said he would probably
stay away from it.

   Why did he think he was ready to expose humans to the little-understood risks
a decade ago?

   "I was naive," he said. "The technologies we had available to us at the time
were inadequate."

   In his commentary, Wilson pointed to miscommunication, overwork and lack of
funding as factors - but not excuses - for lapses that occurred. He acknowledged
that federal investigators were right about many of those lapses: toxic effects,
monkey deaths, and Wilson's financial ties to a gene-therapy company were not
disclosed to volunteers. Federal reporting rules were not strictly followed.

   And, perhaps the most serious failing: Members of Wilson's team violated
their own study protocol when they gave the treatment to Gelsinger. His blood
ammonia level - a sign of liver malfunction - rose above the predetermined
threshold before he got the treatment. But since it fell back into the safe
zone, the team decided to proceed.

   "It wasn't OK," said Wilson, who noted that he was not consulted at the time.
"Something as critical as [eligibility criteria], there shouldn't be any
ambiguity."

   Wilson takes heart that Penn and other institutions have made "substantial
reforms . . . in terms of oversight of human subject research."

   Caplan, among others, does not.

   "I don't think a lot has changed," Caplan said. "We still haven't figured out
how to deal with informed consent. We hope conflicts of interest are
well-managed, but revelations that come out almost weekly tell me it isn't. And
deaths continue to occur."

   On a personal note, Wilson, who is married with four children aged 14 to 23,
said the fallout from the trial taught him to "back off."

   "I've learned that it's more fun and more productive not to drive so hard,"
he said. "Give people space. They're happier. They have lives. You need to step
away from all this. I do that, too."

   Despite all Wilson has learned, his answer to a crucial question is
equivocal: Would Jesse Gelsinger have lived if not for the problems in the
trial?

   "I don't know," he said.

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or
mmccullough@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2009


                              232 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            April 30, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: COLLEGES

BODY:

   --- Loyola University ---

   Five Loyola University New Orleans public relations students were chosen as
finalists in the 2009 Bateman Case Study Competition. The annual competition,
organized by the Public Relations Student Society of America and the Consumer
Bankers Association, asks teams from universities to tackle a full-scale public
relations campaign for a nonprofit organization.

   Bateman team members Janine Sheedy, Heather Miranne, Sarah Mackota, Ashley
Sutton and Vicki Voelker are students in Loyola's School of Mass Communication
in the College of Social Sciences. Their campaign focused on showing high-school
students the correlation between attending college and maximizing earning
potential.

   Teams from Loyola, the University of Maryland and Michigan State University
were chosen from 77 national entries to present their campaigns in person before
the CBA in Washington, D.C., in May. A panel of judges from the CBA and the
Public Relations Society of America will select the first-, second- and
third-place teams.

   Public Relations Professor J. Cathy Rogers advises Bateman competitors.

   For information on Loyola's Bateman Team, contact Rogers at crogers@loyno.edu

   --- LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans ---

   Sharell Bindom, a student in the MD/PhD program at LSU Health Sciences Center
New Orleans, received the Mead Johnson Research Award in Endocrinology and
Metabolism from the American Physiological Society at the 2009 experimental
biology meeting April 18-22 in New Orleans.

   The award, which includes a check for $500, recognizes the graduate student,
resident or postdoctoral fellow who presents the best abstract for research in
the area of Endocrinology and Metabolism at the meeting. Bindom works in the
laboratory of Eric Lazartigues, assistant professor of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics at LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans.

   Her abstract is titled "ACE2 gene therapy leads to Ang-(1-7)-mediated
restoration of glucose metabolism in diabetic mice."

   --- University of New Orleans ---

   The University of New Orleans and the Louisiana Endowment for the Humanities
are partnering to offer a Summer Teaching Institute for Advanced Studies,
"Putting PRIME TIME in New Orleans Public Schools," to be held June 8 through
July 2 at UNO. Aplication deadline is Friday.

   The program is designed to show kindergarten through eighth grade New Orleans
public school teachers how to implement the PRIME TIME family reading
methodology in their classrooms to enhance their humanities-based class
discussions.

   Nancy Dixon of the UNO English Department will direct the institute, which
offers participants a $750 stipend, three hours of UNO graduate credit and 45
CLUs.

   For information, contact Dixon at ndixon@uno.edu or 504.202.0121.

   --- Xavier University ---

   National political strategist Donna Brazile will deliver the keynote address
and receive an honorary degree, and actor-director-producer Forest Whitaker will
receive an honorary degree when Xavier University of Louisiana holds its 82nd
annual commencement on May 9 at 10 a.m. at the Kiefer Lakefront Arena.

   Xavier's annual Baccalaureate Mass will be held May 8 at 7 p.m. in the
gymnasium.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2009


                              233 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            April 29, 2009 Wednesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 531 words

HEADLINE: UNO psychology department receives grant to fix up clinic;
Renovated facility to open in the fall

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   The University of New Orleans' psychology department has received a $144,000
grant from the state Board of Regents to improve its clinic.

   The renovated facility will be open in the fall to serve the community as
well as UNO students, faculty and staff.

   . . . . . . .

   PROGRAM OPEN HOUSE: Tulane University's Teacher Preparation and Certification
Program will hold an open house May 6 to recruit prospective teachers and
discuss the program.

   The free event, in the lobby of Robert C. Cudd Hall, will last from 5 to 7
p.m. Registration is not required. More information is available from program
specialist Monique Hodges at 504.865.5342 or mhodges3@tulane.edu

   . . . . . . .

   RESEARCH AWARD: A local student has won a national prize for an experiment in
which she used gene therapy to improve the metabolism of diabetic mice.

   Sharell Bindom, who's working on a medical degree and a Ph.D. at LSU Health
Sciences Center, has received the American Physiological Society's Mead Johnson
Research Award in Endocrinology and Metabolism, which includes a $500 check.

   . . . . . . .

   APPOINTMENTS: Steve Berrien is Nunez Community College's new vice chancellor
of academic affairs. Berrien, who holds master's and doctoral degrees from
Harvard University, had been dean of academic affairs at Bristol Community
College in Fall River, Mass.

   -- Jill Henkin Glazer of Palm Beach, Fla., and Andrew Wisdom of New Orleans
have been named to the Board of Tulane, the university's governing body. Glazer,
an active volunteer, is a member of Tulane's President's Council. Wisdom, an
investment consultant for Equitas Capital Advisors, is co-founder of Turbo Squid
Inc., a startup technology company. He also is the great-grandson of A.B.
Freeman, for whom Tulane's College of Business Administration is named.

   . . . . . . .

   HONORS: Gerald Cannon, an assistant professor of visual arts at Loyola
University, has been invested with the Edward and Adelaide Benjamin
Distinguished Professorship in Music and Fine Arts.

   -- Tulane President Scott Cowen is one of this year's recipients of the Weiss
Awards, which honor civic and humanitarian activities. The others are Seletha
Nagin, a community activist and wife of New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin; Dorothy
"Dottie" Reese, a civic leader; and George Shinn, owner of the New Orleans
Hornets.

   -- Loyola music professor Sanford Hinderlie has been invested with the Rita
O. Huntsinger Distinguished Professorship in Music.

   -- Alison McCrary, a second-year law student at Loyola University, is this
year's recipient of the Louisiana State Bar Association's Pro Bono Publico Law
Student Award. The prize honors dedication to providing legal services for the
poor.

   -- Loyola philosophy professor Constance Mui has been invested with the Rev.
Youree Watson, S.J., Distinguished Professorship in Arts and Sciences.

   -- Bradley Troll, a UNO graduate student, has won a full fellowship to attend
the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center's National Playwrights' Conference in July in
New London, Conn. Troll received the O'Neill National Critics Institute
Scholarship during the Kennedy Center American College Theater Festival.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3317.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2009


                              234 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 18, 2009 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Funding problems hit cancer facility;
Bankruptcy filing for Kimmel center

BYLINE: Greg Moran, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: LA JOLLA

BODY:

   LA JOLLA -- The Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
reorganization yesterday, citing a years-long decline in research funding by the
federal government and the larger economic crisis that has hurt nonprofits.

   Jan D'Alvise, the chief executive officer, said the center is hopeful that
the nearby Burnham Institute for Medical Research will acquire part of the
Kimmel center and enable some scientists and staff to continue their research
work.

   Both entities have been in discussions about such a move for months, she
said. Cancer research is done at each of the research centers.

   "We hope that will happen," D'Alvise said. "It would really be a soft landing
for our people."

   John Reed, the president of the Burnham Institute, confirmed that talks had
been ongoing and that Burnham wants to acquire the largest building on the
Kimmel campus where much of the scientific research is being done.

   The center focuses on developing such advanced treatments for cancer as gene
therapy, vaccine research and other measures. Of its approximately 120
employees, 100 are scientists, D'Alvise said.

   It was founded in 1990 as the San Diego Regional Cancer Center and got its
current name in 1995 when Sidney Kimmel made a $5 million donation to the
center's work. He was a retail clothing magnate who has donated millions to
medical research over the years.

   Just two years ago, a $24 million research building and community resource
center opened on the Kimmel center campus.

   Few documents in the court file shed light on the center's woes. D'Alvise
said that additional financial information will be filed with the court starting
Monday.

   She said that the combination of a steady decline over the past seven years
in federal funding from the National Institutes for Health for research, along
with the recession, hit the center hard. Philanthropic donations declined,
D'Alvise said, putting the center in a tight financial bind.

   "Last August and September we realized it was going to take a substantial
amount of money to make the center sustainable," she said, That was when the
center began discussions with Burnham about a possible acquisition.

   Both sides hope that the breathing room and shelter that bankruptcy court
provides financially distressed organizations will allow any acquisition to go
forward, subject to the approval of the court.

   In Chapter 11 proceedings, potential buyers can bid on various assets of the
center, so it is possible another entity could emerge other than Burnham.

   In a statement announcing the filing, the Kimmel center said it hoped the
bankruptcy proceeding would allow it to be acquired by "another nonprofit
research institute with a compatible mission."

   The Burnham Institute clearly fits that criteria. Reed said about half of the
institute's 950 employees are engaged in some kind of cancer research.

   In the meantime, employees at the Kimmel center will still be working,
D'Alvise said:

   "It will be business as usual Monday morning."

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2009


                              235 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2009 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            April 18, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1019 words

HEADLINE: Celebrity Fox makes a point

BYLINE: JOE HENDERSON, jhenderson@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   Actor golfs to show Parkinson's sufferers that they don't have to submit to
disease.

   By JOE HENDERSON

   jhenderson@tampatrib.com

   LUTZ - Michael J. Fox didn't waste a lot of time over the golf ball before
knocking it more than 200 yards down the middle of the 13th fairway. Two or
three dozen people surrounded the tee box, and they broke into spontaneous
applause as the ball took off on its journey.

   Words like "amazing" and "wow" could be overhead in the crowd. One man shook
his head and said to no one in particular, "I don't know how he can do that."

   That's exactly the point of his appearance Friday and today at the Outback
Steakhouse Pro-Am tournament at the TPC Tampa Bay course in northwest
Hillsborough County. The actor who made us laugh on TV shows such as "Family
Ties" didn't just talk about how people with Parkinson's disease don't have to
surrender to its horrors. He showed them.

   "I was really moved by the people who said they had been mistaken for being
drunk or they couldn't get their change together behind the counter and someone
would say, 'That's the thing that Michael Fox has.' At that moment I realized
what a blessing it was and how lucky I was to be in that position and able to
help," he said.

   Fox and his playing partner, Champions Tour pro Tim Simpson, both have
stories to tell and examples to follow. Both are afflicted under the wide
umbrella of neurological disorders - Fox with Parkinson's disease; Simpson with
a movement disorder called essential tremor, which has symptoms similar to
Parkinson's.

   A prominent face

   Fox has been perhaps the most prominent face in the fight against Parkinson's
since 1998, when he announced publicly that he had been diagnosed seven years
earlier with the disease.

   "To give you an idea where my head was at and how big my ego was, I remember
when the doctor told me when I was first diagnosed and my first thought was
like, 'No, you don't know who I am. I'm Michael Fox, the guy on TV. This is not
happening.' It wasn't 'why me?' It was, 'It can't be me.' I couldn't accept it
for about a year," he said.

   He controls the symptoms - trembling, tremors, balance issues - with
medication that can change daily, depending on how the disease chooses to
attack. He was trembling noticeably at the end of a news conference Friday
before playing, but medication allowed him to play.

   "Everyone gets their own version of the disease. You can have five parkies -
I call them that, no disrespect intended - and we'll all be on different kinds
of medication. Some people will swear by something and somebody else will say it
makes them want to throw their kids out the window," he said.

   "I never know what I'm going to be dealing with on a given day. It's a great
excuse for the golf course. I love it when people say stay still over the ball;
that's my favorite line."

   Simpson contracted Lyme disease during a hunting trip in 1991. Shaking,
trembling and symptoms similar to those of Parkinson's disease soon followed. He
was already well established on the PGA Tour by then, with four tournament wins
on the way to $3.4 million in prize winnings, but his career soon plummeted.

   After struggling for more than a decade, Simpson opted for a high-risk,
high-reward treatment called deep brain stimulation.

   He spent more than eight hours on an operating table, conscious while doctors
snaked a cable from his chest into his brain. The cable was attached to a device
implanted into Simpson's chest, sending a signal any time the brain wants to
trigger a Parkinson's symptom. The implant returns a signal through the cable
that zaps the symptom.

   By 2006, Simpson was the Comeback Player of the Year on the Champion's Tour
for pro golfers age 50 and over. Last year, he finished second in two
tournaments.

   "I feel like I was given a second chance to help others," he said.

   Moving forward

   Fox had major surgery as well, a procedure called thalamotomy. Surgeons
drilled a hole into the skull and targeted the thalamus area of the brain, which
controls some involuntary movements. By destroying small parts of the affected
area, they can give patients some relief.

   That's enough for now. He hasn't opted for the riskier procedure Simpson
tried, and likely won't as long as his medication works.

   "My vanity I threw away a long time ago," he said. I'm not a poster on any
teenage girl's wall anymore. I don't [worry about how] I look. When gene therapy
or maybe cell implantation comes along, I'll be in line."

   There cure is out there somewhere - maybe through stem cell research or
something no one has thought of yet. Until that comes, though, those afflicted
with this disease carry on the fight each day.

   "Once you accept it, it doesn't mean you're resigned to it. It means you've
acknowledged what it is, it's a fact in your life, and it's not going anywhere,"
Fox said. "Your hand is shaking and there is nothing you can do about it. Once
you've accepted it, you can make decisions going forward."

   He made a decision to play golf this weekend.

   "The one thing you don't have a choice about right now - and we're working on
it - is whether you have Parkinson's," he said. "But around that non-choice are
a thousand other choices you have. You are not defined by that. You can go out
and be a bad golfer if you want. You can shake and still be steady."

   (CHART) ABOUT PARKINSON'S

   Parkinson's disease is one in a wide range of progressive neurological
diseases. The disease attacks an area of the brain governing movement, causing a
lack of normal body control. Symptoms can include involuntary tremors, a shaking
head, slurred speech and difficulty with balance. Although the symptoms can be
treated with drugs and surgery, there is no cure.

   Photo credit: Tribune photo by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER

   Photo: Michael J. Fox takes a swing Friday during the Outback Steakhouse
Pro-Am in Lutz. The actor wants to be an inspiration for people with Parkinson's
disease.

   Photo credit: Getty Images

   Photo: Michael J. Fox is playing golf to show people with Parkinson's that
they don't have to surrender.

   Copyright © 2009, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2009


                              236 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 5, 2009 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Editorial pages Desk; Part A; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: The height of folly;
For years, doctors gave the drug DES to girls thought to be growing 'too tall.'
Now that decision is coming back to haunt some women.

BYLINE: Christine Cosgrove, Christine Cosgrove is the coauthor of "Normal at Any
Cost: Tall Girls, Short Boys, and the Medical Industry's Quest to Manipulate
Height," which was published last month.

BODY:

   In 1964, when I was 14, a doctor suggested to my parents that I seemed likely
to grow "too tall" for a woman. By that he meant that I would grow too tall to
be happy, too tall to fit in, too tall to find a man.

   Fortunately, he said, there was something he could do about it. Soon after, I
began taking massive doses of a drug he called "the same thing as birth control
pills." The side effects were immediate and unpleasant: nausea, vomiting,
leaking breasts, depression, weight gain. My mother complained, the dosage was
adjusted downward, my stomach calmed down, and I continued taking the drugs for
five more years. I also continued to grow until I was almost 6 feet tall.

   Nobody ever seemed concerned about long-term side effects. But more than two
decades later, I learned that the drug I'd been given was diethylstilbestrol, or
DES, a synthetic chemical compound that acts like estrogen in the body and that
is known today for causing cancer and reproductive abnormalities in the
offspring of women given it during pregnancy.

   The practice of using DES on tall girls had a long history. It was in the
late 1940s that doctors at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston first
discovered a way to alter height -- a distinctive, heritable trait -- in girls
whose parents feared their daughters were growing too tall. In those days,
hormone discoveries were heralding a new era in medicine, just as gene therapy
is today. Hormones were the miracle that would allow doctors to manipulate how
tall a girl grew and allay her mother's fears.

   Why would anyone want to stunt a girl's growth? Back then, if a girl were
heading toward 5 foot 8 or, horrors, 5 foot 10, not only would she have trouble
finding clothes that fit, she'd have a hard time finding a husband. And in the
days when there were few options besides marriage and children for women, well,
that left an old maid.

   Before hormones came along, the best advice a medical columnist for the L.A.
Times could offer worried mothers whose daughters were heading for the rafters
was to limit their food intake and, for heaven's sake, eliminate vitamins. Some
girls who reached towering heights had six inches or so of bone removed from
their long legs, but that required a long and complicated recovery at the very
least.

   So with the availability of the cheap, synthetic drug DES, and the discovery
that large amounts of estrogen could push a girl into and through puberty
quickly, allowing less time for her bones to grow long, the tall-girl problem
appeared to have a solution. An inherited trait that used to be a given -- tall
stature -- could now be fixed.

   In the U.S., it is estimated that thousands of tall girls obediently
swallowed massive amounts of DES -- often 100 times the amount of estrogen
delivered in a high-dose birth control pill -- daily over a period of several
years. When DES was found to cause cancer in the offspring of women prescribed
it during pregnancy, doctors switched tall girls over to different types of
estrogen. The practice continues today throughout the world, although many fewer
girls in the U.S. or their parents request the treatment.

   Now it's OK to be tall -- just ask Michelle Obama, the Williams sisters or
6-foot-8 Brittney Griner, a Houston high school senior and basketball player
with a powerful dunk that will propel her wherever she wants to go in athletics.

   What became of the girls who were treated? Now women in their 30s, 40s, 50s
and 60s, some are happy they had the treatment because they believe they might
have been much taller, although there's no way to know because nobody can really
predict a child's final mature height.

   Others are angry. They blame myriad health problems -- including weight gain,
ovarian cysts, miscarriages, blood clots, endometriosis, depression and
infertility -- on the choices their parents made when they were children. And
they wonder what else their long exposure to huge amounts of estrogen will do to
their future health.

   They have reason to be worried. The first real follow-up on several hundred
stunted girls took place in Australia and showed a significant decrease in
fertility among those who were treated.

   In addition, the women whose height was stunted were not always happy about
their final height or the efforts used to achieve it. The Australian
researchers, who tracked down women and their parents decades later, discovered
that some families were still unable to talk about the subject. One woman said
her teenage daughter had run away years earlier rather than take the pills, and
she beseeched the researchers to let her know if they found her.

   I couldn't help but think about all this when I heard of the Los Angeles
fertility doctor who recently said he would offer parents the option of
selecting not only the sex of their child but their choice of hair and eye color
too. After a flurry of criticism in the media, he backed down, saying designer
babies are off his drawing board.

   But they're sure to return in this era of genome mapping and gene therapy.
And before we go too far down that path, we ought to think carefully about where
we're heading. What kind of kid really wants her parents to choose her genes? If
you don't like your mother's taste in clothes, say, or hairdos, why would you
want her to pick out everything about you? And more to the point, whose life is
it anyway?

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER:Susan Tibbles For The Times

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2009


                              237 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             April 2, 2009 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL DIGEST

BYLINE: From News Services

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   WHO director warns of drug-resistant TB crisis

   The world is on the cusp of an explosion of drug-resistant tuberculosis cases
that could deluge hospitals and leave physicians fighting a nearly untreatable
malady with little help from modern drugs, global experts said Wednesday.

   "The situation is already alarming, and poised to grow much worse very
quickly," said Dr. Margaret Chan, the director-general of the World Health
Organization, in Beijing.

   With Bill Gates at her side, Chan urged health officials from 27 countries at
a three-day forum in Beijing on drug-resistant TB to recognize the warning signs
of what looms ahead, saying that traditional drugs are useless against some
strains of tuberculosis and health-care costs for treating those strains can be
100 to 200 times more than for regular tuberculosis.

   "This is a situation set to spiral out of control. Call it what you may: a
time bomb or a powder keg. Any way you look at it, this is a potentially
explosive situation," Chan warned.

   Elderly patients found to return quickly to hospitals - One in five Medicare
patients end up back in the hospital within a month of discharge, a large study
found, and that practice costs billions of dollars a year, according to a study
published in Thursday's New England Journal of Medicine.

   The findings suggest patients aren't told enough about how to take care of
themselves and stay healthy before they go home, the researchers said. The study
found that half of the non-surgery patients who returned within a month hadn't
seen a doctor between hospital stays.

   Proposal made to cut influence of drug companies - In a drastic proposal for
limiting drug company influence on doctors and patient care, a group of
prominent physicians says medical associations and their leaders should reject
almost all industry funding.

   That means big medical groups would need to find other ways to pay for things
like doctors' continuing education classes, or gatherings where treatment
guidelines are written. Guideline writers also should have no industry ties, the
proposal recommends.

   Some groups have eliminated those freebies, but the proposal - appearing in
the Journal of the American Medical Association - says they should work toward a
complete ban on industry funding.

   Nature magazine retracts paper - A scientific journal is retracting a
research paper published more than eight years ago that reported a gene therapy
treatment had led to remission of Type 1 diabetes in rats and mice. In its
Thursday issue, Nature said the lead author of the paper - Hyun Chul Lee of
Yonsei University in Seoul, South Korea - and two other authors asked for the
retraction because they could not reproduce the experiment's results.

   Drug found to help kleptomaniacs - University of Minnesota investigators
found that a drug used to treat alcohol addiction can help kleptomaniacs by
curbing their urge to steal. It's based on a small study of only 25 people, but
researchers see it as another sign that the inexpensive drug, naltrexone, can
affect compulsive behavior.

GRAPHIC:  MCT map - Multidrug Resistant Tuberculosis

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2009


                              238 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             April 2, 2009 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: UNKNOWN; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for heart disease St. Louis U. cardiologists look to
improve pumping from damaged muscle. IN THE LAB

BYLINE: By Michele Munz - mmunz@post-dispatch.com 314-340-8263

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   St. Louis University cardiologists are participating in the first clinical
trial of gene therapy to treat severe heart failure, which affects about 5
million people nationwide and is the leading diagnosis among adults discharged
from the hospital.

   If successful, it would also be the first to not only treat, but reverse the
severity of the disease. Doctors have long thought that damaged hearts were not
capable of recovering lost function.

   "We're testing a new treatment that appears to be able to improve the pumping
function of damaged heart muscle," said Dr. Arthur Labovitz, director of
cardiology at St. Louis University and principal investigator of the study. "The
goal of the research is to help our patients live longer by not only improving
the symptoms of heart failure, but also restoring physiologic function."

   SLU is one of 13 centers around the world and the only one in the metro area
to participate in the trial, called the CUPID trial.

   The research - Calcium Up-Regulation by Percutaneous Administration of Gene
Therapy in Cardiac Diseases - will investigate whether a genetically-targeted
enzyme replacement therapy can repair heart muscle damaged by a prior heart
attack or heart disease.

   The hope is that the enzyme replacement, called MYDICAR, will reprogram
cardiac muscle cells. The therapy works by replenishing a protein involved in
releasing calcium, which plays a key role in the contraction and relaxation of
the heart.

   "This is truly a novel approach to treating heart failure and moves
therapeutics to a new level," says Dr. Paul Hauptman, co-investigator in the
research.

   Common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath, tiredness and
swelling in the ankles, feet and legs. The diagnosis brings an increased risk
for irregular heartbeats or sudden cardiac arrest. Patients are often prescribed
changes in diet and exercise coupled with different medications aimed to
alleviate symptoms and prevent further damage.

   "Gene therapy allows us the potential of offering meaningful therapy for
people who do not benefit from standard medical therapy," said Dr. Michael Lim,
another co-investigator. "If the CUPID study is successful, it may revolutionize
the way we treat patients with severe heart disease."

   The first phase of the research involves 14 office visits over about 13
months. In the second phase, participants will be contacted by phone every six
months for two years.

   The therapy is delivered to the heart using an outpatient procedure. Tests
regarding its safety were positive, according to researchers.

   The clinical trial is funded and administered by Celladon Corp., which makes
MYDICAR. Celladon is a privately held biotechnology company working to develop
molecular therapies for cardiovascular diseases.

   Gene therapy trials For more information about the CUPID study or to find out
if you qualify, call 314-577-8876, Ext. 2 or visit celladon.net.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2009


                              239 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             April 2, 2009 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 482 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for heart disease St. Louis U. cardiologists look to
improve pumping from damaged muscle. IN THE LAB

BYLINE: By Michele Munz - mmunz@post-dispatch.com 314-340-8263

DATELINE: 0

BODY:

   St. Louis University cardiologists are participating in the first clinical
trial of gene therapy to treat severe heart failure, which affects about 5
million people nationwide and is the leading diagnosis among adults discharged
from the hospital.

   If successful, it would also be the first to not only treat, but reverse the
severity of the disease. Doctors have long thought that damaged hearts were not
capable of recovering lost function.

   "We're testing a new treatment that appears to be able to improve the pumping
function of damaged heart muscle," said Dr. Arthur Labovitz, director of
cardiology at St. Louis University and principal investigator of the study. "The
goal of the research is to help our patients live longer by not only improving
the symptoms of heart failure, but also restoring physiologic function."

   SLU is one of 13 centers around the world and the only one in the metro area
to participate in the trial, called the CUPID trial.

   The research - Calcium Up-Regulation by Percutaneous Administration of Gene
Therapy in Cardiac Diseases - will investigate whether a genetically-targeted
enzyme replacement therapy can repair heart muscle damaged by a prior heart
attack or heart disease.

   The hope is that the enzyme replacement, called MYDICAR, will reprogram
cardiac muscle cells. The therapy works by replenishing a protein involved in
releasing calcium, which plays a key role in the contraction and relaxation of
the heart.

   "This is truly a novel approach to treating heart failure and moves
therapeutics to a new level," says Dr. Paul Hauptman, co-investigator in the
research.

   Common symptoms of heart failure include shortness of breath, tiredness and
swelling in the ankles, feet and legs. The diagnosis brings an increased risk
for irregular heartbeats or sudden cardiac arrest. Patients are often prescribed
changes in diet and exercise coupled with different medications aimed to
alleviate symptoms and prevent further damage.

   "Gene therapy allows us the potential of offering meaningful therapy for
people who do not benefit from standard medical therapy," said Dr. Michael Lim,
another co-investigator. "If the CUPID study is successful, it may revolutionize
the way we treat patients with severe heart disease."

   The first phase of the research involves 14 office visits over about 13
months. In the second phase, participants will be contacted by phone every six
months for two years.

   The therapy is delivered to the heart using an outpatient procedure. Tests
regarding its safety were positive, according to researchers.

   The clinical trial is funded and administered by Celladon Corp., which makes
MYDICAR. Celladon is a privately held biotechnology company working to develop
molecular therapies for cardiovascular diseases.

   Gene therapy trials For more information about the CUPID study or to find out
if you qualify, call 314-577-8876, Ext. 2 or visit celladon.net.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2011


                              240 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            March 28, 2009 Saturday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: Medical Center attacks rare eye cancer Doctors from 4 institutions
pool resources to fight retinoblastoma

BYLINE: By TODD ACKERMAN, HOUSTON CHRONICLE

BODY:

   Four Texas Medical Center institutions are pooling resources to fight a
childhood cancer for which the most effective treatment is removing the eye.

   Doctors and researchers will seek to improve treatment for retinoblastoma, a
fast growing cancer that kills most of its victims if it escapes the eye. It is
diagnosed in about 350 children a year, usually between birth and 5 years of
age.

   "Because this cancer is so rare, coming together as a team to share expertise
and patients is invaluable for pioneering advancements," said Dr. Dan Gombos, an
ocular oncologist and one of the co-directors of the Retinoblastoma Center of
Houston.

   The center, announced this week, involves scientists from Texas Children's
Cancer Center, the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center's Children's
Cancer Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine and the Methodist Hospital.

   It is not only a rare multi-institutional collaboration in the medical
center, it's also the world's first retinoblastoma center made of more than two
centers.

   Proton therapy

   The center will bring together unique ocular pathology services at Methodist,
pioneering gene therapy at Methodist, Baylor and Texas Children's and a more
precise form of radiation, known as proton therapy, at M.D. Anderson, one of
only a handful of centers in the nation offering it.

   Gombos said that even though retinoblastoma can be successfully treated if
caught early, the treatment leaves much to be desired because it often involves
removing the eye or delivering chemotherapy or radiation that can have harmful
side effects.

   He also noted that successfully treated children with the hereditary form of
the disease nevertheless usually die of other cancers as adults.

   What to look for

   Retinoblastoma is suspected when a child develops whitish discoloration of
the eye's pupil or when the eyes are crossed or misaligned. The most common
malignancy of the eye in children, it is caused by a mutation in the cells of
the retina. It can affect one eye or both eyes at the same.

   Retinoblastoma is relatively unheralded, though awareness was raised in 2007
when pro basketball player Derek Fisher gave a television interview after an NBA
playoff game in which he talked about his 10-month-old daughter's bout with the
disease and urged parents to have their children checked for it.

   todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2009


                              241 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2009 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            March 25, 2009 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BRANDON; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1180 words

HEADLINE: Supporters Aiding Infant's Family

BYLINE: D'ANN LAWRENCE WHITE, dlwhite@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   The baby is starting treatment in Gainesville for a genetic disorder without
a cure.

   By D'ANN LAWRENCE WHITE

   dlwhite@tampatrib.com

   VALRICO - She was such an easygoing baby, always smiling and giggling.

   So when Olivia Salinas suddenly became fussy at 6 months old, her parents,
Ryan Salinas, 24, and Michelle Burruezo, 20, of Brandon, knew something was
amiss.

   "Everything had been great up until then," Ryan Salinas recalled. "She was
such a happy baby. Then we noticed something was wrong when she started refusing
her bottle."

   Olivia's pediatrician diagnosed her with an ear infection and put her on an
antibiotic. When she didn't improve, the couple took her to Brandon Regional
Hospital, where doctors discovered Olivia's heart was enlarged.

   In fact, it was the size of an adult heart. They first suspected she might
have cardiomyopathy, a serious heart disease in which the heart muscle becomes
inflamed, enlarged and doesn't work properly. They transferred the baby to St.
Joseph's Children's Hospital of Tampa for further testing.

   The doctors at St. Joseph's came back with even more shocking news.

   "They brought in a social worker and chaplain, so we knew it was serious,"
said Salinas, recalling bits and pieces of the conversation through the daze. "I
remember they were quite compassionate about the way they told us, but they
didn't want to downplay it or tell us something that wasn't right. They told us
it was a terminal illness. There is no cure, but researchers did come up with a
treatment about three years ago."

   It's called Pompe disease, named after the Dutch pathologist J.C. Pompe who
first described a 7-month-old baby who died suddenly from the disease in 1932. A
rare disease that occurs in one in every 40,000 births, it is a genetic disorder
that occurs when both parents carry a certain recessive gene.

   "No one in our families has ever had the disease," Salinas said. "It's just
the combination of mine and Michelle's genes that caused it."

   The disease mutates a gene that makes an enzyme called alpha-glucosidase,
which the body uses to break down glycogen, a stored form of sugar used for
energy. As a result, excessive amounts of glycogen accumulate everywhere in the
body, especially the heart and skeletal muscles. Most babies with Pompe disease
die from cardiac or respiratory complications before their first birthday.

   Doctors told the young parents that, without treatment, Olivia most likely
would die within two months.

   But Salinas wasn't ready to say goodbye to his baby girl.

   "I got on the Internet and started doing some research," he said. He
discovered that just two hours from their home, doctors at Shands Children's
Hospital in Gainesville were conducting breakthrough research and clinical
trials on patients with Pompe disease.

   "They could offer treatments that, although they may not cure her, could
prolong her life," Salinas said. "I figured prolonging her life is better than
doing nothing. We want the best for our baby."

   They contacted Shands, and Barry J. Byrne, a professor of pediatric
cardiology and molecular genetics, medical director of the Congenital Heart
Center at the University of Florida and director of the Powell Gene Therapy
Center, agreed to see whether Olivia would be a candidate for the hospital's
trials.

   For eight years, Byrne, who holds a medical degree and doctorate, has been
involved in laboratory research, developing enzyme replacement therapies for
Pompe disease. The research and trials are being funded through the National
Institutes of Health and the American Heart Association.

   So far, the clinical trials have shown that enzyme replacement therapy
decreases heart size, improves muscle function, tone and strength, and reduces
the accumulation of glycogen in babies with Pompe disease.

   Byrne and his research team made national news in 2001 when they successfully
restored normal muscle function in mice with Pompe disease with just two doses
of the enzyme replacement. A year later they began testing the enzyme on humans.
It now has been approved by the federal Food and Drug Administration.

   As far as Salinas is concerned, the new drug was created in anticipation of
the birth of his daughter.

   "It's a miracle that these doctors were doing this research so close to us,"
Salinas, who recently returned from Gainesville with Olivia after she underwent
initial testing and suppression of her immune system in preparation for her
first treatment this week. "We're putting a lot of faith in these doctors. We
know they'll do everything possible for her."

   Back home, Salinas also is getting a great deal of support from his extended
family at Beef O'Brady's on State Road 60 in Valrico, where he has worked as a
cook for nine months.

   "The staff at the restaurant is extremely close," said Reagan Thomas, wife of
Beef O' Brady's owner Jeff Fuerst. "And we've known Olivia since she was born. I
have a 3-month-old myself, and I just feel so helpless. She's such a sweet
little girl."

   Salinas said Olivia most likely will need enzyme treatment every other week
for the rest of her life. They hope to work out an arrangement so she eventually
can receive treatments at St. Joseph's Children's Hospital and will have to
travel to Shands just once a month.

   In the meantime, the cost of gas, food, parking and time out of work are
taking their toll on the young family.

   "We found out about Olivia March 1 and decided to do something right away to
help the family," Fuerst said. "So on March 8 and 9, the restaurant donated 20
percent of the sales those days to Ryan. I also matched the donations, and
customers came in and gave cash donations. We ended up raising $2,400 without
any real publicity other than word of mouth."

   The staff plans to follow up with another fundraiser, a pancake breakfast set
for 8 to 10 a.m. Saturday at the restaurant. The cost is $7 for adults, $4 for
children. The event also will include drawings for dog care, cat care, personal
care and Beef O'Brady's gift baskets.

   "We're hoping to raise another $3,500 with this fundraiser," Fuerst said.

   "The people at work have been wonderful, really supportive and helpful,"
Salinas said. "Reagan calls every other day to check on us. It's a sad story,
but we're very hopeful. There's no telling what can happen."

   Anyone who can't attend the pancake breakfast but would like to make a
donation can drop off or send contributions to Beef O'Brady's at 2561 E. State
Road 60, Valrico, FL 33594. The restaurant also welcomes donations for its
drawing. Call (813) 655-1055.

   Reporter D'Ann Lawrence White can be reached at (813) 657-4524.

   Photo: A happy baby, Olivia suddenly became fussy at 6 months old.

   Photo credit: Photo from Michelle Burruezo

   Photo: Olivia is being treated for Pompe disease as part of clinical trials
in the hopes of prolonging her life.

   Photo credit: Photos from Michelle Burruezo

   Photo: Ryan Salinas and Michelle Burruezo of Brandon are fighting for the
life of their 7-month-old daughter, Olivia, diagnosed with a rare genetic
disease.

   Copyright © 2009, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2009


                              242 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            March 21, 2009 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 335 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE FILE;
All-it-can-eat mouse is created;
UC Berkeley lab finds knocking out a gene prevents weight gain.

BYLINE: Melissa Healy

BODY:

   Imagine you've bellied up to the all-you-can-eat pasta bar in Berkeley, only
to meet one of the mice from Hei Sook Sul's Nutritional Science and Toxicology
Lab.

   If you come here often, you know that loading up on carbohydrates is going to
make you pretty chubby. But you notice that your fellow diner -- the mouse -- is
pretty slim. How does he do it?

   This lucky mouse has had a gene knocked out of his genome by researchers in
Sul's UC Berkeley lab. The observation that mice without this gene can eat all
the carbs they want and stay slim -- whereas other mice fed a high-carb diet
become fat -- leads Sul to conclude that her lab has found a gene that plays a
key role in the process of converting carbohydrates to fat. And that discovery
points to an important new target for drug developers hoping to find a way to
prevent and perhaps even reverse obesity in humans.

   The discovery of the gene's role in obesity was published Friday in the
journal Cell.

   The gene involved, known as DNA-PK (for DNA-dependent protein kinase), is
widely studied for its role in repairing breaks in the DNA -- a function that
has made it crucial in cancer research and treatment. But Sul said it was a
surprise to discover that the same gene has a key role in the liver's conversion
of excess glucose (all that bread, pasta and sugary soda you've failed to work
off) to fatty acids.

   Not only were mice whose DNA-PK gene had been knocked out 40% leaner than
normal mice when all were fed a high-carb, low-fat diet; they also had better
blood-lipid profiles, suggesting they'd be at lower risk of developing heart
disease.

   Sul said no one at this point was thinking about gene therapy as a treatment
for obesity. Instead, drug developers might look at how the DNA-PK gene calls
out other actors to set in motion the conversion of excess calories to fat and
find an agent that might disrupt the process.

   If they're successful, you'll be able to join that mouse at the pasta bar and
look just as svelte as he does.

   --

   melissa.healy@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2009


                              243 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2009 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            March 18, 2009 Wednesday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: Boston Sci progresses despite the bumps;
Longtime CEO Jim Tobin says he has a story to tell about his newly revived
company.

BYLINE: JANET MOORE, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Forgive Jim Tobin if he sounds a bit weary.

   The CEO of Boston Scientific Corp., perhaps the most-maligned medical device
company in recent years, has survived a bruising series of product recalls, a
market plunge in its signature heart stent and a widely ridiculed $27 billion
acquisition of Guidant Corp. that has taken nearly three years to sort out.

   Now Tobin, a 38-year veteran of the medical technology industry, has a
flailing economy and the Obama health care reform to look forward to.

   Yet the plain-spoken head of the Natick, Mass.-based medical technology
company, which employs about 5,000 people in the Twin Cities, believes he has a
story to tell. Part of the storytelling involves stumping before analysts at
investors' conferences, like the one held in Boston Tuesday by the investment
firm Cowen & Co.

   "We're in a different place than we were three years ago, a better place,"
Tobin said.

   A key part of Boston Scientific's story, and one with great pull locally, is
the status of the 2006 purchase of Guidant, whose pacemaker and heart
defibrillator operations remain in Arden Hills.

   Although Boston Scientific emerged the victor in a bidding war with rival
Johnson & Johnson, it won a business that was crippled by a series of product
recalls.

   The recalls spooked some doctors and patients, and sales fell.

   To make matters worse, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) slapped the
division with a warning letter, seen as a serious violation in the med-tech
world, claiming its quality systems weren't up to snuff.

   Tobin says the issues with the warning letter are resolved, and the division
has introduced a series of new products to treat heart disease, including its
Cognis and Teligen lines of defibrillators that are thinner and last longer than
the competition's.

   (That includes Fridley-based Medtronic Inc. and St. Jude Medical Inc. of
Little Canada.)

   Meanwhile, at the company's cardiovascular division in Maple Grove, sales of
the company's blockbuster drug-coated heart stent dampened in 2006 after several
studies suggested the artery-clearing device could cause deadly blood clots in
some cases. Further, the company faced new competition from Abbott Laboratories
and Medtronic.

   Today, Tobin says the business has stabilized with the successful launch of
its Promus stent (essentially the same product as Abbott's top-selling Xience
stent, the result of a licensing agreement) and the second-generation of its
Taxus stent, called Liberte. According to the Millennium Research Group, Boston
Scientific controlled 50 percent of the drug-coated stent market in February.

   In recent years, Tobin has been fairly circumspect with the press, giving few
interviews. But at the close of Tuesday's conference, he was almost chatty. Here
are excerpts from the conference and his interview with the Star Tribune:

   On the Guidant acquisition: "If you dug into our financial projections for
2009 you would see a big chunk of our sales growth and more than all earnings
growth comes from products we acquired in the Guidant deal. Guidant is now the
engine pulling the train."

   On health care reform: "Everybody's for reform as long as it's the other guy
who has to reform. I think this time around it has a better shot, maybe 50-50.
Boston Scientific is principally a minimally invasive procedure company.
Minimally invasive procedures are part of the solution, not the problem."

   On medical devices in the economy: Most of what we do seems to be fairly
immune to discretionary health care spending. Maybe 5 to 7 percent of what we do
you could postpone, but if you need a stent, you could have it either today --
or tomorrow."

   On whether he's surprised Medtronic hasn't fared better with its new Endeavor
drug-coated stent: "No. Data is my deal, and the data (are) pretty clear. It is
probably as safe as the earlier stents, but it does not work as well as the
earlier stents. We've been able to make that argument pretty effectively in the
marketplace."

   On the Supreme Court ruling restricting lawsuits by patients: "I've spent
most of my career trying to make as close to perfect products as humanly
possible. The goal should be to avoid the problems, so you don't have to worry
about people suing you, because they have nothing to sue about."

   On whether Medtronic's recall of the Sprint Fidelis defibrillator lead has
affected his business: We are gaining (defibrillator) share -- whether it's
Fidelis-related or we have better products, I don't know why. I'm a little
surprised because Fidelis is a thing of the past, but it's still there and
getting worse. There's a lot of angst and anger in the marketplace and among
(specialists). I don't see it going away anytime soon. But it's not my problem."

   On whether medical devices will become obsolete in the future: "I'll be dead
and gone. I was in the biotech business, I've spent considerable effort trying
to understand the possibilities. Gene therapy, cell therapy hold great promise
if you look far enough over the horizon. It took us 110 years to figure out how
aspirin works."

   On whether he's looking at major acquisitions: "We're kind of happy with the
company we got. I'm not anxious to go out and do this again. (Laughs.) I'm too
old for that."

   On whether, at age 64, he plans to retire: "I only have one gear, and it's
full speed ahead."

   (At which point, the company spokesman interrupts and says, "No comment.")

   Janet Moore - 612-673-7752

   IN NEED OF A JOLT

   Daily stock closes

   (See microfilm or PDF for complete chart.)

NOTES: See microfilm or PDF for complete chart.

GRAPHIC: CHART
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2009


                              244 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            March 12, 2009 Thursday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 023

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: Honeywell, Shire in deal

BYLINE: By CHRISTINE McCONVILLE

BODY:

   Honeywell Process Solutions will be installing its newest technologies at
Shire's biopharmaceutical facility in Lexington.

   The deal, to be announced today, will bring Honeywell's efficiency to Shire's
science, at what is expected to be the nation's largest biotech facility using
disposable containers and liners.

   ``It's a significant win for us,'' said Jerry Belanger, a life sciences
business manager for Honeywell. He declined to say how much Honeywell would be
paid.

   Belanger and Don Wuchterl, director of manufacturing for Shire Human Genetic
Therapies unit, said the joint effort will lead to faster, cheaper drug
production.

   Shire's $250 million production facility is part of the firm's $394 million
expansion at the former Raytheon complex in Lexington.

   When the facility is complete sometime in 2010, Shire will be making
medication in new disposable containers, as a way to reduce cleanup costs.

   Shire will use Honeywell technology to regulate recipes, use controllers on
moveable equipment and help workers store, retrieve and analyze data during the
drug-development process.

   The end result, Honeywell Process Solutions regional general manager Don
Maness said, ``will be lower production costs so biopharmaceutical producers
like Shire can reinvest in research and development and deliver products to
market faster.''

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2009


                              245 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                              March 9, 2009 Monday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: Device restores limited sight to the blind

BYLINE: Elizabeth Fernandez, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   In a darkened room, Dean Lloyd sits before a computer screen slowly moving
his head, searching for a white box on the black screen.

   Then he points directly at the square.

   Lloyd has been blind for two decades.

   About 18 months ago, the 68-year-old attorney in Palo Alto had an
experimental electrode implanted at the back of his right eye, part of a complex
electrical system designed to give him rudimentary vision.

   He's among only 18 blind people in the world - 10 in the United States - to
undergo the procedure.

   Lloyd wears an apparatus that could be out of a sci-fi novel - black
sunglasses containing a tiny camera and transmitter, video processor and battery
pack on his belt, electrode-studded array tacked to the back of his eye.

   The mechanism represents new hope for blind people, particularly those with
retinitis pigmentosa, a devastating hereditary disease that destroys vision.

    "It's not perfect, but it's incredibly exciting," said Dr. Timothy Schoen,
director of preclinicial research at the nonprofit Foundation Fighting
Blindness, which funds research. "Some people with the device can see large
objects, they can see dark from light,"

Tools for hope

    Called Argus II, the device is part of a panoply of revolutionary research
around the country that seeks to restore vision to more than 10 million people
who have lost it due to macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa, Usher
syndrome and other diseases. The research includes gene therapies, dietary
treatments, even the development of artificial retinas.

   "Patients with extreme vision loss have a greater cause for optimism than
they have in the past," said retinal specialist Dr. Jacque Duncan, a UCSF
associate professor of clinical ophthalmology who is involved in the Argus II
clinical trial. Lasting 36 months, the trial will determine the safety of the
prosthetic device and is about halfway complete.

   With the mechanism, wearers see crude shapes or forms, such as the outlines
of a person. Many see doorways. Many perceive fuzzy spots of light, others say
images look like fireworks.

   Argus II bypasses sensory cells that have died and takes messages to the
brain, sending tiny electrical pulses through the vision pathway to the retina.
It was developed by Second Sight Medical Products Inc., a 10-year-old firm based
in Sylmar, in Los Angeles County.

    "The device helps people feel more connected to the world," said senior
principal scientist Dr. Matthew McMahon. "One subject said she could point to
the full moon - for 15 years she hasn't been able to do that, and for her it was
a huge deal. A realistic goal is to get to the point where people can see
patterns and shapes much more reliably, and ultimately, to be able to read and
recognize faces."

   Argus II contains 60 electrodes. The next generation might utilize more than
a thousand electrodes, said McMahon.

   Lloyd can now see primary colors, as well as objects with high water content,
such as eyes. He can walk along a white line on a dark floor, or locate an
object on a computer screen.

Seeing colors again

   It's a relatively crude form of vision - but it's much more than he's had for
many years.

   "When I first got it I thought it was pretty useless," he said. "But it's
getting a lot better. I can see edges and borders and boundaries. An eye looks
like a star to me. I hadn't seen color for a long time. The red I see is a
beautiful shade. The blue is luminescent. The green, it's just plain old green.

   "I was probably hoping for a lot more than I received, but I'm not
disappointed because it is more than I had."

   Lloyd was nearly 24, a medical school student, when he was diagnosed with
retinitis pigmentosa. The disease, even decades later, has no cure, no effective
treatment. It affects about 100,000 people in the United States.

   He gave up his hopes of becoming a doctor, and worked as a biochemist and
software engineer before becoming a lawyer. For years, his vision was somewhat
stable, then it began to fade and finally vanished.

   Lloyd has a particularly strong incentive to participate in the trial: his
brother, who is also blind, has the disease. And so do several other members of
his immediate family, including his daughter, Lisa.

   Now 37, and living in Sunnyvale, Lisa Lloyd was diagnosed when she was 22.
Director of development at the Northern California chapter of Foundation
Fighting Blindness, her vision is relatively fine during the day, but she
stopped driving at night five years ago.

   "This device is such a big step in the right direction," she said. "My dad
went from no light perception to being able to see my hand. Just a few weeks
ago, we were walking by a creek. Dad told me the water looked to be about 4
inches high. He was right."

GRAPHIC: Dean Lloyd left tests the Argus II eye implant at UCSF Medical Center.
Neuroscientist Matthew McMahon monitors. Paul Chinn / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2009


                              246 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                              March 9, 2009 Monday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Main News; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Obama siding with science in policy switch

BYLINE: Philip Elliott, Associated Press

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:

    President Obama's planned announcement today that he is overturning his
predecessor's policies toward embryonic stem cells also will include a broad
declaration that science - not political ideology - will guide his
administration.

    Obama plans to reverse President George W. Bush's limits on federally funded
stem cell research through the National Institutes of Health and to put in place
safeguards through the Office of Science and Technology Policy so that science
is protected from political interference. The moves would fulfill a campaign
promise.

    "We've got eight years of science to make up for," said Dr. Curt Civin,
whose research allowed scientists to isolate stem cells and who now serves as
the founding director of the University of Maryland Center for Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine. "Now, the silly restrictions are lifted."

    Bush limited tax dollars for stem cell research to a small number of stem
cell lines that were created before Aug. 9, 2001. Many of those faced drawbacks.
Hundreds more of such lines - groups of cells that can continue to propagate in
lab dishes - have been created since then. Scientists say those newer lines are
healthier and better suited to creating treatments for diseases, but they were
largely off-limits to researchers taking who took federal dollars.

    "We view what happened with stem cell research in the last administration as
one manifestation of failure to think carefully about how federal support of
science and the use of scientific advice occurs," said Harold Varmus, a Nobel
Prize-winning biologist who is chairman of the White House's Council of Advisers
on Science and Technology.

    Bush and his supporters said they were defending human life; days-old
embryos - typically fertility-clinic leftovers otherwise destined to be
discarded - are destroyed for the stem cells.

    The long-promised move will allow a rush of research aimed at one day better
treating, if not curing, ailments from diabetes to paralysis - research that has
drawn broad support, including from notables such as Nancy Reagan, widow of
President Ronald Reagan, and the late Christopher Reeve.

    The move also will highlight divisions within the Republican Party, now in
the minority and lacking votes in Congress to stop Obama.

    The proposed changes do not fund creation of new lines, nor do they specify
which existing lines can be used. They mean that scientists who until now have
had to rely on private donations to work with these newer stem cell lines can
apply for government money for the research, just like they do for studies of
gene therapy or other treatment approaches.

    Embryonic stem cells are master cells that can morph into any cell of the
body. Scientists hope to harness them so they can create replacement tissues to
treat a variety of diseases - such as new insulin-producing cells for diabetics,
cells that could help those with Parkinson's disease or maybe even Alzheimer's,
or new nerve connections to restore movement after spinal injury.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2009


                              247 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: OBAMA READY TO EXPAND STEM CELL RESEARCH

BYLINE: Ben Feller and Lauran Neergaard, The Associated Press

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Reversing an 8-year-old limit on potentially life-saving
science, President Barack Obama plans Monday to lift restrictions on
taxpayer-funded research using embryonic stem cells.

   The long-promised move will allow a rush of research aimed at one day better
treating, if not curing, ailments from diabetes to paralysis -- research that
crosses partisan lines, backed by such notables as former first lady Nancy
Reagan and the late actor Christopher Reeve. But it stirs intense controversy
over whether government crosses a moral line with such research.

   Mr. Obama will hold an event at the White House to announce the move, a
senior administration official said yesterday. The official spoke on condition
of anonymity because the policy had not yet been publicly announced.

   Embryonic stem cells are master cells that can morph into any cell of the
body. Scientists hope to harness them so they can create replacement tissues to
treat a variety of diseases -- such as new insulin-producing cells for
diabetics, cells that could help those with Parkinson's disease or maybe even
Alzheimer's, or new nerve connections to restore movement after spinal injury.

   "I feel vindicated after eight years of struggle, and I know it's going to
energize my research team," said Dr. George Daley of the Harvard Stem Cell
Institute and Children's Hospital of Boston, a leading stem cell researcher.

   But the research is controversial because days-old embryos must be destroyed
to obtain the cells. They typically are culled from fertility-clinic leftovers
destined to be thrown away.

   Under former President George W. Bush, taxpayer money for that research was
limited to a small number of stem cell lines that were created before Aug. 9,
2001 -- lines that, in many cases, had some drawbacks that limited their
potential usability.

   But hundreds more of such lines -- groups of cells that can continue to
propagate in lab dishes -- have been created since then, ones that scientists
say are healthier, better suited to creating treatments for people rather than
doing basic laboratory science.

   Work didn't stop. Indeed, it advanced enough that this summer, the private
Geron Corp. will begin the world's first study of a treatment using human
embryonic stem cells in people who recently suffered a spinal cord injury.

   Nor does Mr. Obama's change fund creation of new lines. But it means that
scientists who until now have had to rely on private donations to work with
these newer stem cell lines can apply for government money for the research,
just as they do for studies of gene therapy or other treatment approaches. The
aim of the policy is to restore "scientific integrity" to the process, the
administration official said.

   "America's biomedical research enterprise experienced steady decline over the
past eight years, with shrinking budgets and policies that elevated ideology
over science. This slowed the pace of discovery and the search for cures," said
Sean Morrison, director of the University of Michigan's Center for Stem Cell
Biology.

   Critics denounced the move. "Taxpayers should not have to foot the bill for
experiments that require the destruction of human life," said Tony Perkins of
the conservative Family Research Council. "President Obama's policy change is
especially troubling given the significant adult stem cell advances that are
being used to treat patients now without harming or destroying human embryos."

   Indeed, there are different types of stem cells: So-called adult stem cells
that produce a specific type of tissue; younger stem cells found floating in
amniotic fluid or the placenta. Scientists even have learned to reprogram
certain cells to behave like stem cells.

   But even researchers who work with varying types consider embryonic stem
cells the most flexible and thus most promising form -- and say science, not
politics, should ultimately judge. "Science works best, and patients are served
best, by having all the tools at our disposal," Dr. Daley said.

   Mr. Obama made clear during the campaign that he would overturn Mr. Bush's
directive. During the campaign, Mr. Obama said: "I strongly support expanding
research on stem cells. I believe that the restrictions that President Bush has
placed on funding of human embryonic stem cell research have handcuffed our
scientists and hindered our ability to compete with other nations." He said he
would lift Mr. Bush's ban and "ensure that all research on stem cells is
conducted ethically and with rigorous oversight."

   "Patients and people who've been patient advocates are going to be really
happy," said Amy Comstock Rick of the Coalition for the Advancement of Medical
Research.

   The ruling will bring one immediate change: As of Monday, scientists who have
had to meticulously keep separate their federally funded research and their
privately funded stem cell work -- from buying separate microscopes to even
setting up labs in different buildings -- won't have that expensive hurdle
anymore.

   Next, scientists can start applying for research grants from the National
Institutes of Health. The NIH already has begun writing guidelines that, among
other things, are expected to demand that the cells being used were derived with
proper informed consent from the woman or couple who donated the original
embryo.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2009


                              248 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2009 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 7, 2009 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 012

LENGTH: 866 words

HEADLINE: Obama plans to reverse limit on stem-cell research

BYLINE: BEN FELLER AND LAURAN NEERGAARD, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Reversing an 8-year-old limit on potentially life-saving science, President
Obama plans to lift restrictions Monday on taxpayer-funded research using
embryonic stem cells.

   The long-promised move will allow a rush of research aimed at one day better
treating, if not curing, ailments from diabetes to paralysis - research that
crosses partisan lines, backed by such notables as Nancy Reagan and the late
Christopher Reeve. But it stirs intense controversy over whether government
crosses a moral line with such research.

   Obama will hold an event at the White House to announce the move, a senior
administration official said yesterday. The official spoke on condition of
anonymity because the policy had not yet been publicly announced.

   Embryonic stem cells are master cells that can morph into any cell of the
body. Scientists hope to harness them so they can create replacement tissues to
treat a variety of diseases - such as new insulin-producing cells for diabetics,
cells that could help those with Parkinson's disease or maybe even Alzheimer's,
or new nerve connections to restore movement after spinal injury.

   "I feel vindicated after eight years of struggle, and I know it's going to
energize my research team," said George Daley of the Harvard Stem Cell Institute
and Children's Hospital of Boston, a leading stem cell researcher.

   But the research is controversial because days-old embryos must be destroyed
to obtain the cells. They typically are culled from fertility-clinic leftovers
otherwise destined to be thrown away.

   Under President George W. Bush, taxpayer money for that research was limited
to a small number of stem cell lines that were created before Aug. 9, 2001,
lines that in many cases had some drawbacks that limited their potential
usability.

   But hundreds more of such lines - groups of cells that can continue to
propagate in lab dishes - have been created since then, ones that scientists say
are healthier, better suited to creating treatments for people rather than doing
basic laboratory science.

   Work didn't stop. Indeed, it advanced enough that this summer, the private
Geron Corp. will begin the world's first study of a treatment using human
embryonic stem cells, in people who recently suffered a spinal cord injury.

   Obama's plans don't fund creation of new lines. But it means that scientists
who until now have had to rely on private donations to work with these newer
stem cell lines can apply for government money for the research, just like they
do for studies of gene therapy or other treatment approaches.

   The aim of the policy is to restore "scientific integrity" to the process,
the administration official said.

   "America's biomedical research enterprise experienced steady decline over the
past eight years, with shrinking budgets and policies that elevated ideology
over science. This slowed the pace of discovery and the search for cures," said
Sean Morrison, director of the University of Michigan's Center for Stem Cell
Biology.

   Critics immediately denounced the move.

   "Taxpayers should not have to foot the bill for experiments that require the
destruction of human life," said Tony Perkins of the conservative Family
Research Council. "President Obama's policy change is especially troubling given
the significant adult stem cell advances that are being used to treat patients
now without harming or destroying human embryos."

   Indeed, there are different types of stem cells: So-called adult stem cells
that produce a specific type of tissue; younger stem cells found floating in
amniotic fluid or the placenta. Scientists even have learned to reprogram
certain cells to behave like stem cells.

   But even researchers who work with varying types consider embryonic stem
cells the most flexible and thus most promising form - and say that science, not
politics, should ultimately judge.

   "Science works best and patients are served best by having all the tools at
our disposal," Daley said.

   Obama made it clear during the campaign he would overturn Bush's directive.

   During the campaign, Obama said, "I strongly support expanding research on
stem cells. I believe that the restrictions that President Bush has placed on
funding of human embryonic stem cell research have handcuffed our scientists and
hindered our ability to compete with other nations."

   He said he would lift Bush's ban and "ensure that all research on stem cells
is conducted ethically and with rigorous oversight."

   "Patients and people who've been patient advocates are going to be really
happy," said Amy Comstock Rick of the Coalition for the Advancement of Medical
Research.

   The ruling will bring one immediate change: As of Monday, scientists who've
had to meticulously keep separate their federally funded research and their
privately funded stem cell work - from buying separate microscopes to even
setting up labs in different buildings - won't have that expensive hurdle
anymore.

   Next, scientists can start applying for research grants from the National
Institutes of Health. The NIH already has begun writing guidelines that, among
other things, are expected to demand that the cells being used were derived with
proper informed consent from the woman or couple who donated the original
embryo.

GRAPHIC: Seeing the future Some areas where researchers say stem cells of
various types may one day prove of value, although all the research is in very
early stages: California-based Geron Corp. will start the world's first study of
a treatment based on human embryonic stem cells this summer, a project aimed at
patients who recently suffered a spinal cord injury that left their legs
paralyzed. Study participants will be given a single injection within two weeks
of the injury, to see if the treatment helps repair damaged nerves. Stem cells
have helped paralyzed rodents move again in several ways, including helping to
regrow destroyed nerve cells in the spinal cord and successfully restoring
myelin, a nerve fiber insulation that helps maintain the electrical conduction
required to move. Scientists are working to create insulin-producing cells for
diabetics, and cells that could produce the brain chemical needed by Parkinson's
disease patients. Last year, researchers used human embryonic stem cells to
create cells that act - in lab tests - like natural red blood cells, offering
the potential to one day ramp up the blood supply. Embryonic stem cells aren't
the only type. Studies also are under way using adult stem cells, harvested from
patients' own blood or bone marrow, and one using cells derived from the
placenta is planned soon. Researchers also are learning to take ordinary cells
and reprogram them to act like stem cells. - Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2009


                              249 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                              March 1, 2009 Sunday
                                   5 EDITION

SECTION: ITOWNS; Pg. H8

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:

   AVON

   Top Bioengineering Honor: Dr. Cato T. Laurencin, of Avon, the University of
Connecticut Health Center's vice president for health affairs and the dean of
the UConn School of Medicine, is the 2009 winner of the Pierre Galletti Award,
the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering's highest honor.

   The Galletti Award recognizes contributions to public awareness of medical
and biological engineering and to promotion of the national interest in science,
engineering and education. The AIMBE cites Laurencin's "seminal contribution to
tissue engineering and international leadership in biomedical engineering."

   "I am both honored and humbled to receive the Pierre Galletti Award,"
Laurencin said. "The award is really a tribute to those instrumental in my
success in the field: Dr. Robert Langer, my Ph.D. adviser and lifelong mentor,
my many great students, and of course my wonderful family."

   Laurencin accepted the award Feb. 13 at the AIMBE's Annual Event in
Washington, D.C.

   A nationally prominent bioengineering expert and orthopedic surgeon,
Laurencin holds the Health Center's Van Dusen Endowed Chair in Academic Medicine
Center and is a professor in the Department of Orthopedic Surgery.

   More information about the American Institute for Medical and Biological
Engineering is available at www.aimbe.org.

   Biomedical Engineering Honor: The American Institute for Medical and
Biological Engineering has inducted Dr. Jay R. Lieberman, of Avon, into its
College of Fellows.

   Lieberman, director of the University of Connecticut Health Center's New
England Musculoskeletal Institute and professor and chairman of the Health
Center's Department of Orthopedic Surgery, was nominated for "significant and
sustained contributions to understanding the biology of arthroplasty implants,
and for innovative strategies for bone regeneration using gene therapy and
materials science," according to the AIMBE.

   The honor puts Lieberman in the exclusive company of the top 2 percent of
medical and biological engineers in their field, including distinguished
professors, researchers and heads of engineering and medical schools at major
universities, as well as entrepreneurs, directors of research and development,
and corporate leaders.

   "Dr. Lieberman has been and continues to be a major contributor to the
advancement of the science of biomedical engineering," says Dr. Cato T.
Laurencin, the Health Center's vice president for health affairs and dean of the
UConn School of Medicine, himself an AIMBE fellow. "The work being done in Dr.
Lieberman's lab, as well as the translational research taking place at the New
England Musculoskeletal Institute under his leadership, is of unquestionable
benefit to the patients of today and tomorrow. This is a proud day for UConn
Health Center, the New England Musculoskeletal Institute, and the University of
Connecticut as a whole."

   More information about the New England Musculoskeletal Institute is available
at http://nemsi.uchc.edu. More information about the American Institute for
Medical and Biological Engineering is available at www.aimbe.org.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: COLOR MUGS
 PHOTO 1: CATO  PHOTO 2: LIEBERMAN

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2009


                              250 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           February 28, 2009 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1097 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gets closer to a `cure' Success stories, and fewer risks

BYLINE: Carolyn Y. Johnson GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Two decades ago, medicine seemed on the cusp of a revolution. Doctors would
soon treat diseases at their very roots, inserting "good" genes to replace
patients' faulty ones. Gene therapy was a seductively straightforward idea that
offered promise for treating everything from cancer to sickle cell disease.

   But only now, after overcoming unexpected scientific obstacles and the
high-profile death of a teenage patient, is gene therapy racking up some
clear-cut successes. Promising studies are sending ripples of excitement through
the field. Some researchers are daring to use the word cure.

   "Yes, we have endured a few more years of questions about gene therapy: Does
it really work? Is it really safe?" said Savio Woo, a professor at Mount Sinai
School of Medicine in New York and a past president of the American Society of
Gene Therapy. "Now we can show it does work, and it's safe."

   That doesn't mean that people will be lining up for gene therapy any time
soon. No treatments have been approved yet. But researchers are finally pointing
to a few inspiring successes, untainted by the kind of tragedy that cast a
shadow on the field in the past.

   Gene therapy started the year with a bang: Researchers reported in the New
England Journal of Medicine that the technique cured eight of 10 children
suffering from usually lethal "bubble boy disease," a lack of immunity that
leaves children vulnerable to infections. After two to eight years, all the
patients were alive, unlike a previous trial.

   That came on top of an announcement last year that two groups of researchers
independently used gene therapy to treat a form of hereditary blindness in a
small number of patients, restoring some vision. The evidence, also published in
the New England Journal, was presented at a scientific conference in April.

   "I've never seen [such] a response. ... The audience basically burst into
applause, sustained applause, cheering even. It was just amazing," said Sam
Wadsworth, group vice president of translational research for Genzyme Corp. in
Cambridge, which has its own gene therapy program.

   Two other studies this month add to the momentum. The journal Nature
Medicine, reporting on a trial of 74 HIV patients, said gene therapy had modest
but promising effects. A study in the journal Human Gene Therapy reported that
two patients with rheumatoid arthritis saw a reduction in pain and swelling with
gene therapy.

   Eight-year-old Corey Haas of Hadley, N.Y., received gene therapy for a rare
disease called Leber's congenital amaurosis, which was causing him to go blind.
His family knew the treatment worked when, soon thereafter, Corey asked his
parents when two of his friends changed their hair color. He could finally tell
they were blonde, not brunettes.

   Ethan Haas, Corey's father, said the treatment was worth it. "He'll be
sitting in the back of the car and say, `I can see the trees go by, and I
couldn't see them before,"' Haas said.

   The optimism generated by recent gene therapy advances is a far cry from just
a few years ago.

   "I reached a point I wouldn't even admit I was doing gene therapy," said
Xandra Breakefield, a professor of neurology at Massachusetts General Hospital,
describing the shadow cast on the field by the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in
1999. He suffered from a genetic liver disease.

   The idea of gene therapy emerged decades ago, as it became clear that
scientists could isolate genes and insert them into cells. The first patient was
treated with gene therapy in 1990 and since then, hundreds of trials have been
conducted.

   But with the simple idea of gene therapy came a slew of scientific
challenges. Researchers use viruses, which can trigger the body's natural
defenses, to deliver genes into cells. Viruses can also insert genes into the
wrong place in the genome, potentially causing cancer.

   Gelsinger died when the viruses used in the experiment triggered a massive
immune response that led to his death. With his death came an outpouring of
national concern. Some trials were suspended, a Senate hearing was held to
examine the need for regulation, and it turned out some clinicians were not
properly reporting adverse events.

   Another shadow was cast beginning in 2002, when several children, part of a
French trial treating "bubble boy disease," began to develop leukemia.

   A sobered scientific community continued to work on the technology, but with
more caution and without the hype.

   Around the time Gelsinger died, Connie Burnett-West, diagnosed with fatal
lung cancer and told she had seven months to live, enrolled in a gene therapy
trial at the Mary Crowley Cancer Research Center, now in Dallas.

   She is cancer-free today, something she credits to gene therapy. "It looks
like to me, in my little nonscientific way, that this might be the wave of the
future," said Burnett-West, 63.

   What has changed since the days of doubt? Over the years, medical knowledge
has improved. Researchers understand better how the immune system works and how
to reduce the virus risk, in some cases by using a different virus. The tools
doctors use are safer and more effective, said Dr. Jean Bennett, a professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania, who treated hereditary
blindness in Corey Haas and others.

   Gene therapy "is now having results across different branches of medicine,"
said Dr. Fabio Candotti, a senior investigator with the National Human Genome
Research Institute. "That's what makes you feel some things are beginning to
work now."

   Still, scientists proceed cautiously. Christopher Evans, a professor of
orthopedic surgery at Harvard Medical School who worked on the arthritis trial,
said it had been reduced from six patients to two because of an adverse event in
an unrelated gene therapy trial.

   A second planned trial, he said, has been set back a year because a patient
died in a gene therapy arthritis trial led by a Seattle company in 2007, even
though that death was not necessarily connected to the therapy.

   Now one of the biggest challenges for the field may lie in the transition
from basic science lab to clinic and eventually to the market.

   "Because the medicine is so fundamentally different than what the
pharmaceutical industry knows, it's been very difficult to engage the industry,"
said Richard Mulligan, director of the Harvard Gene Therapy Initiative. "... I
think the technology is actually moving very nicely, but what's not been fixed
is the interest of the industrial concerns that can really make the stuff
happen."

   Carolyn Y. Johnson can be reached at cjohnson@globe.com

   SIDEBAR:

   GENE THERAPY

   PLEASE SEE PDF FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: Gene therapy helped Corey Haas, 8, regain some sight. He has a rare
disease that was causing him to go blind. Nancy and Ethan Haas with son Corey at
Children's Hospital on the morning after surgery. His father says the gene
therapy for a rare disease that was causing Corey to go blind was worth it.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2009


                              251 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           February 28, 2009 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 181 words

HEADLINE: Alkermes calls report of its moving speculation

BYLINE: TODD WALLACK

BODY:

   DAILY BRIEFING

   Alkermes Inc. said a published report that it is on the verge of moving from
Cambridge to Waltham is premature.

   According to the Boston Business Journal, the Cambridge biotech is in talks
to lease up to 100,000 square feet at 850 Winter St. in Waltham and sublet its
headquarters on Sidney Street in Cambridge. The company's lease in Cambridge
runs through 2012, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange
Commission. But Alkermes spokeswoman Rebecca Peterson said the firm is still
considering an array of options and has made no decision to move to Waltham.

   "It's pure speculation," Peterson said. "We're exploring a plethora of
opportunities."

   If Alkermes does eventually move, it would add to the list of Cambridge
biotechs that have headed to the suburbs in search of cheaper rents.

   Biogen Idec Inc., one of the state's largest biotech companies, recently said
it will move its corporate headquarters from Cambridge to Weston in 2010. Shire
Human Genetic Therapies is in the process of moving to Lexington. Amag
Pharmaceuticals Inc. moved to Lexington last fall.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2009


                              252 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2009 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 7942 words

HEADLINE: What's Wrong With Summer Stiers?

BYLINE: By ROBIN MARANTZ HENIG.

   Robin Marantz Henig, a contributing writer, is the author most recently of
''Pandora's Baby: How the First Test Tube Babies Sparked the Reproductive
Revolution.''

BODY:

   Her breasts are beautiful. This is a surprise. Seeing them looking so healthy
and normal reminds you how young this patient is and what her life might be like
if her body hadn't started to disintegrate in her childhood. If all you could
see were her breasts, you would think she were perfectly fine. But that would be
like the blind men trying to describe the elephant when each one focuses on a
single part. Look at the rest of this patient's torso, and you start to get a
sense of the fuller story. A little bit higher, near the left clavicle, you
notice a bump beneath the skin marking the implantation site of her vagus-nerve
stimulator, which delivers an electrical impulse to her brain every three
minutes to stave off the seizures that would otherwise plague her. A little
lower, on the right-hand side of her abdomen, you see a hole and a permanently
implanted tube through which she has hooked herself up to peritoneal-dialysis
equipment every night for the past five years, to flush out the toxins that her
ruined kidneys cannot.

     The metaphor of the blind men and the elephant applies not only to the
landscape of this woman's body but also to the approach of just about every
specialist who has seen her in the 20-plus years that she has suffered from her
mystery disease. The limitation of this method is what took this patient -- a
petite, feisty, 31-year-old woman from Oregon named Summer Stiers -- to this
consultation room at the National Institutes of Health on a Thursday in early
December, stripped down to her panties. Stiers was being examined by a
dermatologist, Maria Turner, who is among the dozen or so specialists who would
see her before the week was out. And even though Turner and the others are part
of the innovative new Undiagnosed Diseases Program at the N.I.H., and even
though they collectively represent the very best that American medicine has to
offer, they still began by approaching the big picture of Summer Stiers the way
most specialists do: like the blind men, one piece at a time.

     The Undiagnosed Diseases Program was designed to move past that halting
first step -- the inevitable result of the organ-by-organ orientation of most
medical specialties -- to achieve a more coherent view. Under the direction of
William Gahl, a longtime N.I.H. investigator who is also the clinical director
of the National Human Genome Research Institute, the program brings together
scientists from most of the N.I.H.'s 27 research institutes and centers on a
collegelike campus in Bethesda, Md. Organizationally, it creates a kind of
superdiagnostician, whose orientation would be to look at not just one piece at
a time but at the whole darn elephant.

     The program's methodology is still evolving, but for the first dozen or so
patients it worked this way: A primary-care physician sent in a letter
describing the case, followed by reams of records documenting the diagnostic
dead ends the patient had already confronted. Gahl personally reviewed all the
cases and discarded about three-quarters of them, usually because the problem
was insufficiently documented, seemed to be psychosomatic or, for some other
reason, left Gahl with the impression that the N.I.H. had little new to offer.
Then he took the most promising cases to his medical-review board, made up of
several dozen clinical investigators from all over the N.I.H. The board reviewed
10 or so cases at each monthly meeting, out of which it accepted just a handful,
the ones that seemed most likely to lead to a new insight into a known disease,
or, even better, to a diagnosis of a disease never before seen. Then Gahl's
staff arranged to bring in each patient for a week of assessment in Bethesda.
There, the patient would meet an array of specialists who did physical exams,
took histories and conducted whatever additional tests they needed: ultrasound
scans, M.R.I. scans, X-rays, electroencephalograms, maybe a spinal tap or a
biopsy of skin or other tissue.

     This part of the process is familiar to most of these patients, who have
usually been through something similar, in one medical center or many, during
the years they spent being ill with no one knowing why. What's different about
the new N.I.H. program is its collective approach. After the cavalcade of
specialists, each with a favorite organ, parades past the patient's bedside,
they gather in impromptu meetings to try to connect what they see to what others
are seeing that they themselves might have missed.

     This is especially important in someone like Stiers, whose doctor back home
described what happened to her as a ''cascading collapse of systems.'' Over the
past 20 years, her health declined bit by bit, unpredictably, from her head to
her toes: one eye removed, retinal bleeding in the other one, cavernous
hemangiomas in her brain, kidney failure, intestinal bleeding, osteoporosis,
bone-tissue death in both legs. She has been on disability since her 20s and
spends her days sleeping, doing some sort of physical therapy or going to
doctors. Since last summer she has also received hyperbaric oxygen therapy, in
which she lies in a high-pressure chamber. This relieves some of her symptoms,
possibly by delivering more oxygen to her eye, intestines and muscles. On the
bathroom door of her room at the N.I.H. hospital, she posted photos of some of
those most important to her: her three cats and her doctor in Oregon, Robert
Pinnick. In one photo she and Pinnick are dressed up for Halloween: he is in a
big blue costume involving an inflatable swimming tube, and she is a
five-foot-tall banana.

     Stiers spent the week of Dec. 8 at the N.I.H., seeing doctors all day long.
But it was only after she left that the real work began on figuring out what was
wrong with her. Even now, two months after she was discharged, scientists are
just beginning to use the DNA extracted from blood samples they took while she
was there. They will be working on that DNA for months to come -- looking for
deletions or repetitions of bits of her genome, sequencing specific genes
implicated in similar conditions -- and culturing her skin cells to look for
proteins whose presence or absence might be relevant, which will also take
months. But even after all this effort, it is quite possible that Stiers's
condition will never be diagnosed.

     The time frame for the program's success must be measured in decades, Gahl
says. And even then, for every diagnosis the group makes, he estimates that
there will be nine cases that remain mostly unresolved. Among the two dozen
patients who have been through the program so far, there have been just two
diagnoses, when patients admitted for neurological symptoms were found to have
rare forms of multiple sclerosis.

     Gahl's projected success rate is so low because his aim is so high. His
holy grail is a molecular diagnosis: finding not just a description of a new
disease but also an understanding of how it works at the level of the gene. With
this goal, the Undiagnosed Diseases Program aspires to be a model for how
genomic medicine will be done in the 21st century.

     ''This is what we're really all about at N.I.H.,'' says Gahl, a compact
58-year-old who tends to make dry jokes in his slightly gruff baritone about
almost everything -- except science. ''We're in this business because we want to
define and understand new diseases.'' The expectation is that this work will
offer important insights into the mechanisms of more common, more familiar
diseases too. But knowledge can be double-edged: useful for the community at
large, yes, and in some cases even helpful for the patient, but often
incomplete, confusing or unbearably grim. Gahl worries constantly about taking
away from his patients their last refuge: hope. When you're suffering from a
nameless malady, it's easy to think that the only thing standing between you and
a cure is the name itself.

     The limitation of knowledge is something that troubles Gahl -- or would
trouble him if he allowed himself to dwell on it. Gahl has been at the N.I.H.
for his entire career. He was born in a small town in Wisconsin, studied
biochemistry as an undergraduate at M.I.T. and received his medical degree from
the University of Wisconsin-Madison, where he also did his pediatrics residency
and went on to earn a Ph.D. in oncology research. When he first arrived at the
N.I.H. in 1981, it was as a fellow in the new field of medical genetics, back
when scientists felt they were on the threshold of the era of gene therapy, when
all you would need to do to cure a disease would be to find its gene, figure out
what the gene did and imitate it. The ensuing years have shown how difficult it
is to bridge the gap between the gene and the cure, which has been accomplished
far less often than people once predicted. Despite the accumulating
disappointments and false starts in genomic medicine, however, Gahl has never
given up searching for the genetic bull's-eye.

     As he described Summer Stiers to me for the first time in October, Gahl
sounded like a mixture of teacher, scientist, enthusiast and old-fashioned
healer. ''It looks like she has leaky membranes; what causes that?'' he began,
as though he were a senior attending physician and I were a medical student on
rounds. ''She had a diagnosis as a child of Coats disease, where fluid leaks out
of her eye, and then there's a reaction; her eye was removed. Her kidneys are
ruined; her gut is problematic, she had bleeding; her lungs are reasonably O.K.;
she's got calcification in her skin; her vessels leak.'' Gahl was certain he
would accept her into the program. ''This is an absolutely great case,'' he
said. It had everything he was looking for when he first helped design the
program: documentation of her long, perplexing history and the likelihood that
she was suffering from something entirely new. He was also impressed with the
patient's good disposition and coping mechanisms, which at the time he knew
about only because of how Robert Pinnick, her primary-care physician, described
her in his introductory letter. ''We appreciate your interest in helping us make
a diagnosis in this wonderful 31-year-old woman,'' Pinnick wrote, ''whose
indomitable will to survive and always positive and pleasant attitude make her
case not only tragic, but intriguing and a joy to pursue.''

     There was fierce competition among patients for a spot in the Undiagnosed
Diseases Program, which began as a $280,000 pilot initiative last May. (It was
later approved for full financing -- $1.9 million for fiscal year 2009.) By the
time Gahl showed me Stiers's case files in his cramped, chilly office that
October afternoon, he had received more than 1,000 inquiries. He was in the
process of reviewing about 300 charts and had accepted 35 patients. Another 100
or so charts were circulating through the N.I.H. for review by relevant
specialists, and Gahl expected that another 20 patients would be admitted to the
program before the end of the year. Summer Stiers, as Gahl anticipated, turned
out to be one of them.

     When I first spoke with Stiers by telephone in mid-November, I could tell
what it was about her that captivated Gahl. She was soft-spoken, with a lilting,
little-girl voice, and even when she was telling me about the devastating series
of physical breakdowns that have afflicted her, there was nothing complaining or
self-pitying about it. Only once did she give a hint of her frustration, when
she mentioned being told earlier that day that her phosphorus numbers were high,
always a concern on dialysis. ''They don't know why it is, since I'm doing
everything they tell me to do; I'm eating just what they tell me to,'' she said.
''That's kind of what my whole life is. I follow directions -- I'm a good little
follower, I do what I'm told -- and this happens anyway.''

     Stiers was born in 1977 in Portland, Ore. She had a troubled childhood: her
father left before she was born, and she remembers her mother as a distant,
difficult parent. The first sign of Stiers's health problems was that her teeth
were weird. They were odd, small and sort of pointy, and she was told there were
no buds for permanent teeth behind most of her baby teeth. When she was 10,
problems started with her right eye: a black mass in her central vision
resulting in several futile operations, which led to pain and inflammation and
eventually total blindness in that eye. Her condition was diagnosed as Coats
disease, a rare eye disorder, though her symptoms were not at all typical.
''They told me there was a lot of pressure,'' she said, ''and they tried to take
care of it surgically, like they did back then, cutting little slits to let the
pressure out.'' The operations only bruised and battered her; the eye hurt
constantly, the vision was destroyed and finally, on her 14th birthday, Stiers
had her right eye removed. A year later she received a prosthetic eye. She's now
on her third prosthetic, and the color matches her own blue-gray eye color so
perfectly that it's hard to tell which one is real.

     When she was 15, Stiers dropped out of high school and ran away to
Vancouver, Wash., just north of Portland. She doesn't like to talk about why she
left home, but she soon cut off almost all contact with her mother. When she was
18 she started having seizures -- blank, absent periods in which she would find
herself in a bathroom and not know how she ended up there. She was married at
the time and working at a car wash, sometimes getting in the way of the cars
during her seizures. She had to quit work, and she started looking for
treatment.

     Soon her husband left her, she told me, and Stiers called the only adult
she could count on: Doug Ward, who had been married to Stiers's mother for eight
years and adopted Summer when she was a girl. They had not seen each other for
years, but Ward and his current wife, Kim Plummer, drove a truck up to Vancouver
and took Stiers home with them to Bend, Ore. At the time, Plummer was in her
late 40s and childless. ''Kim needed a daughter, and Summer needed a mother,''
Ward says, explaining their unusual family arrangement. Since then, Plummer has
been the only person Stiers calls ''Mom.'' Stiers has no interest in contacting
her birth mother -- though it might help the N.I.H. scientists in their analysis
of her DNA to have samples from a biological relative for comparison.

     Stiers's medical problems escalated two years later, in early 2000. She was
22, and was five months pregnant by a new boyfriend. ''I got up one morning and
looked at my lower legs, and they were the size of my thighs,'' she said. ''I
poked at them, and I had edema -- of course I didn't know what it was then --
and I called the doctor, and they said, 'Get in here right now.' They airlifted
me to the Bend airport and jetted me to Portland.'' The doctors diagnosed
toxemia, a serious and potentially fatal complication of pregnancy that includes
high blood pressure and seizures. When they could not get her blood pressure
down, Stiers said they told her, ''We're not losing both of you, we're taking
the baby.'' Nine years later, the memory of that lost baby still seemed raw.

     Stiers was told to go home and wait for her blood pressure to return to
normal, but it never did. She was profoundly anemic, so she was hustled over to
cancer specialists to be tested for leukemia or other bone-marrow cancers. She
developed joint pain, so she was evaluated for autoimmune disorders like lupus
and rheumatoid arthritis. She took Vioxx and Celebrex for the pain, but that led
to uncontrollable vomiting. She stopped the painkillers and took steroids when
the vomiting persisted.

     It was two years before she was evaluated by a kidney specialist. He took a
biopsy of Stiers's kidneys and found that they looked odd, flecked with strange
filamentous material whose origin no one could place. Within a year, Stiers's
kidney function declined, and she suffered from near-constant headaches,
vomiting and diarrhea. Always slim, she lost 20 pounds. She was placed on kidney
dialysis in October 2003. She immediately felt better and has been on dialysis
ever since.

     In the following years, new problems would emerge in the ''cascading
collapse.'' Bleeding on the retina of her left eye, worsened by the blood
thinner she took when she was on hemodialysis. Multiple bleeding sites in her
brain, accompanied by areas of calcification, one or both of which probably
caused her seizures. Pain and weakness in both legs, eventually diagnosed as
avascular necrosis -- bone death because not enough blood was reaching her
extremities. Intestinal bleeding. Cessation of menstruation sometime in her late
20s. Insertion in 2007 of the vagus-nerve stimulator to stop the seizures. The
emergence in her head of venous lakes, which are benign tumors caused by
collapsing capillaries, accompanied by a palpable softening of her skull that
Stiers calls ''my sinkhole.'' Development of dark, scaly patches on both legs,
beginning in 2007, so rigid that it feels as if her legs are sheathed in stone,
so painful she is forced to spend some days in a narcotic fog.

     With each new diagnostic test her case grew more baffling. The first
pathologist had never before seen the filamentous material he found on her
kidney biopsy. Another pathologist saw something similar on a subsequent biopsy,
taken from a nerve in her leg: again that filamentous material, which looked a
lot like radiation damage. A gastroenterologist also mentioned radiation damage
in describing her intestine's multiple fragile bleeding sites as seen on an
endoscopy. But Stiers had never been exposed to radiation.

     On the phone, despite the litany of physical decline, Stiers sounded as
chipper as a character from ''The Sound of Music'' as she listed the things that
make her happy: her three cats, which she calls ''my children''; riding horses
once a week for the hippotherapy to keep her legs strong; the ''grandmas and
grandpas'' in her twice-weekly senior water-aerobics class, who watch out for
her in case she has a seizure in the pool; Ward and Plummer; Dr. Pinnick. She
also seemed to find it amusing that at the age of 31, her hair is almost
entirely gray.

     Diagnosis is a complex mixture of art and science. We may think we know how
it works from watching ''House'' on TV: one brilliant mind throws all his
attention at a problem, worries it like a rosary bead and finally has an ''aha''
moment in which he makes a connection that all the other doctors have missed.
Often, on the show at least, it comes down to the insight of that individual,
the person gifted, for whatever reason, with the ability to see colchicine
poisoning when everyone else sees only a cough.

     But in the real world of clinical diagnosis, there is no crabby genius
spending days and nights at a whiteboard, enumerating and eliminating
hypotheses, barking at his residents and taking a stab at a succession of
hunches until he happens to hit on the one that explains everything. The best
diagnosticians depend on induction rather than intuition. Physicians call it
differential diagnosis, and it is taught in medical schools as a process of
elimination that occurs in a particular order. You amass all the information --
the patient's medical history, the results of the physical examination, the
findings of as many medical tests as you can think of -- and you ask, What
disease could explain all these findings? What else could explain them? What
else?

     On television, the mystery is always neatly wrapped up by the end of the
episode. In reality, many medical mysteries are never solved. And by the time
people with undiagnosed diseases make their way to the N.I.H., most of the
logical diagnoses have already been considered and rejected, making a nice tidy
ending even more unlikely.

     Young physicians are often taught some variation of the catch phrase ''When
you hear hoofbeats in Central Park, don't expect zebras.'' In other words, focus
on the most likely explanation for everything you observe. But for Undiagnosed
Diseases Program patients for whom answers are so singularly elusive, those
hoofbeats are likely to herald zebras after all. There are some 6,600 conditions
currently identified, and most physicians are unlikely to encounter more than a
fraction of them. That leaves thousands of others, any of which might come
galloping into the N.I.H. at any time.

     As in the other cases that will rotate through the Undiagnosed Diseases
Program, Summer Stiers's illness is not really undiagnosed; it is, if anything,
overdiagnosed. She has had more than her share of working hypotheses over the
past 20 years: leukemia, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis,
celiac disease, ulcerative colitis, Crohn's disease. Each one was rejected in
turn, either because it failed to explain everything or because objective
testing ruled it out. With most of the common explanations eliminated, it was
time to start thinking zebra.

     Several days after I spoke to Stiers, I called Gahl at work to see what he
was planning for her week at the N.I.H. in December. It was the day after
Thanksgiving; Gahl rarely takes holidays. ''The first thing doctors always think
about is whether there's a unifying hypothesis,'' he told me. ''When you get
bizarre stuff like this, you automatically assume they are related. That was
confirmed when they started to get biopsies of different tissues and they all
looked similar.''

     Based on the N.I.H. pathologist's review of all the biopsy reports and
slides submitted as part of Stiers's case history, Gahl said he suspected the
primary problem was in her basement membranes. The basement membrane is a thin
sheet outside some tissues, on which a single layer of cells line up like tiles,
all facing one direction to support the tissue's architecture and to provide a
barrier that keeps out damaging material. The membrane is composed of several
types of protein, including collagens and glycoproteins, and it is found in just
about every kind of tissue: skin, eye, muscle, the lining of the capillaries,
the glomerulus of the kidney, the alveolus of the lung.

     What pleased Gahl about the basement-membrane hypothesis is that it
followed a rule of thumb in medicine known as diagnostic parsimony -- also
called Occam's razor -- which seeks a single diagnosis for all symptoms whenever
possible. A problem with the basement membrane could, all by itself, explain
almost all the organ breakdowns Stiers has experienced since the age of 10. ''I
would bet you practically anything that all these things are related,'' Gahl
said.

     Before Stiers's arrival the following week, Gahl planned to do some reading
on basement-membrane disorders and to look for an expert somewhere at the N.I.H.
''There are basic scientists here who study the basement membrane as their
life's work,'' he said, referring to investigators who work only in the lab,
examining cell cultures or animals rather than human patients. ''We just have to
find them.'' In the sprawling bureaucracy of the N.I.H., a $28 billion federal
agency that employs 6,000 researchers, it can be difficult sometimes to know who
is who. A strength of the Undiagnosed Diseases Program is that it offers a
systematic way to corral those investigators -- about a quarter of them
clinicians with medical degrees, the rest scientists with doctorates in a
variety of biological subspecialties -- and get a lot of them thinking about the
same mystery.

     Gahl tried to keep his expectations modest for Stiers's week at the N.I.H.
''Largely it's to get a lot of consultations from all the smart people here and
to synthesize their suggestions,'' he said.

     And a diagnosis for Stiers's condition? Not by the end of the week, for
sure, and possibly not even at the end of several months' more lab
investigations. ''I was pretty explicit with her on the phone not to expect much
of this program in terms of her own diagnosis,'' he said, but rather to feel
like part of a larger contribution to scientific knowledge in general, to the
elucidation of a new disease. Gahl said he thought that she got it. He mentioned
Robert Pinnick's comment on Stiers's ''positive and pleasant attitude.'' After
his own phone conversation with her, Gahl said, ''I think she sort of has an
accurate understanding of the limits of what medicine can do for her.''

     When Summer Stiers finally arrived at the N.I.H. Clinical Center on Monday,
Dec. 8, her pleasant attitude was nowhere in sight. She and her traveling
companions, Doug Ward and Kim Plummer, were still grumpy about the trip from
Oregon. On better days they might have focused on the program's largess --
everything about this trip, from the airfare for Stiers and one parent to the
hospital costs to lodging at the Edmond J. Safra Family Lodge -- was free to
them, all of it paid for by the N.I.H. But on the first morning, they spent a
lot of time talking about their trouble driving from the airport to Bethesda the
previous night and going through security to get onto the N.I.H. campus and
finding the cafeteria closed. Stiers settled down after she had a chance to
order breakfast -- an omelette with Cheddar cheese, tomatoes, onions, mushrooms
and ham, and some apple juice to help her swallow the four pills she takes at
the beginning of every meal or snack to help her regulate phosphorus -- and her
headache finally went away. As Plummer pointed out to me, Stiers is easily set
off course; she needs all her emotional and physical resources to get through a
day, and when anything goes awry, she tends to take it hard. But after this bad
beginning, Stiers rallied and showed herself to be tougher than anyone expected.

     The family looked like a band of aging hippies from the Great Northwest,
with Stiers in a hooded red sweatshirt, jeans and big sheepskin boots. All of
them have wild gray hair, making them look biologically related even though
they're not. Ward also has a big white beard, and all through this week in
December, with Christmas decorations on every wall and a gingerbread-house
contest in the hospital lobby, he was told more often than he could count how
much he resembled Santa Claus.

     After breakfast, there began the first of a dozen medical histories and
physical exams that Stiers would go through over the next four days. The blind
men approached the elephant, the specialists concentrating on the organs they
knew best. Sometimes their listening skills were a bit deficient, sometimes they
were as sharp as Sherlock Holmes's. Almost everyone, for instance, heard Stiers
say she began dialysis on Oct. 27, 2003. But only Lakshmi Gopal, the
gastroenterology fellow, noticed the odd specificity. ''Why do you remember that
date in particular?'' she asked.

     ''Because it's when I started to feel better,'' Stiers said. A small thing,
but one more piece of the elephant, one more detail of how dreadful Stiers must
have felt in the months her kidneys were shutting down.

     Some of the specialists brought out the jokiness in Stiers, who has a racy
sense of humor that emerges when she likes you; with others, she sat very still
in exaggerated, strained politeness. She was stoic during every encounter. At
home she sleeps 10 hours a night, naps for another 2 or 3, but here she
soldiered through the long, repetitive days and never asked for a break. She
said she was determined to use her time in Bethesda to help get some answers for
others in the future. It was perhaps significant that, during her first formal
interview with Gahl that day, her main question -- which caught Gahl by surprise
-- was how she could donate her body to the N.I.H. after she died.

     At the end of the long first day in Room 5-2624 in the northwest wing of
the Clinical Center, Stiers started warming the bags of fluid she would need for
her nightly dialysis treatment, and Gahl hurried back to her room to see how she
was doing. James Balow, the nephrologist, who was last on the day's lineup,
stopped him in the hall. Balow wanted to offer his diagnostic suggestions, all
of them kidney-related. Gahl listened politely, unconvinced; Balow's hypotheses
explained some of Stiers's symptoms, but they didn't explain everything. And
Gahl was still looking for one elegant, simple explanation for the whole
cascading collapse.

     The potential limitation of Occam's razor comes to the fore in someone like
Stiers, whose disease is so protean and so complex. Sometimes simplicity is a
good thing, but sometimes simplicity is just too simple. In the 1950s, a
professor of medicine at Duke University, John Hickam, was said to have proposed
an alternative to Occam's razor that he called, tongue slightly in cheek,
Hickam's dictum: ''Patients can have as many diseases as they damn well
please.'' Stiers might have something going on with her basement membranes, or
some other problem that leads to lack of integrity in vessels throughout her
body. But some of her symptoms might be secondary complications related only
tangentially to the underlying flaw.

     On Wednesday morning, Dec. 10, while Stiers worked her way down the long
list of consultants -- eye doctor, dentist, dermatologist, hematologist,
acupuncturist -- Gahl and Galina Nesterova, the genetics fellow working on
Stiers's case, met in Gahl's office with Yoshihiko Yamada, a leading
basement-membrane investigator at the N.I.H. Two geneticists from Gahl's lab
also attended. Yamada described what can happen in laboratory animals when the
basement membranes lack integrity, and there was a ripple of recognition around
the table when he listed many of the symptoms Stiers has, too: gray hair, tooth
abnormalities, muscle degeneration, vascular defects, cartilage and bone
abnormalities and abnormal nails.

     Would you recognize a nail abnormality related to basement-membrane
dysfunction if you saw it? Gahl asked.

     ''Not in the human,'' Yamada said with an apologetic smile. ''Only in the
mouse.''

     Yamada said there were at least 20 proteins, possibly many more, that
express themselves in the basement membrane, meaning that if Stiers's basement
membrane was involved, a defect in any of those proteins could be part of her
molecular diagnosis. How to limit the search? A geneticist, Marjan Huizing,
suggested figuring out first which tissue was damaged as a result of the primary
disease, rather than as a secondary complication of kidney failure; this might
determine which basement-membrane proteins to start with.

     ''O.K.,'' Gahl said, turning to Yamada. Gahl summarized what they knew
about Stiers so far based on her previous test results. ''If we knew muscle
wasn't involved, and intrinsic neuronal tissue wasn't involved, and bone is
involved and vessels and renal tubules, then that may tell us what components to
go after.''

     Yamada thought for a moment and suggested the protein fibulin, of which
there are seven forms. ''Great,'' Gahl said, smiling for the first time that
morning. He wrote it down as Yamada spelled it out, because Gahl was unfamiliar
with the word and Yamada has a thick accent. F-i-b-u-l-i-n.

     About 4 the next afternoon, Thursday, Dec. 11, Gahl asked all the
consultants on Stiers's case to meet him at 4:30 in a small area outside her
room. At least 16 specialists had traipsed past Stiers's bedside in the previous
four days; almost all of them managed to carve out time for the spontaneous
meeting. Not surprisingly, the dermatologist suggested a dermatologic diagnosis,
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome. The nephrologist, James Balow, still liked his
kidney diagnoses. The rheumatologist didn't want to rule out Sjogren syndrome
just yet. ''Any other specialists around here who want to explain your own
favorite organ?'' Gahl asked with a little chuckle.

     The balkanization of medicine accounts for an increasingly constrained
approach to diagnosis -- an approach that, as Gahl's joke suggests, is defined
by a specialist's focused knowledge rather than by some broader understanding of
the patient. ''This is partly because of how medicine is taught -- how it has to
be taught,'' said Kathryn Montgomery, professor of medical humanities and
bioethics and of medicine at the Northwestern University medical school in
Chicago, when we spoke by telephone. ''Doctors get educated to solve problems in
their own terms. They've got only a certain set of information and experience at
their disposal.''

     Few physicians are trained to look at the patient as a whole, Montgomery
says, with the exception of generalists like internists and pediatricians. In an
era of increasing specialization, she sees the Undiagnosed Diseases Program as
an institutional atavism, a way to reconstruct the old-school generalist ''on a
multiperson level.''

     But the problem is not just overspecialization, Montgomery says; it's the
complex nature of diagnosis itself, and the difficulty of trying to teach the
process in medical school. Because diagnosis involves so many intersecting and
often incompatible parts, medical students have traditionally been taught to do
opposite things at once when they meet a new patient: suspend judgment, but form
an initial impression; look for a single diagnosis to explain all symptoms, but
watch for co-morbidities; avoid the anecdotal, but pay attention to stories;
expect the diagnosis to be a common disease, but don't forget the rare ones.
This dissonant approach was recently modified in some medical schools, according
to Montgomery, with students now taught to begin with a ''working diagnosis''
that they refine as they accumulate data that either confirm or refute their
first guess. But while the working-diagnosis method might clarify some things,
Montgomery worries about what might be lost: a sense, as she wrote in her 2006
book, ''How Doctors Think: Clinical Judgment and the Practice of Medicine,'' of
an alternative pathway. Because of the inherent contradictions traditionally
taught in medical school, she wrote, new doctors have been able to achieve ''a
certain balance, a consciousness that, no matter which way they may work through
a diagnosis, there is another way.''

     Gahl's way, at least in regard to Summer Stiers, had little room for
contradictions. After hearing his colleagues' thoughts at the Thursday-afternoon
meeting, he mentioned his hypothesis that she had a defect in her basement
membranes. He said his plan was to collect skin cells from Stiers, try to grow
them in the lab and look for the seven forms of fibulin -- the word that was
dictated to him only the day before -- as a first step in hunting down a
possible genetic defect that might cause her basement membranes to leak.

     ''I don't like it,'' Balow said, ruffling the pages of Stiers's chart with
some irritation. ''The basement membranes to me don't look abnormal.'' Gahl
pointed out that the N.I.H. pathologist read the kidney biopsy as showing a
''split basement membrane,'' but Balow said what he saw on the biopsy looked
more like a ''split appearance; it's not really split, it's a double contour.''
In any case, he continued, other diseases of the basement membrane of the
kidney, like Alport syndrome, have a completely different appearance. Gahl
parried, ''But those are the known ones.''

     Diseases of the basement membrane of the skin look different too, added the
dermatology resident, listing a few. ''Again, those are the known ones,'' Gahl
said, starting to sound a little testy. A variation of the zebra conundrum: If
you have a completely unknown disease but a hypothesis based on some
similarities to a few known diseases, how many dissimilarities are enough to
toss out your hypothesis?

     Everyone agreed that the stony, scaly plates on Stiers's shins, the source
of so much pain, were probably not a symptom of the underlying disease process,
whatever it was. They also disputed her Oregon doctors' conclusion that the
plates were caused by calciphylaxis. The consensus was that the hardened skin on
her legs was probably a result of a complication seen in dialysis patients who
are given a particular chemical during an M.R.I. to make the brain structures
show up better. The chemical, gadolinium, is now known to cause a stiffening
syndrome in people whose kidneys are unable to clear it out of their systems.
The trouble with her shins was taken off the table in the search for an
underlying diagnosis.

     On Friday morning, Dec. 12, Gahl presented a synthesis of everyone's
thinking during a wrap-up session for Stiers and Ward (Plummer had already left
for a weekend with her sister in Pennsylvania). He filled her in on the details
of basement membranes and a related hypothesis, that there's a defect in the
region between cells known as the tight junction. He also told her that his
colleagues thought that the problem on her lower legs was nephrogenic systemic
fibrosis, not calciphylaxis. Stiers nodded sagely. Her lifetime of doctor visits
had made her fluent in medicalese, even though she has only a high-school
equivalency diploma. She had just one question for Gahl: If this was an entirely
new disease, was there any chance they might name it after her? She sort of
liked the ring of ''Summer's syndrome.''

     As a scientist, Gahl sees understanding disease at the molecular level as
his ultimate ambition. But as a clinician, he sees its limits. ''We have a
two-pronged goal here at N.I.H.: medically helping the patient and advancing
scientific knowledge,'' he said. Molecular diagnosis, telling the story of the
disease through the genes involved, is not necessary to accomplish the first
goal of patient care; diseases are often diagnosed and satisfactorily treated
even when the molecular basis is unknown, and discovering the genes involved
does not always improve patients' lives. But molecular diagnosis is an important
part of accomplishing the second goal of scientific advance.

     Many diseases are defined by their signs and symptoms alone, Gahl said, and
that's fine as far as it goes. But for a research institution, especially one
that is seeing what might be the only patient with a particular disease, a
description of signs and symptoms is not enough. What Gahl is looking for is the
whole package: a defect in the patient's DNA that points to a specific genetic
mutation; evidence that explains how that mutation would cause the patient's
symptoms; and a clinical demonstration that the protein -- or other chemicals --
made by the gene is missing or defective, and that its derangement accounts for
the symptoms.

     A molecular diagnosis for Stiers, if one is to emerge, will probably
originate in a laboratory at the N.I.H., perhaps in collaboration with one of
the few state-of-the-art clinical laboratories scattered across the country that
are part of the N.I.H. network. ''We're at the frontiers here; people don't do
this every day,'' Gahl said. ''We can't say to a lab, 'Give us a fibulin
antibody test on this unstained kidney.' We have to arrange to have them do that
-- or do it ourselves.''

     The genetic work on Stiers's blood and saliva samples began a few weeks
after she went home to Oregon. In mid-January a colleague of Gahl's, the
geneticist Thomas Markello, received the results of a test known as a
one-million-SNP array, and his computer analysis of those results is still under
way. Each SNP (pronounced ''snip''), which stands for single nucleotide
polymorphism, represents a small change in the three billion nucleotides in the
human genome. In isolation, any single SNP is likely to be of little
consequence. But several SNPs in a row could represent a deletion -- or, in some
cases, a duplication -- of several thousand nucleotides, which could interfere
with the behavior of a known gene. Because of information gained from the Human
Genome Project, which first sequenced the entire human genome in 2000, the
location of SNPs can point scientists to which particular genes might be
affected and what the functional consequences of a mutation might be.

     Every person has about 50 SNP regions on a million-SNP array, most of them
representing genetic variations that are either completely meaningless or that
code for something harmless, like red hair rather than brown. Stiers had the
expected number of SNP regions, about 47. The question now -- which is still
unanswered, five weeks after the test results came back -- is which of those 47,
if any, is related to her disease. Markello has spent the last month comparing
Stiers's SNPs to those of known disorders, paying special attention to those
found near genes involved in making basement-membrane proteins like fibulin. An
intriguing finding is a mutation on chromosome 9, where both copies of a
particular stretch of nucleotides are missing (chromosomes come in pairs, and
sometimes mutations occur in only one chromosome, sometimes in both). Stiers is
missing six SNPs in a row on that chromosome, representing a deletion of at
least 4,694 nucleotides, which intrigues Markello because the deletion is not
far from a gene whose absence causes a rare, always-fatal neurological disease.
Stiers doesn't have that disease -- the gene itself seems to be intact -- but
does her six-SNP deletion affect how that crucial gene functions? ''This change
may be so far away from the start of the gene that it has no effect,'' Markello
told me in an e-mail message. ''But it is close enough to begin the process of
planning a cell-biology experiment with her cells to test whether the gene
[protein or other products] is being made at the same amount or not.''

     While running computer analyses of Stiers's results, which can be
painstaking and tedious, Markello has been buoyed by the million-SNP array
results in an unrelated case that came in about the same time from another
Undiagnosed Diseases Program patient. The patient, a 51-year-old woman, came to
the N.I.H. in December complaining of vague neurological symptoms -- overall
fatigue and burning and stinging in her feet and spine -- that seemed to become
worse when she ate foods with spices, artificial additives and a long list of
other ingredients. The million-SNP array indicated a complete deletion of about
a third of both copies of a gene known to be involved in the digestion of
certain starches. It was never previously associated with any human disease. Now
Gahl is making plans to bring the patient back to Bethesda to look for a
specific neurological change that should occur in people unable to digest the
starch normally. If the scientists can confirm their genetic findings
clinically, the program might have its first new diagnosis.

     In Stiers's case, however, the search continues. While Markello conducts
further analysis of her million-SNP array, the geneticist Marjan Huizing and her
colleagues are cultivating samples of Stiers's cells to look for fibulin
directly, as well as for other relevant proteins like those involved in the
maintenance of tight junction cells. Other investigators in Gahl's lab are
growing Stiers's skin cells in culture -- or, more accurately, they are trying
to. The fibroblasts, a type of skin cell, are barely growing in the dish. The
melanocytes, another type, are growing into a bizarre shape, with long,
proliferative extensions. Gahl said his team is trying to figure out what to
make of these findings. ''Why cells grow in culture, why they don't grow in
culture, there could be 100 different explanations,'' he told me. ''All we know
is that it's very unusual. It could be a measure of the extent of the pathology
in those cells.''

     Like the scientists in the Undiagnosed Diseases Program, the patients also
tend to have a double mission. On one hand, they hope to advance scientific
knowledge and leave something useful behind; on the other hand, they're hoping
the information might improve their day-to-day lives. In their unguarded
moments, they even utter words like ''cure.'' The double-edged nature of their
motivation, the strange mix of altruism and self-interest, is a source of
tension for a man like Gahl. He is personally opposed to pursuing diagnosis at
any cost, having seen cases in which, as he puts it, ''too heavy a pursuit of
these things can tear families apart.'' Yet he is professionally dependent on
just that kind of determined, slightly desperate pursuit. If it weren't for the
courage and single-mindedness of these patients, he knows that clinical research
at the N.I.H. would grind to a halt.

     ''It's always a balance,'' Gahl, the father of four grown children, said.
''Everyone who's come here has already self-selected as being very, very
interested in pursuing things; the ones who aren't interested we never see. What
we really have to do is sort of modulate these patients in the other
direction.'' Under the stress of an undiagnosed disease, he said, ''people tend
to react the same way they would react under other circumstances, just in a
little more intense form.'' How could it be otherwise? The prospect of physical
decline in the face of an unknown future represents, after all, the essence of
the human condition.

     When the Undiagnosed Diseases Program's first pediatric patient, 2
1/2-year-old Ragan Thursby of Florida, was admitted in October, Gahl said he
thought he recognized the signs of parents who would go too far, to the point of
pursuing every diagnostic option, spending money they didn't have and
shortchanging Ragan's healthy older sister. Gahl later realized that he was
wrong. After the first day, Ragan's father sought out Gahl to demarcate his own
bottom line: his unwillingness to put his daughter through needless pain for
uncertain benefit. At that point Gahl decided it must be Ragan's mother who was
driven, without limit, to find a name for Ragan's profound developmental delay,
no matter what the emotional and financial toll. But the week at the N.I.H.
seemed to shift priorities in Ragan's mother as well. ''I'm finished now,'' she
said at the end of the week. She was at last ready to turn over the search for
Ragan's mystery to the N.I.H scientists, she said, and was heading back home to
Tallahassee to do what Gahl suggested: to continue to fight to provide Ragan
with the best local services she could; and to take a breath and just love her
little girl.

     During each patient's week at the N.I.H., Gahl's staff usually builds in
time for visits with consultants who focus on care rather than diagnostics:
physical therapists, speech pathologists, pain experts and psychiatrists. This
is the staff members' way, it seems, of helping patients derive some personal
benefit from the experience -- a small thing sometimes, a party favor of sorts,
but at least some tangible recognition of how central the patients are to the
whole enterprise. Ragan Thursby left the N.I.H. with a lighter pair of orthotics
that made it easier for her to learn to walk. And Summer Stiers went home with a
CD to help her meditate her way through the pain in her legs and her back, as
well as with a prescription for acupuncture.

     Stiers, who has spent much time thinking about things like legacies, also
went home with something else. When the wrap-up meeting with Gahl was over, she
and Ward returned to her room to pack her things. They pronounced themselves
satisfied with the way the week went. Before she came, Stiers told me as we
hugged goodbye, she thought she couldn't offer any real information about her
disease until after she was dead and had donated her body to science. But, she
said, ''all these tests were something I could do and make a difference, so
someone else wouldn't have to go through this, having things go wrong and not
knowing what is coming next.'' She even dares to hope, she said, that the
scientists might learn something that will point them to a way to ease her own
psychic and physical pain.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE WOLKOFF) (pg.MM23)
Dr. William Gahl, director of the Undiagnosed Diseases Program at the N.I.H.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE WOLKOFF) (pg.MM25)
(PHOTOGRAPH BY KATHERINE WOLKOFF) (pg.MM28) CHART: TEAM SUMMER: Some of the
doctors and clinicians who worked on the case of Summer Stiers in the
Undiagnosed Diseases Program of the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda,
Md. In a time of specialization, the N.I.H. program attempts to reconstruct an
old-school generalist on a multiperson level.: Thomas Markello CLINICAL
GENETICIST Did a DNA analysis of Stiers's blood cells.
Colleen Wahl NURSE PRACTITIONER Coordinated the medicalteam visits.
James Balow NEPHROLOGIST Examined the kidney biopsy and helped make a diagnosis
for Stiers's scaly leg patches.
Lakshmi Gopal GASTROENTEROLOGIST Reviewed Stiers's gastrointestinal history,
endoscopies and biopsies.
Yoshihiko Yamada CRANIOFACIAL RESEARCHER Shared information about basement
membranes with the medical team.
Galina Nesterova CLINICAL GENETICIST Looked for oddities in Stiers's physical
measurements.
Adeline Ge ACUPUNCTURE CONSULTANT Gave Stiers an acupuncture treatment.
Thomas Hart DENTIST AND GENETICIST Performed an oral evaluation.
Maria Turner DERMATOLOGIST Looked for skinpigment changes under ultraviolet
light.
 Mark Gourley RHEUMATOLOGIST Evaluated Stiers's medical history for possible
autoimmune disorders. (pg.MM27)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2009


                              253 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 15, 2009 Sunday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Business

LENGTH: 1438 words

HEADLINE: OHSU gets money from Florida for new vaccine lab Florida will pay for
the center, and Oregon gets the prestige Florida money, OHSU research OHSU:
Florida center to use elderly in research

BYLINE: LES ZAITZ, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Oregon's university finds funding on the Treasure Coast for a new
vaccine lab

   OHSU gets money from Florida for new vaccine lab Florida will pay for the
center, and Oregon gets the prestige

   Florida money, OHSU research Florida center

   to use elderly

   in research

   LES ZAITZ

   A phone call from one scientist to another put Oregon Health & Science
University on the path to build a new research laboratory 3,100 miles away on
Florida's Treasure Coast.

   This summer, the Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute Florida is expected to
open in borrowed space, awaiting construction of its own state-of-the-art
complex.

   Florida will pay for sophisticated equipment for research into viruses and
vaccines. For a time, the state also will pay the scientists for their work. The
$60 million granted to OHSU is part of Florida's effort to stake a claim as the
nation's newest biotech base. For OHSU, the Florida venture opens the way for
scientific discoveries in human health, the reward being prestige and profits.

   The venture is a counterpoint to deep cuts OHSU is undertaking in Oregon to
slash millions in costs.

   The improbable pairing of an Oregon university with Florida's ambition can be
traced to the long professional association of two leading scientists --Jay
Nelson, founder of OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, and Richard
Houghten, founder of the Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies.

   Early in their careers, the two men worked together in California, and later
their institutes shared research on common projects.

   Houghten was an early beneficiary of Florida's push. He agreed to open a
satellite of his California-based institute, lured by Florida's promise of lots
of money. After he was established in Florida, officials there sought his help
recruiting other research centers.

   OHSU's serious financial troubles were a long way off when Houghten called
Nelson in spring 2007. He shared his story and urged his colleague to consider
applying for the millions Florida put up for grabs.

   The idea intrigued Nelson. His research team in Oregon had gained
professional acclaim for research into viruses and immunology using animals such
as monkeys. The scientists at the Hillsboro-based institute weren't equipped to
take discoveries on to human applications. And the cramped quarters allowed no
hope for expansion.

   Florida could change all that, Nelson thought, with a new center focused on
human research. He could design a laboratory from scratch, hire some of the
world's top researchers and be less restrained by the constant hunt for research
grants.

   Nelson stunned his boss, Dan Dorsa, with news that Florida might just hand
OHSU several million dollars. Dorsa, OHSU's vice president for research, called
Florida officials himself to get assurances that the offer was indeed serious.

   "The idea was exciting but daunting to think about," Dorsa said.

   He considered the challenge of managing a transcontinental research effort
and how the idea would be perceived at home. Oregonians have invested millions
boosting OHSU's research efforts and pushing the biotechnology industry.

   Dorsa tested the idea with two veteran legislators, including one who sits on
the board of OHSU's foundation. Both backed the idea but cautioned that OHSU
would need a good public explanation for why the Oregon university would be
operating in Florida.

   "People can misunderstand what might be transpiring," said OHSU President Joe
Robertson, an early supporter of Nelson's idea. Florida fit neatly into OHSU's
strategy of capitalizing on intellectual property, Robertson said.

   No OHSU money in deal

   As OHSU executives crafted the request to Florida, one principle emerged as
essential: No Oregon money would go to the Florida project. Internal OHSU
records released to The Oregonian showed OHSU executives were keen to keep that
promise. They checked repeatedly over two months for any hint that Oregon money
was leaking to Florida. The new center had to be self-supporting.

   The questioning irritated one of Nelson's chief associates.

   "This is turning into an ordeal," researcher Janko Nikolich-Zugich wrote in
an e-mail to an OHSU executive. "Most other places would be happy that this
opportunity exists, rather than afraid of the achieved success."

   But OHSU executives pressed to ensure the university could honestly tell the
public that no Oregon money would flow to Florida. Lois Davis, OHSU vice
president for public affairs, worried that even indirect spending could prompt
criticism.

   "They'll think we were shading the truth when we claimed no resources were
going out of the state," she wrote in an internal e-mail debating the issue.

   In fact, OHSU stands to profit from significant discoveries in Florida. Such
discoveries are likely to be spun off to separate companies, which OHSU has
promised would operate in Florida, not Oregon. But profits from licensing
discoveries to drug companies or outright sale of new companies would flow back
to OHSU.

   In December 2007, Nelson got the call that his project had been picked for
$60 million in Florida state funding and another $53 million from local
governments for a new building. More than a year passed before OHSU was
comfortable it had a deal for both temporary and permanent space.

   The Florida center in the coastal city of Port St. Lucie is expected to have
200 employees within 10 years, double the current size of its sister operation
in Hillsboro. OHSU aims to develop vaccines and other therapies to combat
disease, focusing research on the elderly.

   Nelson said immune systems in the elderly fail over time. Flu vaccines, for
instance, work on average for 90 percent of the population, but for only 40
percent of the elderly. Nelson said research will identify the chemical
substances that appear depleted in senior populations. Then scientists will try
to devise a vaccine to supplement the weakened substance, a booster shot of
sorts for the immune system.

   Florida is ideal for such research because of its large population of senior
citizens.

   OHSU also can advance what's known about adaptive or emerging diseases such
as HIV and West Nile virus. Nelson said Florida is a portal for such diseases,
and the state's diverse population provides an important research pool. That
diversity will allow OHSU to more rapidly devise vaccines to halt the spread of
such diseases, Nelson said.

   Last month, OHSU revealed that it had clinched a deal with Rafick-Pierre
Sekaly, a leading Canadian researcher credited with significant advances in HIV
and AIDS research. He and Nelson will be co-directors of OHSU's new institute.

   "It's a fantastic opportunity," said Sekaly, who began talking with OHSU
officials before the Florida funding was confirmed.

   "It's the first time a whole institute will be working on understanding the
human immune system," Sekaly said. He said working with human subjects could
foster major scientific advances. "We have a lot of failures in terms of
producing drugs," Sekaly said. "We're using the wrong approach because we have
been working in mice. Mice are not human."

   He said one focus of his research will be figuring better ways to treat
cancer patients. "Immune-based therapies hold a very big promise, but they have
been failing all the time."

   Vaccine research grows

   OHSU's effort is part of a national shift to vaccine research, long
considered the province of large pharmaceutical firms.

   Gary Nabel, director of the national Vaccine Research Center at the National
Institutes of Health, said work in vaccines is growing rapidly. Concentrating
scientists in places such as Florida accelerates discoveries in complex
research, Nabel said.

   "We live in a world where pathogens can be transferred from one part of the
planet to another in a matter of hours," Nabel said. New technology will permit
swifter action to prevent diseases. "The science really has begun to hit high
gear."

   Harry Orf, vice president for scientific operations at The Scripps Research
Institute's Florida operation, said the potential for bioscience compares to the
last century's advances in communications.

   "In one century, we went from smoke signals to radio to TV to computers to
the Internet," Orf said. "Bioscience will have a similar impact on everyone's
life this century."

   Orf said OHSU's reputation for translational research --the art of moving
basic scientific discoveries to clinical applications --makes it a welcome
addition in Florida.

   Houghten, the Torrey Pines founder, said Florida's money is significant to
such science.

   "You're not spending all your time writing grants and begging," Houghten
said. "You're spending your time on science."

   Les Zaitz: 503-221-8181; leszaitz@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2009


                              254 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           February 5, 2009 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: Don't back down on disclosure

BODY:

   THOSE medical conventioneers who are boycotting Boston - because of the
state's new law intended to limit the drug industry's influence over physicians
and researchers - might soon have to hold their confabs outside the United
States. The state law discourages marketing disguised as continuing education
and requires doctors to report perks from drug companies. But more far-reaching
federal laws may be on the way. A US Senate bill, for instance, would require
health companies to report all their financial links with doctors on a
government website.

   The rationale is that drug and medical device companies have used resort
weekends, speech honoraria, and other forms of largess to get doctors to use
their products. This can compromise a doctor's judgment of what is best for a
patient. Since many of the new medications or devices that companies are hawking
to the doctors are more costly than older ones, this practice can also drive up
the nation's overall health expenditures.

   Recently, the Globe reported that the American Society of Gene Therapy and
the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology are backing out of plans
for meetings in Boston in 2015. The president of the Greater Boston Convention
and Visitors Bureau, Patrick Moscaritolo, is asking the state to delay
implementation of the new law, which is set to go into effect July 1. Nonsense.
The law makes sense and should go forward as planned.

   The boycotting groups, both of which get funding from drug makers, say the
state's rules would limit participation by drug company scientists in meetings
and continuing-education courses for doctors. But the state simply adopted the
guidelines set by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education -
that any course offered must present objective content and not just hype the
sponsoring company's products.

   The regulations drawn up by the state Department of Public Health actually
fall short on one point. While they require public disclosure of company fees to
doctors for consulting or speaking engagements, they exempt payments for
research. Companies say that releasing such information would hurt them
competitively. The bill in the US Senate rightly requires that this information,
too, be available so the public can make judgments about doctors' objectivity
when they tout a product they helped develop.

   Thanks to the Massachusetts law, the bill in Congress, and a crackdown by
federal prosecutors on device-makers' illegal inducements to doctors, several
drug and device companies have begun to report financial ties with doctors
voluntarily. But this should not weaken support for federal legislation.
Disclosure rules should be the same in Las Vegas as in Boston.

   111

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2009


                              255 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            January 30, 2009 Friday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 125 words

HEADLINE: OFF CAMPUS WITH ...

BYLINE: Jose E. Garcia, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Bret Goers

   School: Surprise Willow Canyon.

   Sport: Soccer.

   Position: Left defense.

   You scored a 2050 out of 2400 on your SAT. How were you able to accomplish
that? "Ivy League schools require at least a score of 2000. I was proud of my
score. It's just a lot of hard work. I have taken a lot of college classes and
worked hard."

   How are you able to achieve a lot in the classroom while playing soccer?
"Perseverance. On school nights I sometimes study until midnight."

   What are your plans after high school? "Hopefully attend MIT. Their admission
office said I have a good chance of getting in. I plan to get my Ph.D. in
biotechnology. I've got big plans."

   What are those plans? "I want to do my research in gene therapy. It's
something I have an interest in."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2009


                              256 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2009 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           January 29, 2009 Thursday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 376 words

HEADLINE: AROUND THE NATION

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   MAYOR DENIES KATRINA FRAUD

   JACKSON, Miss. - The mayor of a Mississippi city devastated by Hurricane
Katrina pleaded not guilty Wednesday to charges he lied to get disaster
assistance to repair his damaged beachfront home. Gulfport Mayor Brent Warr is
the highest-ranking public official so far to be charged with fraud related to
the storm that slammed the Gulf Coast on Aug. 29, 2005. He and his wife, Laura,
pleaded not guilty in federal court to charges in a 16-count indictment that was
issued Jan. 22. Warr, 45, and his wife, 43, also are accused of making false
claims to their insurance company.

   ASSOCIATED PRESS

   ALABAMA

   Jurors indict ex-police official

   BIRMINGHAM - Federal grand jurors have indicted a former Alabama police
supervisor accused of stealing evidence money, faking his abduction and flying
off to Las Vegas to try to win enough cash to pay off debts. Authorities say
48-year-old Faron White of Falkville was trying to stage his disappearance to
cover up more than $5,000 missing from northern Alabama's Decatur Police
Department. Federal marshals caught up to White in a Las Vegas hotel on Jan. 5.
He was charged with theft from a program that receives federal funds.

   NEW YORK

   Bubble boy cure found, experts say

   NEW YORK - Gene therapy seems to have cured eight of 10 children who had
potentially fatal "bubble boy disease," according to a study that followed their
progress for about four years after treatment. The eight patients were no longer
on medication for the rare disease, which cripples the body's defenses against
infection. The successful treatment is reported in today's issue of the New
England Journal of Medicine and offers hope for treating other diseases. Bubble
boy disease is formally called severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID. This
genetic disorder is diagnosed in about 40 to 100 babies each year in the United
States.

   ARMY RECALL

   Body armor fails; testing blamed

   WASHINGTON - Army Secretary Pete Geren has ordered the recall of more than
16,000 sets of body armor after an audit concluded the bullet-blocking plates in
the vests failed testing and may not provide soldiers with adequate protection.
The audit by the office of the Defense Department inspector general, faults the
Army for flawed testing procedures.

GRAPHIC: Photo: INDICTED: Gulfport Mayor Brent Warr and his wife, Laura, were
indicted Wednesday.
BILOXI SUN HERALD

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              257 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           January 29, 2009 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Foreign Desk; Part A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 408 words

HEADLINE: Study shows gene therapy cures 'bubble boy disease'

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE:  NEW YORK

BODY:

   Gene therapy seems to have cured eight of 10 children who had the potentially
fatal "bubble boy disease," according to a study that followed their progress
for about four years after treatment.

   The eight patients were no longer on medication for the rare disease, which
cripples the body's defenses against infection. The successful treatment is
reported in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine and offers hope
for treating other diseases with gene therapy.

   The disease, formally called severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, is a
genetic disorder that is diagnosed in about 40 to 100 babies in the United
States each year. The nickname comes from the experience of a Houston boy, David
Vetter, who became famous for living behind plastic barriers to protect him from
germs. He died in 1984 at age 12.

   He had the most common form of SCID. Recent studies found that gene therapy
produced impressive results for that form of the disease, but also carried a
risk of leukemia.

   The new study involved a different, less common form of SCID. In 1990 it
became the first illness to be treated by gene therapy, according to the U.S.
government. Two Ohio girls showed improvement but continued to take medication.

   This form of SCID arises in babies with a genetic defect that leaves them
with a deficiency of an enzyme called adenosine deaminase. Patients can be
treated with twice-weekly shots of the enzyme or a bone marrow transplant, but
the medicine is expensive and marrow transplants don't always work.

   Gene therapy for the new study was performed in Italy and Israel. Researchers
removed marrow cells from the patients, equipped the cells with working copies
of the gene for the enzyme and injected the cells back into the patients. In
most cases, the procedure was done before the children turned 2.

   The journal article reports the outcome two to eight years later, with an
average period of four years. All 10 patients were still alive, but two needed
further treatment. None showed signs of leukemia or other health problems from
the therapy, the researchers said.

   Dr. Donald Kohn, a SCID expert at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles and USC,
said scientists are trying to understand why gene therapy produces a leukemia
risk with the most common form of SCID but not the enzyme-related form.

   The findings are promising for treatments of other blood cell disorders,
including sickle cell disease, said Kohn, who didn't participate in the study.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              258 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           January 29, 2009 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH DIGEST

BYLINE: FROM NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   NEW YORK

   Donating a kidney is safe in long term, study says

   Donating a kidney doesn't appear to have any long-term health consequences
for the donor, according to a study being published today in the New England
Journal of Medicine.

   Researchers at the University of Minnesota found those who gave up one of
their two kidneys lived a normal life span and were as healthy as people in the
general population. The donation also didn't raise the risk of having kidney
failure later.

   "It is a confirmation that living donation is a safe thing," said Dr. Matthew
Cooper, a transplant surgeon at the University of Maryland who was not involved
in the research.

   DURHAM, N.C.

   Nicotine-PTSD link will be studied

   At least half of the 8 million Americans with post-traumatic stress disorder
also smoke cigarettes, a statistic that is leading to a study of the connection
to determine if smoking helps calm the sufferer or adds to the problem.

   "Everybody's afraid to have their patients quit smoking because they're
afraid they're going to get worse. There's not a lot of empirical data about
that," said Dr. Jean Beckham, a psychologist at the Durham, N.C., Veterans
Affairs Medical Center who will conduct the study.

   There are also studies on the link between the disorder and the use of drugs.

   Briefly

   - Bubble boy cure: Gene therapy seems to have cured eight of 10 children who
had potentially fatal "bubble boy" immune deficiency disease, according to a
study that followed their progress for about four years after treatment, it was
reported in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.

   - Beryllium exposure: The Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico says
nearly 1,900 workers and visitors might have been exposed to beryllium, a
substance that can cause lung disease. Employees and visitors will be offered a
chance to be tested, and decontamination of the area where it was found is under
way.

NOTES:  health Digest

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              259 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           January 29, 2009 Thursday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A07

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: Around the Nation

BODY:


 Abramoff Associate Faces Federal Charges

   Todd A. Boulanger, an associate of disgraced lobbyist Jack Abramoff, was
charged yesterday with conspiring to provide lawmakers and government officials
with expense-paid travel, event tickets and expensive meals in exchange for
actions that would help their clients.

   The federal charges of conspiring to commit honest-services wire fraud came
in a "criminal information," a document that can be filed only with the
defendant's consent. Such an approach usually signals a plea deal.

   In the charging documents filed in U.S. District Court, prosecutors alleged
that Boulanger contacted a staffer working for a U.S. senator who might help him
in "promoting" his lobbying firm's interest in representing a Mississippi Indian
tribe. In e-mails, prosecutors alleged, Boulanger and Abramoff discussed concert
tickets they had arranged for the staffer, who was not identified in court
documents.

   L.A. Archdiocese Investigated

    LOS ANGELES -- Federal prosecutors are investigating Cardinal Roger M.
Mahony and other officials of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles over
their handling of alleged clergy child-molestation cases, according to reports
published Wednesday. The Los Angeles Times, citing two unidentified law
enforcement sources, reported that Mahony is among those being investigated by a
federal grand jury to determine whether   they failed to keep children safe from
predatory priests. The Wall Street Journal, citing an unnamed source, said
authorities are looking to see if church officials tried to cover up the sexual
abuse of minors by priests. The Los Angeles U.S. attorney's spokesman said his
office has no comment on the reports. Mahony's attorney told the Times he has
been informed that the cardinal is not a target of the inquiry.

   Gene Therapy for 'Bubble Boys'

   NEW YORK -- Gene therapy seems to have cured eight of 10 children with
"bubble boy" disease, according to a study that followed their progress for
about four years after treatment. The eight were no longer on medication for the
rare disease, which cripples a body's defenses against infection. The successful
result is reported in Thursday's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine
and offers hope for treating other diseases with a gene therapy approach.

   Winter Storm Cuts Wide Swath

   PHILADELPHIA -- A destructive winter storm left more than 1 million customers
in the dark and delayed flights as it barreled into the Northeast on Wednesday.
The storm has been blamed for at least 23 deaths and a glaze of ice and snow
that caused widespread power failures from the Southern Plains to the East
Coast. Utility officials warned that it could be mid-February before electricity
is restored to some of the hardest-hit places.

   -- From News Services and Staff Reports

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              260 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                           January 28, 2009 Wednesday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: GILBERT REPUBLIC 12; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: 3-year-old's lifelong battle with tumor comes to end

BYLINE: Srianthi Perera, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   "Heaven is pink, and now that it has Briannah, it's fuschia-pink," Tammy
Olsen said in describing the death of her daughter, Briannah.

   The 3-year-old Gilbert girl died Saturday evening at Phoenix Children's
Hospital after a lifelong struggle with an inoperable brain tumor.

   Tammy and Mark Olsen were with her during the final hours.

   "It was such a beautiful thing. Her spirit left her little body. I got to
hear the last beat that her heart made. I slowly heard her heart stop," Tammy
said.

   The death was unexpected because the toddler was responding well to the
experimental treatment at the Burzynski Clinic in Houston that she began more
than a year ago, her mom said.

   Briannah's tumor had shrunk 20 percent since she began the non-toxic gene
therapy. She was also the same size as kids her age, which is a feat for the
girl who was 7 pounds at birth but gained only 2 pounds in the first months of
her life.

   On Oct. 11, she celebrated her third birthday with sisters Savannah, 10, and
Hannah, 12, at her side.

   "The treatment was working. The thought of her dying never crossed my mind,"
Tammy said.

   On Thursday, Briannah was taken to the hospital after her sodium levels
dropped and she was laboring to breathe. Her kidneys were failing and doctors
could not do dialysis on her little body.

   At the hospital, she suffered cardiac resuscitation twice.

   This was also the time that the deeply religious Tammy Olsen saw a vision
that helped her decide that "it was OK to let her go."

   "I saw a cross and beside, to the right, I saw Briannah. She was three feet
tall, whole, healed and with a pretty dress on. She was standing in a fog. I
really believe that God spoke to me," Tammy said.

   Two days later, Briannah's body began to deteriorate.

   "I believe with all of my heart when she left her body the first time, she
didn't want to come back. Children love Jesus," Tammy said.

   At 4:30 p.m. Saturday, Briannah's breathing machine was unplugged. She died
at 6:30 p.m.

   A life-celebration service has been planned for Monday. with visitation
Sunday afternoon. The public is welcome. The venue for Sunday's service will be
posted at babybriannah.org later today.

   **

   'Briannah's Life Celebration Service'

   What: Speakers, music, balloons and a joyful spirit celebrates 3-year-old
Briannah Olsen's life. The public is invited and encouraged to wear bright and
pink-colored attire.

   When: 10:30 a.m. Monday.

   Where: Living World Bible Church, 3520 E. Brown Road, Mesa.

   Details: 480-964-4463.

   In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to the Baby Briannah Foundation,
which will

   continue to help other challenged families.

   Details: babybriannah.org.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              261 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            January 26, 2009 Monday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D04

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: Conventions

BODY:

    The following conventions are scheduled to start this week in the Washington
area.

Walter E. Washington Convention Center

     Association Technology Conference and Expo 2009

   Dates: Tuesday and Wednesday

   Attendance: 1,000

Elsewhere

   American Association of Orthodontists Governmental Affairs Conference

   Dates: Tuesday and Wednesday

   Attendance: 200

   Headquarters: Renaissance Washington Hotel

   Phacilitate Cell and Gene Therapy and Vaccine Forums

   Dates: Monday through Thursday

   Attendance: 450

   Headquarters: Grand Hyatt Washington

   American Society of Association Executives & The Center for Association
Leadership

   Association Technology Conference and Expo

   Dates: Wednesday through Friday

   Attendance: 1,200

   Headquarters: Renaissance Washington Hotel

   -- Compiled by Dimetrius Simon

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2009


                              262 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2009 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           January 24, 2009 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1079 words

HEADLINE: Medical meeting falloff feared At issue: New drug firm limits

BYLINE: Liz Kowalczyk GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Boston's status as a popular destination for medical industry meetings -
which generate tens of millions of dollars in revenue for hotels, restaurants,
and the state - is at risk because of new regulations restricting financial
relationships between pharmaceutical companies and doctors, according to
industry executives.

   The city hosted 2,500 medical and pharmaceutical company meetings in 2007 and
2008, attended by thousands of doctors and other clinicians; hotels earned $130
million from those meetings, while the state received about $16 million in tax
payments, according to the Greater Boston Convention and Visitors Bureau. About
40 percent of the city's convention business is medical-related.

   But now, with strict new regulations set to take effect July 1, some meeting
sponsors are considering pulling out of Boston, said Patrick Moscaritolo,
president of the convention bureau, who wants the state to delay implementation
of the law. At least two large medical conferences already have withdrawn.

   One consumer group and a legislator who pushed for the law called the
concerns far-fetched. Health Care for All, a Boston-based consumer advocacy
group that is lobbying for even stricter regulation of industry interactions
with physicians, said the medical groups are engaging in "fear-mongering" as a
way to cast doubt on the new rules, which will be finalized within the next two
months.

   The American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, however, wrote the
convention bureau three weeks ago to say it has decided to relocate its 2015
annual meeting, with an estimated 8,000 doctors and other participants, which
had been scheduled for the Boston Convention and Exposition Center. The group
cancelled hundreds of rooms reserved for the meeting at the Westin Boston
Waterfront. Conventions are planned years in advance.

   Another group, the American Society of Gene Therapy, informed the convention
bureau this week in writing that it has decided against booking its 2015 annual
meeting in Boston because the regulations will "cripple the content and
quality."

   A third group, the Heart Rhythm Society, wrote to convention officials that
it is reconsidering its commitment to hold five meetings in Boston between this
year and 2021.

   The groups said in the letters and in interviews with the Globe that one of
their concerns is that the state's regulations, which establish a code of
conduct for pharmaceutical company employees, will limit participation by drug
company scientists in meetings and continuing medical education courses in
Massachusetts.

   The state's rules say that continuing medical education courses, which
doctors must take to keep their licenses, must comply with guidelines issued by
the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education.

   Kay Whalen, executive director of the allergy academy, and David Bodine,
president of the gene therapy society, said this requirement is a major problem.
Those guidelines don't allow presentations by drug company employees, and Whalen
believes that Massachusetts intends to go further by saying drug company
scientists cannot present research even for courses not for education credit.

   "Quite a bit of cutting-edge research is done by pharmaceutical companies and
scientists want to hear it," Whalen said. "Our reading of this law is we could
not have those sessions at all."

   "That's absolutely false," said Amy Whitcomb Slemmer, executive director of
Health Care for All. "Of course company scientists can present. But having
providers get education credit for that is not appropriate. It's an
advertisement."

   Public health officials said the regulations actually do allow company
scientists to present at meetings in Massachusetts, but with caveats: The
presentations must present information in an objective fashion and cannot simply
be promotional talks for the company's products.

   Drug companies participate heavily in medical meetings across the country in
other ways as well, by paying for meals and subsidizing tuition and by hawking
their products to doctors from rows of exhibits set up on convention floors. The
new regulations will prohibit companies with booths from distributing free
merchandise to Massachusetts doctors, state public health officials confirmed.

   The regulations written by state Public Health Department staff are intended
to implement a law passed by the Legislature last summer, which bans companies
from providing gifts to physicians, limits when companies can pay for doctors'
meals, and requires companies to publicly disclose payments to doctors over $50
for certain types of consulting and speaking engagements. The law aims to
control costs by reining in unnecessary prescribing of expensive drugs and to
make doctors' potential conflicts-of-interest transparent to the public.

   The new rules also govern drug company conduct at scientific meetings,
professional conferences, and continuing medical education courses in
Massachusetts. They allow firms to sponsor such meetings, as they do now, but
with restrictions: Companies cannot pay for attendees' personal expenses such as
travel and lodging, or pay them to attend. Companies cannot pay for meals for
specific groups of doctors in attendance, but conference organizers can use
pharmaceutical company funds toward meal costs for everyone. And, drug companies
cannot dictate to conference organizers on the presentations made to physicians.

   Tom Lyons, Public Health Department spokesman, said the agency received 1,000
pages of comments on the proposed regulations from 120 groups and individuals -
the most on any regulation in recent memory. "We will give due consideration to
every comment that has been submitted, but we believe we have a very balanced
regulation," he said.

   On the opposite side, consumer groups and others are heavily lobbying health
officials to tighten the rules. One criticism by Health Care for All and some
legislators is that companies will not be required to disclose payments to
doctors for research-related activities.

   The Public Health Council plans to approve a final version of the rules in
February or March.

   "I don't buy that this will have any material effect on the convention
business in Massachusetts," said Senator Mark C. Montigny, a New Bedford
Democrat who has pushed for years to ban industry gift-giving. "But even if it
does, I would say it's completely irrelevant. We're talking about rules to
protect the public health here."

   Liz Kowalczyk can be reached at kowalczyk@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2009


                              263 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           January 22, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: NEW ORLEANS PICAYUNE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 978 words

HEADLINE: COLLEGES

BODY:

   --- University of New Orleans ---

   The University of New Orleans International Alumni Association is accepting
nominations for the 2009 University of New Orleans Homer L. Hitt Distinguished
Alumna/us of the Year and the Early Career Achievement Awards

   Nominees for the Early Career Achievement Award must have graduated from UNO
within the last 10 years. Any UNO alumna/us may be nominated, and anyone may
nominate. Nominations should include a resume and letter(s) of recommendation.
Please submit nominations by 4:30 p.m. on Feb. 6, to the Office of Alumni
Affairs, Homer L. Hitt Alumni and Visitors Center, 2000 Lakeshore Drive, New
Orleans, LA 70148.

   . . . . . . .

   The University of New Orleans Musical Excursions concert series will present
a performance by the Hot Club of San Francisco on Monday at 7:30 p.m. in the UNO
Performing Arts Center Recital Hall.

   Tickets are $24 for general admission and $12 for seniors and UNO faculty and
staff, and $6 for students. To purchase tickets, call the UNO Department of
Music at 504.280.6789, fax 504.280.6098 or e-mail musicalexcursions@uno.edu

   --- Xavier University ---

   Tickets are on sale for the Allstate Sugar Bowl 2009 Crosstown Classic
Basketball game, featuring Xavier University vs. Dillard University in a
doubleheader on Saturday in the New Orleans Arena. The annual contest between
the two schools is the city's longest running collegiate basketball rivalry.

   The Gold Rush (men's) and Gold Nuggets (women's) basketball teams of Xavier
University will host the event as they take on the Blue Devils and Blue
Devillettes of Dillard University in their first NAIA contest of the year. The
two HBCU schools face off every year to a packed house of students, alumni and
supporters.

   The Gold Nuggets will play at 5 p.m. and the Gold Rush at 7 p.m. Tickets are
available at $12 for open seating and $20 for special courtside seats through
Ticketmaster by calling 504.522.5555 or visit www.TicketMaster.com. Tickets are
also on sale weekdays at the Xavier University center, through the Office of
Students Services at 504.520.7357.

   Net proceeds from this game will establish a new "Allstate Sugar Bowl"
scholarship at both Xavier and Dillard.

   For more game information about the Allstate Sugar Bowl Crosstown Classic,
contact the Xavier Athletics Department, Sports Information Office, at
504.520.5707.

   --- LSU Health Sciences Center ---

   Dr. Steve Nelson, Dean of the School of Medicine at LSU Health Sciences
Center New Orleans, has appointed Dr. Jay K. Kolls as professor and chairman of
the Department of Genetics.

   A pediatric pulmonologist and immunologist, Kolls led the LSUHSC gene therapy
program for six years before being recruited by Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh as chief of the division of pediatric pulmonology. In 2006, he was
the first professor to occupy the Neils K. Jerne Endowed Chair in Immunology at
the University of Pittsburgh. Kolls is an elected member of the American Society
of Clinical Investigation and the American Association of Physicians. He
completed a residency in medicine/pediatrics and a research fellowship at LSU
Health Sciences Center New Orleans and with Dr. Bruce Beutler at UT Southwestern
Medical Center in Dallas, TX before joining the LSUHSC faculty in 1991.

   --- Delgado Community College ---

   Delgado Community College's Automotive Department is teaming up with the 39th
annual O'Reilly Auto Parts World of Wheels, which will be held Friday, Saturday
and Sunday, at the Louisiana Superdome, to conduct its second annual
International Show Car Association (ISCA) Student Day on Friday beginning at
9:30 a.m. The program offers any interested student the opportunity to learn
first-hand about the custom and specialty automotive after market from industry
celebrities and leaders, as well as receive VIP. early access to the show.
Delgado's Automotive Department will be among the World of Wheels participants
with a booth featuring program information and student-customized specialty cars
on display.

   After the activities are over, the students are given open, early access to
the World of Wheels show, allowing them ample time to visit with the many
vendors and car owners one-on-one before the show opens to the public at 4 p.m.
Student Day participants will also receive a wristband that allows them entrance
into the show free of charge for the whole weekend.

   The cost for participation in ISCA Student Day is $10 per person, which
includes all activities and admission to the World of Wheels show for the entire
weekend. Students may also wish to purchase an optional $5 food voucher, which
entitles the student to a hot dog, chips and drink on Friday. Regular adult
admission to a single day of the World of Wheels show is $14 per person.

   To learn more about the 2009 ISCA Student Day at the O'Reilly Auto Parts
World of Wheels, including registration and payment details, please contact
George Torlage, Delgado Automotive Department instructor and co-organizer of the
2009 New Orleans ISCA Student Day, at 504.913.3721 or gtorla@dcc.edu

   --- Newcomb College ---

   Political strategist and New Orleans native Donna Brazile and former
Louisiana Gov. Kathleen Blanco will explore how women transform the notion of
leadership during the Newcomb College Institute's second biennial summit, POWER
LINES: Women Transform the Grid. The summit is scheduled for Feb. 5-7 in the
Lavin-Bernick Center at Tulane University.

   During this interdisciplinary leadership summit, students, faculty and
professional participants will address the following questions: Who is leading
us? Can women substantially transform the power structure? How are women
negotiating the dangers and pitfalls of power networks?

   The leadership summit is free and open to the public but participants must
complete the online registration form at the Institute's Web site,
newcomb.tulane.edu. The registration deadline is Jan. 23.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2009


                              264 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                           January 21, 2009 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 014

LENGTH: 386 words

HEADLINE: Group kills Hub event, blames doc-gift rules

BYLINE: By JAY FITZGERALD

BODY:

   A major medical group has canceled a multimillion-dollar convention in
Boston, citing the state's new law cracking down on free gifts, meals and other
goodies handed out to doctors by the pharmaceutical industry.

   Other life-sciences groups, meanwhile, are sending strong signals that they
also won't hold conventions in Boston as long as the state's new law remains
unclear and out of sync with industry gift-giving standards.

   In a letter to the Massachusetts Convention Center Authority, the executive
director of the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology said it was
pulling out of its 2015 convention contract in Boston because it's ``very
difficult'' to find sponsorships and to provide education courses under current
legal conditions.

   ``The re-evaluation of Boston as an annual meeting destination was prompted
by the current laws in Massachusetts,'' Kay Whalen, executive director of the
AAAAI, wrote in her letter.

   The group's move will likely cost Boston businesses millions of dollars, as
AAAAI shifts its 8,000-attendee show to another city and cancels thousands of
hotel bookings in Boston.

   In an interview, Whalen, whose group helps manage other medical associations,
said she knows of other life-sciences organizations that are writing off Boston
as a convention destination.

   One of them is the American Society of Gene Therapy, which has management
links with AAAAI.

   The gene-therapy society's president, Dr. David M. Bodine, said yesterday his
group - which held a meeting in Boston last year - would ``love to return'' to
the Hub. But the new law discourages convention events, such as continuing
education classes, he said.

   Last year, lawmakers passed the law, with the hope that banning gifts from
industry groups to doctors would help control health-care costs and reduce
needless use of expensive medical devices and drugs. The ban applies to meals,
drinks, trips and presents.

   Amy Whitcomb Slemmer, executive director of Health Care for All, which backs
the gift ban, defended the new law and predicted other states will catch up to
Massachusetts' gift-ban rules by 2015.

   Spokesmen for Gov. Deval Patrick - whose administration is currently
hammering out specific guidelines for the new law - said the state is striving
for a balance between the needs of consumers and life-sciences researchers.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2009


                              265 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2009 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            January 19, 2009 Monday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 08C

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: TECHCOLUMBUS GRANTS;
Medical technology flourishing in central Ohio

BYLINE: Margaret Harding , THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Saving lives also could be the way to help save Ohio's economy.

   Five of the nine companies that received $1.6 million in funding from
TechColumbus produce medical devices.

   It's an area of strength in central Ohio, said Ted Ford, president and chief
executive of TechColumbus, an organization that supports the development of
technology-based enterprises.

   "We do think, as we come through the current economic situation, Columbus is
going to be very well-positioned with these young companies coming up to really
make a mark," he said.

   The funding comes from TechColumbus' $22.5 million initiative to promote
technology-based businesses.

   "The entrepreneurial environment is actually quite good. We're seeing a lot
of strong growth in the number of companies that are coming forward," Ford said.

   The money is split between investments of up to $500,000 for more established
companies and grants for up to $50,000 for new businesses.

   Some of the medical products set to receive funding could help prevent
strokes, develop cures for diseases and diagnose joint disorders.

   "Columbus has actually got a pretty substantial strength in the
medical-device market," Ford said. "It's an area that we have a lot of strength
in, so that's a natural outgrowth."

   Philip E. Eggers, Cardiox founder and chief executive, said he will use the
$500,000 investment to continue testing his device, and he plans to conduct
clinical trials by the end of the year.

   Cardiox has developed a noninvasive method of detecting right-to-left shunts
in the heart, abnormal natural channels that can lead to strokes. It works by
injecting an indicator into a vein and placing a sensor at the earlobe, Eggers
said. The patient then is asked to do a breathing maneuver to detect the shunt.

   "We're trying to catch it before it happens," Eggers said.

   If a shunt is detected, the problem can be corrected through surgery.

   The detection method also can be used after surgery to make sure the problem
is solved, Eggers said.

   Advanced materials is another strength for the Columbus area, Ford said,
adding that people come out of Battelle and Ohio State University to start
businesses.

   One such business is NanoMed Inc., which has created a way to genetically
modify cells to rapidly prototype new gene therapies, which are used to come up
with cures for diseases.

   The technology came out of Ohio State and was used in an entrepreneurship
class.

   "Students have the opportunity to work out a license or option agreement to
take the technology and turn it into a real business," said Seth Cramer, a
mentor for the class and chief financial officer of NanoMed.

   The NanoMed technology won the school's business-plan competition and was
awarded a $50,000 grant from TechColumbus to test more cell lines and conduct
market research.

   Cramer said the system improves cell-test success rates, raises cell-survival
rates in tests and reduces the time it takes to produce results.

   "We believe the technology is different and it delivers some distinct
benefits," Cramer said. "Faster advancements ultimately mean faster cures."

   mharding@dispatch.com

   Box Story: Investments

   TechColumbus just invested $1.6 million in nine tech-based companies through
two funding programs.

   \

   Regional Commercialization Fund, up to $500,000 each:

   * Cardiox Corp.: Developing a noninvasive method of detecting right-to-left
heart shunts

   * Toobla Inc.: Providing a Web application, or widget, storage utility that
works with all widgets across different platforms

   * Znode Inc.: Creating a software platform that allows businesses to quickly
build online storefronts

   \

   TechGenesis Grants, up to $50,000 each:

   * Epico LLC: Creating a medical device that measures visual impairment of
cataract patients at night

   * JoeMetric Inc.: Developing a way to create custom virtual market-research
panels

   * Joint Sound Holdings LLC: Creating a device that uses sound sensors and
ultrasonics to diagnose abnormal joint conditions

   * NanoMed Inc.: Developing a system for researchers to rapidly prototype new
gene therapies with a better test-success rate, higher cell-survival rate and
quicker result time than other methods

   * ThermoBuffer LLC: Developing a travel coffee mug that heats and holds hot
coffee at an ideal drinking temperature

   * Vision Optimization LLC: Developing medical devices used to diagnose and
assess patients undergoing eye procedures

   Source: TechColumbus

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2009


                              266 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2009 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           January 14, 2009 Wednesday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News for PC Home Page; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 997 words

HEADLINE: For women with cancer gene, new surgery support

BYLINE: By Marie McCullough; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Of all the devil-and-the-deep-blue-sea dilemmas in modern medicine, the one
faced by women with defective BRCA genes is especially awful.

   They can reduce their high risk of both breast and ovarian cancer by having
their ovaries removed at a young age, but this drastic measure permanently
compromises their health and ends their fertility.

   For women grappling with the trade-offs, a new statistical analysis by
University of Pennsylvania researchers provides the best estimate to date of the
value of surgery: It cuts breast cancer risk by half, and ovarian cancer risk by
80 percent, presumably by reducing exposure to the female hormone estrogen.

   The numbers, while lower than some previous estimates, clearly confirm the
benefits of surgery.

   But the analysis, based on combining the results of 10 studies, also reveals
that ovarian cancer detection and prevention strategies have not improved, 14
years after testing for BRCA gene mutations became available. Unlike breast
cancer, ovarian cancer has no early-detection test and no approved drug to help
prevent the disease.

   "You need to have your ovaries out," said Timothy Rebbeck, the Penn
epidemiologist who led the research, published in today's Journal of the
National Cancer Institute. "We hoped for another option, but we haven't found
one yet."

   Sandy Cohen, 40, of Lafayette Hill, who had her ovaries removed last year at
the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, said: "With all the information
I gathered, I felt I didn't have a choice. This will keep me alive until they
come up with something better."

   The many mutations found so far in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for less than 10
percent of the 182,000 breast cancers that occur annually in the United States.
But for women who inherit one of those mutations, the specter of cancer hangs
like a shroud over their families.

   Instead of the normal 1.5 percent lifetime chance of ovarian cancer, their
risk ranges from about 20 percent to 50 percent, studies show.

   Instead of the normal 12 percent lifetime chance of breast cancer, they have
at least a 50-50 chance - and some BRCA mutations virtually guarantee the
disease.

   These cancers tend to strike early and hard.

   Cohen's grandmother, for example, died of breast cancer at age 38.

   "My mother grew up without a mother," Cohen said, "so every year after she
turned 38, she was sure she was going to get breast cancer. The fear was
ingrained in me, too."

   Her mother made it to 54 before dying of the disease in 1994, the year that
BRCA1 was discovered.

   "I was so scared," Cohen recalled. "I went to meetings about genetic testing,
but I wasn't ready. I wasn't married and I didn't have children."

   Expert guidelines have long recommended that women with such strong
hereditary predispositions have an "oophorectomy" - removal of ovaries and
fallopian tubes - by age 35, or as soon as they finish having children.

   The surgery plunges the woman into premature menopause with severe hot
flashes, and raises "important and difficult questions," Rebbeck wrote. The
unnatural loss of ovarian estrogen raises the woman's risks of developing heart
disease, osteoporosis and dementia, yet long-term hormone replacement therapy
has been shown to increase the risks of breast cancer and dangerous blood clots.

   Postponing surgery may be safe in some cases because high-risk women develop
ovarian cancer on average at age 50, Rebbeck said. On the other hand, BRCA1
mutation carriers, who are at highest risk of ovarian cancer, tend to develop it
younger.

   Studies also suggest that up to 10 percent of women already have microscopic
amounts of the cancer when they undergo preventive oophorectomy.

   This undetected cancer can stay behind to seed malignancy even after surgery,
which is why removing the ovaries does not guarantee full protection.

   "That's very disconcerting because it suggests the window for prevention is
short," Rebbeck said. "The timing of surgery is still a huge question."

   To better answer these questions, researchers at Penn and 24 other medical
centers have been following 5,000 BRCA mutation carriers. Next year, Rebbeck
said, they expect to publish findings on the timing of surgery, the health
consequences, hormone therapy and mortality.

   Cohen shared her anguish over her genetic risks on her very first date with
attorney Barry Cohen. They married in 1997, and twins Sam and Emmie were born in
2000.

   In 2004, Cohen finally underwent genetic testing. As she expected, she had a
BRCA1 mutation. Most BRCA1-related breast cancers are not fueled by estrogen,
making them more aggressive and harder to treat than BRCA2 breast cancers.

   In 2005, Cohen opted to have both healthy breasts removed and replaced with
implants. Last year, she had an oophorectomy.

   "I thought, 'How am I going to live without any female organs?' But I looked
at my kids and I wanted to be there for them," she said.

   Today, the grieving, the healing, the hot flashes, and the adjustment to
hormone therapy (pills gave her chronic migraines so she switched to a patch)
are behind her. She credits the loving support of her husband, and an
organization called Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered (FORCE). She is now
cochair of the local chapter.

   "I just love to be able to help other women and take away some of the fears
that I had," she said.

    More Information


   About FORCE

   Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered (FORCE) is a national organization that
provides information and support to families affected by hereditary breast and
ovarian cancer.

   Documentary screening

   The Philadelphia chapter will screen In the Family, a documentary about four
such families, at

   the Wellness Community of Philadelphia,

   1 Chamounix Dr.,

   on Feb. 21 at 3:30 p.m.

   A talk by filmmaker Joanna Rudnick, presentations on new research findings,
and a Q&A session will follow. Admission is free.

   Contact

   Call 866-288-7475

   ext. 707, or go to http://go.philly.com/health

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720

   or mmcullough@phillynews.com.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2009


                              267 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           January 14, 2009 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: A MIGHTY FINE PART OF BRAIN;
NIMBLE MOVES COME FROM DIFFERENT SECTION

BYLINE: Mark Roth, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   The nimble finger movements of a violin soloist, an expert typist and a pro
football receiver are all made possible by a special part of the brain that is
separate from the region that controls other muscle movements.

   That's the main finding of research published this week by neurobiologists at
the University of Pittsburgh. The animal experiments not only shed new light on
how the human brain has evolved, but may offer a new way of treating brain
disorders by using an inactivated form of the rabies virus.

   The research showed that the neurons that control fine motor movements in the
hands, arms and shoulders of rhesus monkeys are connected directly to a part of
the brain's motor cortex that evolved more recently, said Peter Strick,
co-director of the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, a joint operation
of Pitt and Carnegie Mellon University.

   This area, which allows much more precise control over muscles, is present in
some monkeys, the great apes -- gorillas, orangutans and chimpanzees -- and
humans, Dr. Strick said, and appears to be a brand new area that was added to
the brain later in evolutionary history.

   More ancient animals, even agile ones like cats and gazelles, control their
muscles with another part of the motor cortex that sends neurons to the spinal
cord, where they pass their messages on to other neurons that intersect with the
muscles.

   Cats are impressively graceful, he said, "but can you show me a cat that can
type, play the violin, or catch a football? Cats can do flips, but compare a cat
to a ballerina -- that's the difference we're talking about."

   The rabies vaccine comes into play because that is what Dr. Strick and his
colleague, Jean-Alban Rathelot, used to trace the nerve connections in the
rhesus monkeys.

   What makes rabies so dangerous, Dr. Strick said, is that the virus can move
directly up the nerves to the brain. By injecting anesthetized monkeys with the
virus and later staining the nerve cells after the animals were euthanized, the
researchers could tell exactly which part of the brain was controlling the
muscle neurons.

   Scientists are working on ways to detoxify the virus, he said, and if they
succeed, it conceivably could be used to deliver gene therapy to the brain for
such conditions as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease.

   At this point, though, scientists don't know how to inactivate the virus
safely because they don't completely understand how rabies causes lethal brain
damage. That is why rabies vaccinations must be administered shortly after
someone is bitten by a rabid animal, Dr. Strick said, because once the virus
enters the nervous system, it can't be treated.

   One side benefit of the motor neuron research may be a better understanding
of what makes the virus so toxic and better ways to treat infections, he said.
The monkeys used in the experiments were not allowed to experience rabies
symptoms before being euthanized, he noted.

   The fine motor control area, which is deeper in the brain than the older part
of the motor cortex, not only came along more recently in evolutionary
development, but matures vigorously after birth.

   When babies first start to pick up objects, they grab them with their fists,
he said. But starting at about 6 months of age and continuing until age 2, young
humans and monkeys become increasingly skilled at fine motor control.

   Animals that don't have this part of the motor cortex never develop such
abilities, Dr. Strick said. An example is spider and cebus monkeys that live
side by side in South America. Spider monkeys, which go back further on the
evolutionary tree, can only pick up objects by scooping them up with their whole
hands, and have no way of moving their digits independently from one another.
Cebus monkeys can grasp objects between the forefinger and thumb or retract most
fingers so one can be extended to poke holes and dig.

   In human beings, studies of expert violinists and pianists have shown that
the part of the motor cortex that controls hand movements is larger than in
other people, and largest of all in those who started practicing at the youngest
ages.

NOTES: Mark Roth can be reached at mroth@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1130. /

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: Pitt, CMU, Post-Gazette: (Better connection)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2009


                              268 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2009 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           January 14, 2009 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, SCIENCE, MEDICINE & TECHNOLOGY; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: PITT SCIENTISTS MAKE KEY DIABETES FINDING

BYLINE: David Templeton, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   Human beta cells that produce insulin in the pancreas are one hot commodity
in medicine, and the University of Pittsburgh has figured out a novel way to
produce them.

   A team led by Dr. Andrew F. Stewart, chief of the university's Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, has identified key molecules that cause human beta
cells to replicate in a laboratory setting and in diabetic mice.

   Nathalie M. Fiaschi-Taesch of Pitt's Division of Endocrinology and Dr. Todd
A. Bigatel, a recently graduated post-doctoral fellow at Pitt, are chief authors
of the study that appears online in the Diabetes journal, published by the
American Diabetes Association.

   While work in rodents still needs to be confirmed in humans, the study "may
provide insight into how best to expand human beta cells for therapeutic
purposes in the treatment of diabetes," the study says.

   The team accomplished a scientific first by identifying an inventory of
proteins involved in the cell cycle of beta cells. Then they figured out which
ones appeared to play an important role in making beta cells replicate.

   Key candidates identified from 30 potential molecules were cdk-6 and cyclin
D1. The two molecules, delivered by gene therapy techniques to the human beta
cells, then transplanted into diabetic mice, succeeded in controlling their
blood-glucose levels for the full six weeks of the study.

   Dr. Stewart said the process marks an important step in understanding
beta-cell biology and diabetes. It also provides "a road map or model to more
deeply understand and exploit human beta cell replication," the study states.

   The research also helps scientists to unravel several long-standing mysteries
of diabetes.

   It's long been known that Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune disease that
destroys beta cells, leaving the patient with insufficient amounts of insulin to
convert blood glucose into cellular energy. Diabetes occurs when abnormal levels
of glucose accumulate in the blood.

   But Dr. Stewart said recent research shows that Type 2 diabetes, previously
thought to involve insensitivity to one's own insulin, also involves the
destruction of beta cells.

   Despite steady destruction of beta cells in people with diabetes, the
pancreas continues producing the cells, even in people with Type 1, he said. The
problem is, the new cells continually are killed off.

   Future research will determine if different combinations of the 30 identified
molecules will further enhance the replication process.

   Pitt's study already reveals the possibility of beta-cell replication 40
times faster than normal with use of the molecular enhancements.

   Having a means of producing beta cells could prove important in transplants
and beta-cell replacement therapy, which currently involves beta cells taken
from cadavers. Beta cells taken from cadavers are in short supply.

   The research also leads to speculation that a pill eventually could be
developed to enhance production of cdk-6 and cyclin D1 molecules in beta cells
to encourage more beta-cell production in people with diabetes. The work was
funded by grants from the National Institutes of Health, the ADA and the
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation.

   "I don't want people to think we have a cure right around the corner," Dr.
Stewart said. "But this is a step in the right direction."

NOTES: David Templeton can be reached at dtempleton@post-gazette.com or
412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2009


                              269 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2009 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 12, 2009 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: Study hits FDA oversight;
Financial conflicts in outsourced drug research are said to often remain hidden.

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:

   Missing information, loopholes and weak oversight hamper efforts to uncover
financial conflicts involving researchers who test experimental drugs before
companies seek government approval, an internal watchdog finds.

   As a result, the Food and Drug Administration's screening system is
unreliable, the Health and Human Services inspector general's office said in a
report to be released today.

   "We found a number of limitations in FDA's oversight, leaving FDA unable to
determine whether [drug companies] submit financial information for all clinical
investigators," the report said.

   Investigators examined 118 new drug applications approved by the FDA in 2007.

   Because scientists can be tempted by profits, the government requires
disclosure of possible conflicts involving clinical researchers who review
medications before drug companies seek FDA approval.

   In all, 42% of the applications lacked complete financial information and not
even 1% of researchers disclosed possible conflicts. Such limitations "could
result in FDA being unaware of a clinical investigator's financial interest, and
thus unable to gauge its potential bias on clinical trial results," the report
said.

   The FDA acknowledged the need for improvements while also disagreeing with
some of the inspector general's findings and recommendations.

   Drug companies hire outside scientists and doctors to test the safety and
effectiveness of medications under development. Such tests provide raw data for
the FDA to later decide whether to approve a drug. The process, which uses human
patients as medical guinea pigs, is supposed to be governed by strict scientific
and ethical rules, including financial disclosure.

   The issue is not scientists' compensation for supervising drug development
tests but the conflicts that could arise from other rewards, such as honoraria,
grants and stock options.

   Disclosure requirements were put in place after the 1999 death of a teenager
in an experimental gene therapy trial. Among other problems with that clinical
trial, it turned out that many of the scientists had financial ties to the drug
company.

   The inspector general's report found that in 2007, only 206 of 29,691
clinical investigators disclosed potential financial conflicts. By comparison, a
study published in the Journal of the American Medical Assn. reported that
between 23% and 28% of university researchers had financial ties to the drug
industry.

   For scientists who did report, the most common financial rewards were
consulting fees or honoraria, with a midpoint payment of $47,252.

   The report also concluded that financial information gets to the FDA too late
in the process. Companies submit the data with their application for a drug's
approval. By that stage, clinical tests are complete.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009


                              270 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2009 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            January 12, 2009 Monday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Dillard University to bestow doctorate on poet;
Library ceremony, lecture on agenda

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Nikki Giovanni, a poet, author and civil-rights activist, will receive an
honorary doctorate Friday from Dillard University during a daylong visit to the
Gentilly campus.

   Two events will be open to the public: a free lecture at 7 p.m. in the Kearny
West Wing Building and a 2 p.m. ceremony in the Will W. Alexander Library, where
the section housing her books will be named in her honor.

   A Fisk University graduate who helped organize the Student Non-Violent
Coordinating Committee, Giovanni is a professor at Virginia Tech.

   . . . . . . .

   NURSING SESSION: The LSU School of Nursing will hold a free information
session about its graduate program on Thursday from 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. in the
fourth-floor administration reception area at 1900 Gravier St.

   Reservations are required. They can be made by calling 504.568.5198 or
e-mailing nsprograminformation@lsuhsc.edu

   . . . . . . .

   ARTISTS AT XAVIER: Bradley McCallum and Jacqueline Terry, artists whose work
is devoted to social justice, will speak Thursday at 7 p.m. in Xavier
University's University Center Ballroom.

   Their lecture, part of Xavier's speakers series, will be free and open to the
public.

   McCallum's and Terry's work is included in Prospect.1 New Orleans. They are
on view at the New Orleans African-American Museum, 1418 Gov. Nicholls St.,
through Sunday.

   . . . . . . .

   NEWCOMB SUMMIT: Former Gov. Kathleen Blanco and Democratic Party strategist
Donna Brazile will be among the speakers at the Newcomb College Institute's
second biennial summit Feb. 5-7.

   "Power Lines: How Women Transform the Grid," which will be held in the
Lavin-Bernick Center, also will feature Joyce Zonana, former director of women's
studies at the University of New Orleans; financial experts Matt Flannery and
Premal Shah; and the Urban Bush Women, a dance company. A performance by blues
diva Marva Wright is scheduled to close the conference.

   Although the summit will be free and open to the public, registration at
newcomb.tulane.edu is required. The deadline is Jan. 23.

   . . . . . . .

   APPOINTMENTS: Adrian Guy is Dillard's new executive director of alumni
relations. A Dillard alumna, she has worked at the University of Virginia's law
school, of which she is a graduate, and Friedrich Schiller University in Jena,
Germany, as well as Sony BMG Music Entertainment.

   --  Dr. Jay Kolls, who had led LSU Health Sciences Center's gene-therapy
program before moving to Children's Hospital in Pittsburgh, is returning to be
chairman of the genetics department.

   --  Charlie McMahon, chief technology officer at LSU's Center for Computation
and Technology, will become Tulane's vice president for information technology
and chief technology officer Feb. 1.

   --  Dr. Thomas Yeh Jr. has been invested as the first holder of the Elias S.
Hanna, MD, Cardiovascular Foundation Chair in Cardiovascular Surgery at Tulane's
School of Medicine. Hanna endowed the chair with $1.25 million, and the state
contributed $800,000.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2009


                              271 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 San Antonio Express-News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            San Antonio Express-News

                            December 29, 2008 Monday
                              STATE&METRO Edition

SECTION: METRO AND STATE NEWS; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 5360 words

HEADLINE: Obituaries

BODY:

   20081229

   HOWELLS

   Annie Laurie died on December 24, 2008 after a long illness. She was born to
Edward H. & Annie Laurie Willis on February 16, 1931 in San Antonio, Texas. A
Memorial Service will be held at Sunset Funeral Chapel today Monday, December
29, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. Interment to follow at Sunset Memorial Park. The family
wishes to extend a special thank you for their generous and loving care to the
Blanco Villa Nursing Home and the Bethany Hospice Center.

   LEVINE

   Sharon Renee Levine died December 28, 2008 following an awe-inspiring,
fearless fight against Hodgkins Disease. Sharon was born July 22, 1969 in
Houston and grew up in Sealy, Texas. She graduated from Sealy High School and
earned her Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Texas and her law
degree from Emory University. Sharon began her legal career in Houston as a
court-appointed attorney representing indigent defendants. In 2001, she joined
the firm of Richard Haynes and Associates. She was a member of the Harris County
Criminal Lawyers Association, the Texas Criminal Defense Lawyers Association,
and the Houston Bar Association. She was driven by a passionate commitment to
the idea that no one under any circumstances should suffer from the failures or
excesses of the criminal justice system. Sharon was deeply devoted to her
family, her friends, and her dogs, Avery and Luka. She is survived by her
parents, Barbara and Melvyn Levine, her sister and brother-in-law, Janis and
Larry Stone, her brother, Michael, her nephew Jacob Rosanno, and her nieces
Rachel and Kayla Rosanno. She also leaves behind her aunts and uncles, Carolyn
and Steve Leatherwood, Ricki and Joel Florsheim, Augusta and Sidney Levine, and
Dana and Jerry Robinson. She was predeceased by her grandparents, Frieda and Gus
Levine and Shirley and Mose Macow. Sharon and her family are deeply grateful to
Dr. George Carrum, Audrey Scholoff, R.N., N.P. - C, and the out-patient and
in-patient doctors and nurses at the Cell and Gene Therapy Unit at Methodist
Hospital for their extraordinarily compassionate care. In lieu of flowers
memorial contributions may be made to the Sharon R. Levine Endowed Fund for Cell
and Gene Therapy in care of The Methodist Hospital Foundation,P.O. Box 4384,
Houston, Texas 77210.Graveside services will be held on Tuesday, December 30 at
1:00 PM in the Beth Israel Memorial Gardens at Woodlawn Cemetery, 1101
Antoine,Houston, Texas 77055.

   RODRIGUEZ

   Patsy C. Rodriguez born May 21, 1924 was called into Heaven surrounded by her
adoring family on December 27, 2008. She was preceded in death by her parents,
Juan and Feliz Castillo, grandson Gilbert Martinez Jr and great grandson Joshua
Rodriguez. She is survived by her loving husband Augustine M. Rodriguez, sons:
Roberto Rodriguez (Josie), Roger Rodriguez (Hope), daughters: Ruth Diaz and
Delia Martinez, 10 grandchildren, 14 great grandchildren, one great-great
grandson, two brothers, two sisters and numerous nephews and nieces. She was a
loving wife, mother and grandmother her entire life. Her beautiful smile and
laughter brought joy to all she encountered. She was an avid sports fan,
supporting her children and grandchildren in their sports activities. The Family
would like to thank Dr. Yamini, Dr. Ye, the Nix Hospital ICU and the 19th floor
nursing staff for the care shown to our beloved mother who will remain always in
our hearts.SERVICESVisitation will be held on Tuesday, December 30, 2008 from
4:00 pm-9:00 pm at Brookehill Funeral Home with a Rosary to be recited at
7:00pm. Mass will be celebrated on Thursday, December 31, 2008 at 12:00 Noon at
St. Joseph South San Catholic Church with interment to follow at Fort Sam
Houston Cemetery

   THOMAE

   Adalberto Carlos Thomae, Jr. age 88, passed away on Saturday, December 27,
2008. He was born on July 15, 1920 in San Antonio, Texas. Known as "Beto", "Al"
or "A.C." by many longstanding friends, associates and a loving family, he
survived injuries while bravely serving his country during WWII in the Pacific
Theatre, before returning home to marry his childhood sweetheart, begin a family
and operate and graciously preserve his historic Thomae-Yndo Ranch for the rest
of his long life. A true son of Texas, he was a direct descendant of early Texas
settlers in Bexar, Wilson and Comal County, a great-great grandson of: Adolph
Carl Thomae, a founder of New Braunfels; Don Miguel Yndo, ranch founder and
Canary Island settler; Erasmus "Deaf" Smith, a hero of the Battle of San Jacinto
and the fight for Texas Independence. A lifelong ranchman, hunter and
conservationist, he was a longtime supporter and contributor of the Coastal
Conservation Association of Texas. He was preceded in death by his parents,
Adalberto Carlos Thomae, Sr. and Gertrudis Yndo Thomae, and his brother Adolph
William "Billy" Thomae. He is survived by his wife of 62 years, Conita Benavides
Thomae; daughter Connie Thomae Fitzgerald, her husband Bill and grandchildren
Debbie, Jimmy and Tommy; son, Al Thomae, III; son Bob Thomae, his wife Kim and
grandchildren Robbie, Alex and Andrew; daughter Mari Thomae Garza, her husband
Jes#xFA;s and grandchildren Monica, Beto and Nick; 12 great grandchildren, and
sisters Gertrude Thomae King and Rosemond Gomez Thomae. ROSARYTUESDAYDECEMBER
30, 20087:00 P.M.PORTER LORING CHAPELMASSWEDNESDAYDECEMBER 31, 2008 12:00
NOONST. PIUS X CATHOLIC CHURCH3303 URBAN CRESTMr. Thomae's grandsons will be
pallbearers. Interment at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery.You are invited to
signThe guestbook atwww.porterloring.comArrangements with

   GONZALEZ

   Michael Alexander Gonzalez, born on May 23, 1989, passed away on December 26,
2008, at the age of 19. Michael was a 2007 graduate of John Paul Stevens High
School. He was preceded in death by his uncle and godfather, David S. Garcia.
Survivors include his mother, Lupe Morales Gonzalez; father, Cruz A. Gonzalez;
brothers, Albert Daniel Gonzalez and Fabian Gonzalez; maternal grandfather,
Alberto M. Morales; aunt and godmother, Amelia Garcia; aunts, Nora Morales, Dora
Calderon and her husband, Javier; uncles, Guillermo Gonzalez, Oscar Gonzalez,
Hector Gonzalez, Enrique Gonzalez, and Cesar Gonzalez; special cousins, Cosme
(Lulo) Ramirez, III and Guillermo (Memito) Gonzalez, Jr.; numerous other cousins
and friends. The family will receive friends on Sunday, December 28, 2008, and
Monday, December 29, 2008, at the Castle Ridge Mortuary, from 8:30 a.m. until
9:00 p.m. A rosary will be recited on Monday at 7:00 p.m. The funeral procession
will depart the funeral home on Tuesday, December 30, 2008, at 1:30 p.m. for a
2:00 p.m. Funeral Mass at St. Rose of Lima Catholic Church. Interment will
follow at Resurrection Cemetery at Cordi-Marian. Flowers or memorial
contributions to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society or Make A Wish Foundation are
welcomed. Services under the direction of the Castle Ridge Mortuary.

   RANGEL

   Refugio R. Rangel Jr. (Cuco) went to be with the Lord on December 28, 2008 at
the age of 81 years. Mr. Rangel is preceded in death by his parents Refugio R.
Sr. and Nicolasa Rangel. Also sisters Dominga Davila, Hortensia Sanchez and
Virginia Jaimez and brothers, Lucio and Anselmo Rangel. Mr. Rangel is survived
by daughters; Sylvia Almanza and husband Juan, Maria Rodriguez and husband Tony,
Anjanette Langford and husband Lance, Isabel Brunn and husband Louis, Gracie
Garcia and husband David and Betty Larsen and husband Dave. Sons; Refugio R.
Rangel III, Victor Rangel and wife Patsy, Edward Rangel, Vincent Rangel and wife
Nancy, Richard Rangel and Ruben Rodriguez and wife Cynthia. Sisters; Gracie
Rangel and Sister Carmel Rangel, brother; Micky Rangel and wife Beatrice,
Sisters-In-Law; Antonia and Rafaela Rangel, Brother-In-Law; Robert Sanchez, 27
grandchildren and 14 great-grandchildren and a host of family and friends. Mr.
Rangel was an active volunteer for 20 years with San Juan De Los Lagos Catholic
Church assisting the seniors and working in the office. He also volunteered with
the West Side Catholic Coalition for Folklife Festival for 10 years. He was
greatly loved and will be deeply missed. Visitation will be held on Tuesday,
December 30, 2008 from 10:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. with a rosary to begin at 7:00
p.m. at Alamo Funeral Home, 624 N. Alamo, San Antonio, Texas. A funeral Mass
will be celebrated on Wednesday, December 31, 2008 at 8:15 a.m.at San Juan De
Los Lagos Catholic Church, 3231 El Paso St. San Antonio, Texas 78207. Interment
to follow at Fort Sam Houston National Cemetery.

   CARLE

   Milton "Mickey" Carle went to be with the Lord on December 22, 2008. He is
survived by his loving wife of 53 years, Agnes Carle; sons, Tim Carle, Tom Carle
and wife Debbie; sister, Anna Mae Vernone; grandchildren, Kimberly and Matthew
Carle.SERVICESA visitation will be held at Mission Park Funeral Chapels North on
Monday, December 29, 2008 from 6:00 - 9:00 PM with a Rosary to begin at 7:00 PM.
A funeral mass will be held at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, December 30, 2008 at St.
Luke's Catholic Church with interment to follow at Ft. Sam Houston National
Cemetery. You may sign the on-line guestbook at www.MissionParks.com under the
obituary section.

   OEFINGER

   Robert Earl Oefinger was born on November 9, 1944 in San Antonio, Texas. He
is the son of Alfred Oefinger and Estelle Jenkins Oefinger, deceased. He died on
December 25, 2008 at his home in Corpus Christi, Texas. He is survived by his
two children, Greg Oefinger of Paarl, South Africa, Ashley Tippit of San
Antonio, Texas, and his six grandchildren: Brynn Tippit, Judd Oefinger, Sophie
Tippit, Gage Oefinger, Grace Tippit, and Beck Tippit. He is also survived by his
sister Norma Giebelhaus of Rockport, Texas and nephew Brian Giebelhaus of
Austin, Texas. A family memorial service will be held at a later date. In lieu
of flowers, donations may be made to Monte Christo Ministries. For information
on donations, contact gregoefinger@yahoo.com

   MUISE

   Lt. Colonel Fredric DuBois Muise, USAF (Ret.), died at his home in San
Antonio, TX. on December 24, 2008 at the age of 74. He was born in Newton,
Massachusetts on August 11, 1934. He was preceded in death by his parents,
Benoit W. Muise and Blanche DuBois Muise; and his brother, Benoit E. Muise. He
is survived by his wife, Lois M. Muise; his sons, Gregory D. Muise, Christopher
B. (Tracy) Muise; his daughter Jennifer M. (Jason) Hill; his grandchildren
Elizabeth O'Connell, Melissa Muise and Logan Hill; his sister-in-law Louise
Muise; and six nieces and nephews. Fredric graduated from Kimball Union Academy
in Meriden, New Hampshire and was an avid and accomplished ice hockey player at
the University of New Hampshire. He later received his Bachelors degree in
Business from Texas Lutheran University. He began his military career in 1953
and retired in 1981 after 28 years of dedicated service to his country. He
continued his support for the US Armed Forces by serving as the Director of
Marketing for Air Force Village until 1997. He was among the kindest, gentlest
and wisest of men who truly loved living life and sharing it with others. The
family will receive friends on Tuesday, December 30, from 6:00-8:00 P.M. at
Porter Loring Mortuary North. FUNERAL MASS WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 20089:30
A.M.ST. HELENA CATHOLIC CHURCH14714 EDGEMONTInterment will follow in Fort Sam
Houston National Cemetery.You are invited to signthe Guestbook
atwww.porterloring.comArrangements with

   ROBBINS

   Bernice Robbins born June 6, 1932, died Dec. 27, 2008. She is survived by her
husband, Herbert (Pete) Robbins of San Antonio; son, Kenneth (JoJi) and his wife
Phyllis of Houston; stepdaughters, Audry Robbins of Blanco, Carrie and Rebecca
Robbins of Ft. Worth; grandchildren, Roy Thomas Soffes, Dana Nicole Soffes,
Joshua Robbins of Tulsa and Andrea Robbins of Ft. Worth; sister, Olga Anderele
of Victoria and many nieces and nephews. She is preceded in death by parents
Benny and Bertha Stratmann; brother, Bernard Stratmann and sister Levy Voelkel.
Bernice was a longtme member of the Amazing Grace Lutheran Church. Visitation
will be Monday, Dec. 29, 2008 from 12 p.m. to 2:00 p.m. at the Tondre-Guinn
Funeral Home, Castroville. Funeral Service will be Tuesday, Dec. 30, 2008 at
10:00 a.m. at the Tondre-Guinn Funeral Home. Graveside Service will be Tuesday,
Dec. 30, 2008 at 3:00 p.m. at the Whitting Cemetery, Whitting, TX. Pallbearers
are George Holstien, Mark Reed, Bruce Krahn, Royce Stratmann, Roy Thomas Soffes,
Joshua Robbins. In lieu of flowers donations can be made toAmazing Grace
Lutheran Church, 12525 Potranco Road, San Antonio, TX 78253, 210-679-7800,
www.amazinggraceinsa.org visit www.tondre-guinn.com

   SCHULMEIER

   Alton (Tony) Julius Schulmeier stepped peacefully into the eternity on
Christmas Day , 2008 at his home in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, surrounded by his
family. He was born in Wetmore, Texas, January 23, 1913. He was preceeded in
death by his parents, his first wife, Valeska Acker Schulmeier, his son, Loyd
(Red) Schulmeier, his second wife, Iva Lee Schulmeier and his step son, George
Lee of San Antonio. He is survived by his son Floyd Schulmeier (Vi) of Tulsa,
Oklahoma, a daughter Darleen Lange (Marvin) of St Hedwig, Texas, a daughter,
Aline Wallace (Gene) of Cuba, Illinois, a step daughter, Diana Schulmeier of
Broken Arrow, Oklahoma and a step son, Bill Lee (Shirley) of San Antonio. Texas
, brother Herbert Schulemeir of Ciblo, Texas, a brother, Irvin Schulmeier,of San
Antonio, Texas, a sister, Meta Acker of Yancey, Texas, 17 grandchildren, 35
great grandchildren, 11 great, great grandchildren and one great great great
grand child. Tony was a long standing member of Beitel Memorial Luthern Church
of San Antonio and Hope Worship Center of Tulsa, Oklahoma. Living most of his
life in San Antonio, he moved to Oklahoma in the 90's to work with his son's
watch company. He retired from there to take care of his second wife before she
died. Tony lived by himself in Broken Arrow, Oklahoma with his little dog,
Misty. He still enjoyed beating anyone that came by in Dominoes until the last 2
weeks of his life. He kept a daily dairy from age 9. This was the thing that
kept him sharp in his old age. If you asked him a question about anything, he
would tell you "it's in the book!" Tony will be missed by all who loved him.
Following a Celebration of Life Service in Tulsa, Oklahoma on Monday, December
29,2008 the final services are as follows: Vistation 6-9 pm Tuesday, December
30th at Sunset Home. Funeral services will be held 9 am Wednesday, December 31st
at Sunset Funeral Home Chapel. Interment will follow at Sunset Memorial Park.

   LARISON

   Kimberly Dawn Larison age 35 of Schertz, TX diedDec. 25, 2008. Visitation
will be held on Monday, Dec. 29th. From 6 to 8 PM at the Eckols Chapel. Funeral
services will be held Tue. Dec. 30th at the Eckols Chapel at 2:00 PM. Interment
Kenedy Cemetery.Eckols Funeral Home, Inc. Kenedy, Texas

   HERNANDEZ

   Nicolasa Hernandez, our beloved mother was called home to be with our Lord on
Christmas Day 2008 at the age of 85. She was preceded in death by her husband,
Humberto Hernandez; sons, George and James Hernandez. She is survived by her
sons, Fred Rodriguez and wife Aloma, Jake A. Hernandez; daughter, Elizabeth
Sanchez and husband Don; daughters-in-law, Juanita Hernandez and Margie
Hernandez; 13 grandchildren; 15 great-grandchildren; 1 great-great-grandchild;
brother, Joe Rodriguez and other numerous relatives and friends. She was deeply
loved and will be greatly missed by all of her family and friends. A visitation
will begin Monday, December 29, 2008 at 1:00 p.m. with a Rosary to be recited at
7:00 p.m. at Castillo Mission Funeral Home. Services will conclude with a
cremation to follow.

   KENNEDY

   Frank Lubbock Kennedy, Jr., age 81, of Castroville, TX, passed away Dec. 27,
2008 in Castroville. He was born June 29, 1927 in Texarkana, TX to the late
Frank Lubbock and Hortense Jessup Kennedy, Sr. Frank was a graduate of Peacock
Academy and after graduation served in the Merchant Marines. He retired from TX
DOT in the 1980's. Then as a land surveyor he operated his own survey company,
Medina Valley Surveys, for 20 years. He and his wife lovingly restored the
historic Pigenot home in Castroville. Frank was a member of Masonic Lodge #424
in San Antonio, Past President of Texas Society of Professional Surveyors. He
was preceded in death by his brother, Bill Kennedy. Survivors include his wife
of 62 years, Gloria Lux Kennedy of Castroville; sons and their spouses, Frank
Lubbock Kennedy, III and wife Carolyn of Helotes, and Karl Lux Kennedy and wife
Barbie of Castroville; 7 grandchildren and 7 great grandchildren. The
Tondre-Guinn Funeral Home will open on Wednesday, Dec. 31, 2008 at 1 p.m. for a
Memorial Service that begins at 2 p.m. Memorials may be given to the Texas
Society of Professional Surveyors, TSFI Memorial Scholarship Fund. visit
www.tondre-guinn.com

   WEHMAN

   James (Jimmy) E Wehman, 61, died peacefully December 24, 2008. Just in time
to make it to Heaven for a very special day. Jim was born 4-4-1947 in Cuero, TX.
He attended St. Anthony's Grade School in San Antonio, attended high school at
Arlington Heights in Ft Worth, and Graduated from St. Mary's University with a
Degree in Business Administration. Among his many accomplishments were winning
the National Finals his Jr. year at St. Mary's and subsequently being voted in
to the St. Mary's basketball hall of fame. After college, he joined the State
Farm family, retiring 32 years later with honors, including their Presidents
Club. More importantly, he retired with the love and support of the many friends
that he made during his tenure with State Farm. A group of people that he loved
very much. The family would like to give heartfelt thanks to the ICU staff at
St. David's Hospital in Austin, especially his nurse Jennifer. Bob Spurck, CEO
of Austin Diagnostic Clinic, his State Farm family, and all of his friends and
family. Jim was preceded in Death by his Parents Harvey & Margaret Wehman. He is
survived by his two sons: Wes & Guy. Wes' wife Meleah and their two children
Halee and Reagan, Guy Bob's wife Sunny and their 3 children, Jack, Macy, &
Ellie. His brother Harvey and his wife Joan. Evin Wehman, his close friends Dana
Warrenburg and her husband Wally. Gay & Charles Bottoms and several Nieces and
Nephews. Honary Pallbearers include: Lynn Marie Bonds, Lee Ann Laborde, Damon
Polk, Eddie Wilson, Charles Bottoms, and Wally Warrenburg.Visitation and
services will both be held at Austin Christian Fellowship Church (ACF) in
Austin, TX on Tuesday Dec. 30th. Visitation will be from 12-2pm with services
beginning immediately afterwards at 2:00pm.In lieu of flowers, please send your
donations to Austin Christian Fellowship at: 6401 River Place Blvd: Austin, TX
78730

   JACKSON

   Elida Arevalo Jackson, age 80, of Hondo, TX, passed away Dec. 27, 2008 in
Hondo. She was born June 15, 1928 in San Antonio to the late Luis C. and
Victoria Juarez Arevalo. She was preceded in death by her son, Randall MacMahon,
daughter, Ruth Ashworth, son-in-law, Ruben Cantu; brother, Luis Jr. and Pedro
Arevalo, Jose Arevalo and his wife, Pearly Arevalo. Survivors include her
husband of 24 years, Hubert Jackson of Hondo; children, Victoria Mary Louise
Chavez of San Antonio, Raymond D. MacMahon and his wife Cary of North Carolina,
Laura Lee Scanlan and her husband Stephen of Magnolia, TX; 8 grandchildren; 11
great grandchildren; 11 great great grandchildren; sisters, Elodia Dumas of
Hondo, Margaret De La Garza of San Antonio; numerous nieces and nephews.
Visitation will be Tuesday, Dec. 30, 2008 from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. at the
Tondre-Guinn Funeral Home, Castroville. Funeral Service will be Wednesday, Dec.
31, 2008 at 10:00 a.m. at the Tondre-Guinn Funeral Home. Services will conclude
at the funeral home. Memorials may be given to the American Red Cross.visit
www.tondre-guinn.com

   RODRIGUEZ

   Lily Esquivel Rodriguez, age 84, entered into eternal rest on December 25,
2008. A beloved wife, mother and grandmother, Mrs. Rodriguez always brought
laughter and hospitality to others. She was known for her faith in prayer and
our Lord Jesus Christ. Mrs. Rodriguez is survived by her husband Frank C.
Rodriguez; daughters Yolanda Rodriguez and Anna (David) Ramirez; grandchildren
Rodney Rodriguez, Marc Rodriguez, Anthony (Stephanie) Rodriguez, Jennifer (Dan)
Smith, Michelle Rodriguez, and Jason Ramirez; 11 great-grandchildren; sister
Aurora Zamora; cousin Emiliano (Beatrice) Delgado; and numerous nieces, nephews,
extended family and friends. She is preceded in death by her son, Frank "Red"
Rodriguez, and sisters Hope E. Rodriguez and Connie Marenich. We would like to
thank all of our family and friends for their prayers and support during this
difficult time. Visitation will be held Sunday, December 28, 2008 starting at
4:00PM at Mission Park South Funeral Home with a Rosary to be recited at 7:00PM.
Funeral services will be Monday, December 29, 2008 at 9:30AM at St. Margaret
Mary's Catholic Church with Interment to follow at Delgado Cemetery. Pallbearers
David Ramirez, Richard Zamora, Henry Rodriguez, Randy Resendez, Raymond Sanchez,
George Garcia, Rodney Rodriguez and Jason Ramirez. For personal acknowledgement
you may sign the guest book at www.missionparks.com in the obituary section.

   LIMA

   Sarah Elizabeth Lima, age 17, went to be with her Lord on December 23, 2008
at 8:00 P.M. in San Antonio, Texas. Sarah's many accomplishments included the
Presidential Award for Excellence in Education, 1st Place in UIL 7th & 8th Grade
Orchestra (while attending 6th grade), "Making A Mark" Blue Ribbon Award in art
and an International Poet's Society award for "Beautiful Nature" (published),
dedicated to her father. She wrote the song "Call on His Name" as well as her
own cello music. Occasionally she assisted and taught art classes for Nature
Camp and Sunshine Cottage at the San Antonio Botanical Gardens. Sarah loved
nature - her favorite place was the Humboldt County National Redwood Forest in
California. Sarah was an inspiration to all who met her during her fight with
cancer. She was preceded in death by her paternal grandmother, Jo Ann Lima, and
maternal grandparents, Paul and Sara Boggs. She is survived by her mother and
father, Valerie and Joseph Lima; brothers, Joshua, Jeremiah, and Noah; paternal
grandfather, Joseph C. Lima and his wife, Raquel; aunt, Tina Lima; aunt and
uncle, David and Ginny Boggs. The family will receive friends on Monday,
December 29, 2008 from 5:00 to 8:00 P.M. at Porter Loring Mortuary North.
SERVICE TUESDAY, DECEMBER 30, 2008 10:00 A.M.OAK HILLS CHURCH 19595 IH 10
WESTPastor Dennis McDonald officiating. In lieu of flowers, memorial
contributions may be made in Sarah's name to any Washington Mutual Bank
atwww.wamu.com.You are invited to sign the Guestbook at www.porterloring.com
Arrangements with

   SNEAD

   Snead Henry L. Snead age 86 and 6 months passed away peacefully on December
26, 2008. He was born in San Antonio on June 11, 1922. He was a member of the
Church of Christ and was a US Army Veteran proudly serving his country during WW
II. He was preceded in death by his son; Roger Lynn Snead. He leaves to cherish
his memory his loving wife of 60 years, Letha Lee Snead, son and
daughter-in-law; Jerry Wayne Snead and Cathy, grandsons; Jerry Wayne Snead II
and his wife Suzanne, Shannon Lee Snead, and Chris Alan Snead, great-grandsons;
Ethan Lee Snead and Carson Edward Snead.ServicesVisitation will be held on
Tuesday, December 30, 2008 at Dellcrest Funeral Home from 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 P.M.
Funeral Services will be held on Wednesday, December 31, 2008 at 12:30 P.M. at
the funeral home interment will follow at Ft. Sam Houston National Cemetery with
full military honors.For personal acknowledgment you may sign the guest book
atwww.missionparks.comin the obituary section.Arrangements with:

   NOVIAN

   Mrs. Felix G. Novian nee Elsie Hennings of Fredericksburg passed away on
Saturday, December 27th in the Knopp Nursing & Rehab Center at the age of 99
years. Mrs. Elsie Novian is survived by Three Daughters, Two Sons and spouses:
Dorothy Ann Murtha of Abilene Frances and Lloyd Taylor of San Antonio Henry and
Carole Novian of Delaware Donald and Rosemary Novian of San Antonio Patricia and
David Wilson of Florence Daughter in law: Karen, Mrs. Johnny Novian of
Fredericksburg 16 Grandchildren, 31 Great Grandchildren, Seven Great Great
Grandchildren The body will lie in state in the chapel of the Schaetter Funeral
Home, Fredericksburg until 9:45 A.M. on Wednesday, December 31st with Mass of
Resurrection at 10:00 A.M. in the St. Mary's Catholic Church with the Rev. Jim
Harnan officiating. Graveside services and interment will follow in the St.
Mary's Catholic Cemetery. For those who so desire you may make memorial
contributions in her memory to the St. Mary's School Endowment Fund, Hill
Country Memorial Hospital Hospice or to the charity of your choice. A Vigil
Service will be held on Tuesday evening at 6:00 P.M. in the chapel of the
Schaetter Funeral Home, Fredericksburg. Visitation for Mrs. Elsie Novian will
begin on Tuesday afternoon at 4:30 P.M. in the chapel of the Schaetter Funeral
Home, Fredericksburg. Expressions of sympathy may be sent at www.schaetter.com
Funeral arrangements under the direction ofSchaetter's Funeral Home 301 East San
Antonio Street P.O. Box 489 Fredericksburg, TX 78624 Phone (830) 997-2151 Fax
(830) 997-2153 www.Schaetter.com

   BROWN

   Rubina M. Brown, age 55, passed away at her home in San Antonio on Friday,
Dec. 26th, 2008. Rubina's parents, Santos and Ruby Munoz preceeded her in death
in addition to her brothers, Ruben and Robert Moreno. She is survived by her
husband of 24 years, Eugene C. Brown, Sr., children: Rosalinda Ovalle, Pablo
Salinas and Michelle Moreno and stepchildren, Eugene C. Brown Jr. and Marian
Brown Grandchildren surviving are Spencer, Matthew, Jacob, Amanda, Miranda,
Cassidy, Victor Rene, Seth and Sam. Siblings surviving are Rita Colman, Rachel
Sanchez, Rosemary Valdez, Santos Moreno, Ricardo, Ralph and Roy Moreno. Rubina
was dearly loved by her family and friends and all those who knew her well.
Visitation is scheduled for 5 PM Wednesday, Dec. 31st with services to begin at
6PM at Meadowlawn Tribute Center, 5611 E. Houston St. To leave a note for the
family go to Meadowlawn.net and select Obituaries. Arrangements by Meadowlawn
Crematory and American Mortuary.

   HERNANDEZ

   Albert Hernandez, age 66, entered into rest on December 25, 2008ob in San
Antonio, TX. He was born September 11, 1942 in Weslaco, TX. He volunteered in
the United States Army and proudly served his country during the Vietnam War.
Albert received numerous medal awards including the Bronze Star and was an
expert Marksman and enjoyed target shooting and hunting. He graduated from
Laredo Junior College in auto mechanics. Albert worked as a truck driver and his
CB handle was "War Lord" to all his friends. He is preceded in death by his
parents, Alberto & Olivia Hernandez, and sister Irma Tamez. Survivors include
his sister Delia Hernandez, his niece Yolanda Faburada and husband Abraham;
nephews Daniel Tamez and wife Maria, Carmen Tamez and wife Laurie, Gustavo Tamez
and wife Rachel, Albert Tamez and Edward Tamez, numerous great nephews and
nieces. A special Thanks to Christus Hospice for their care and support. In lieu
of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to the charity of one's choice.
Visitation will be Tuesday, December 30, 2008 from 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. at
Olinger Mortuary Service. Graveside service will follow at 1:45 p.m. at Fort Sam
Houston National Cemetery with full military honors.

   GONZALES

   Michael Alexander Gonzalez, born on May 23, 1989, passed away on December 26,
2008, at the age of 19. Michael was a 2007 graduate of John Paul Stevens High
School. He was preceded in death by his uncle and godfather, David S. Garcia.
Survivors include his mother, Lupe Morales Gonzalez; father, Cruz A. Gonzalez;
brothers, Albert Daniel Gonzalez and Fabian Gonzalez; maternal grandfather,
Alberto M. Morales; aunt and godmother, Amelia Garcia; aunts, Nora Morales, Dora
Calderon and her husband, Javier; uncles, Guillermo Gonzalez, Oscar Gonzalez,
Hector Gonzalez, Enrique Gonzalez, and Cesar Gonzalez; special cousins, Cosme
(Lulo) Ramirez, III and Guillermo (Memito) Gonzalez, Jr.; numerous other cousins
and friends. The family will receive friends on Sunday, December 28, 2008, and
Monday, December 29, 2008, at the Castle Ridge Mortuary, from 8:30 a.m. until
9:00 p.m. A rosary will be recited on Monday at 7:00 p.m. The funeral procession
will depart the funeral home on Tuesday, December 30, 2008, at 1:30 p.m. for a
2:00 p.m. Funeral Mass at St. Rose of Lima Catholic Church. Interment will
follow at Resurrection Cemetery at Cordi-Marian. Flowers or memorial
contributions to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society or Make A Wish Foundation are
welcomed. Services under the direction of the Castle Ridge Mortuary.

   LIMA

   Sarah Elizabeth Lima, age 17, passed away on December 23, 2008 at 8:00 P.M.
in San Antonio, Texas. Sarah's many accomplishments included the Presidential
Award for Excellence in Education, 1st Place in UIL 7th & 8th Grade Orchestra
(while attending 6th grade), "Making A Mark" Blue Ribbon Award in art and an
International Poet's Society award for "Beautiful Nature" (published), dedicated
to her father. She wrote the song "Call on His Name" as well as her own cello
music. Occasionally she assisted and taught art classes for Nature Camp and
Sunshine Cottage at the San Antonio Botanical Gardens. Sarah loved nature - her
favorite place was the Humboldt County National Redwood Forest in California.
Sarah was an inspiration to all who met her during her fight with cancer. She
was preceded in death by her paternal grandmother, Jo Ann Lima, and maternal
grandparents, Paul and Sara Boggs. She is survived by her mother and father,
Valerie and Joseph Lima; brothers, Joshua, Jeremiah, and Noah; paternal
grandfather, Joseph C. Lima and his wife, Raquel; aunt, Tina Lima; aunt and
uncle, David and Ginny Boggs. The family will receive friends on Monday,
December 29, 2008 from 5:00 to 8:00 P.M. at Porter Loring Mortuary North.
SERVICE TUESDAY, DECEMBER 30, 200810:00 A.M.OAK HILLS CHURCH 19595 IH 10
WESTPastor Dennis McDonald officiating. In lieu of flowers, memorial
contributions may be made in Sarah's name to any Washington Mutual Bank at
www.wamu.comYou are invited to signthe Guestbook atwww.porterloring.com

   GARCIA

   Our beloved mother, grandmother and great grandmother, Santos R. Garcia was
born on September 1, 1914 in Floresville, TX. To Luisa and Martin Ramirez, went
to be with the Lord on December 26, 2008 at the age of 94 years. Mrs. Garcia was
preceded in death by her husband, Daniel Garcia, Sr., her son's, Alejandro ,
Andres, and Daniel Garcia, Jr., and several grandchildren. Santos is survived by
her loving children, Hortencia Martinez(David), Oralia Cordova, Otelia
Brown(James), Adolfo Garcia, Alice Dutcher, Bernaldo Garcia, Armando
Garcia(Dora), Louis Garcia(Cindy), and Carmelita Garcia; also 40 grandchildren,
64 great grandchildren, and 24 great great grandchildren, also numerous nieces
and nephews. A visitation will begin on Monday December 29, 2008 at 5pm, with a
rosary being recited that evening at 7pm. A procession will depart the funeral
home at 9:15 am Tuesday December 30, 2008 for a 10am Holy Mass of Resurrection
at St. Margaret Mary's Catholic Church, 1314 Fair Ave. Interment will follow in
Chapel Hill Memorial Park. Services under the direction of

   CARLE

   Milton Carle went to be with the Lord on December 22, 2008. He is survived by
his loving wife of 53 years, Agnes Carle; sons, Tim Carle, Tom Carle and wife
Debbie; sister, Anna Mae Vernone; grandchildren, Kimberly and Matthew Carle.
SERVICES A visitation will be held at Mission Park Funeral Chapels North on
Monday, December 29, 2008 from 6:00 - 9:00 PM with a Rosary to begin at 7:00 PM.
A church service will be held at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, December 30, 2008 at St.
Luke's Catholic Church with interment to follow at Ft. Sam Houston National
Cemetery. You may sign the on-line guestbook at www.MissionParks.com under the
obituary section.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2008


                              272 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                            December 28, 2008 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: Waiting for the light <|> As a degenerative disease steals his sight,
a law student advocates stem cell research, awaiting the breakthrough that could
restore it

BYLINE: MARK JOHNSON, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   For John Walsh, a third-year law student at University of Wisconsin-Madison,
stem cells represent the hope that scientists may find some way to stop the
darkness closing around the edges of his vision.

    He was born with substantial hearing loss, but doctors did not diagnose the
cause until a cruel second act arrived.

    In 1997, one year before James Thomson became the first to isolate and grow
human embryonic stem cells, Walsh was walking home from the Fourth of July
fireworks. He fell into a pond.

    It was the first sign of a vision problem. Soon afterward, a doctor
diagnosed him with Usher syndrome, an inherited disease that causes hearing
loss, but also a progressive loss of vision. Cells called photoreceptors were
dying.

    The same disease also afflicted his older brother, Michael.

    What the doctor told the family left little room for hope.

    "He basically said there is no treatment," said the boys' father, David
Walsh.

    Stem cells were not the only possible therapy under investigation.
Scientists have pursued the possibility of treating the disease by correcting
the genetic defect, said David Gamm, assistant professor of ophthalmology and
visual science at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

    But Gamm added that in the late stages of the disease, when the cells have
died, it becomes too late for gene therapy. At that point, photoreceptor cells
in the retina would have to be replaced.

    But there was another reason John Walsh looked to stem cells more than some
of the other possible therapies, such as development of prosthetic eyes.

    "Those things were unnatural therapies," Walsh said. "But taking a stem cell
and having it commingle with other cells in the body - the concept was clear and
it made sense."

    Since his diagnosis a little more than a decade ago, Walsh has experienced a
progressive deterioration of his vision. In high school, he'd watched his
girlfriend's face grow narrower and narrower as his peripheral vision grew worse
and worse.

    At Notre Dame, where he went to college, he went to the football games,
though he saw much less of the field than his classmates. Over the years his
view of the field has diminished to a small area around the 50-yard line.

    In class, Walsh relied on memory because his vision made it difficult to
look up information in his books. At night, he walked around campus with a cane.
He learned to play guitar - he has a hearing aid - and to find pleasure in
music.

    He knows how to be patient. Although there is nothing speedy about the
process of turning stem cell discoveries into clinical therapies, Walsh has
waited and maintained hope.

    In a speech a few years ago, he told a room full of scientists: "Not many
people in life know at the age of 15 what their best day will be. I think I
might: when the brilliant scientists sitting before me find some sort of
treatment that will improve my vision."

    JSOnline.com

    Go to  www.jsonline.com to see a slideshow of John Walsh's life at the
University of Wisconsin.

   Copyright 2008, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2009


                              273 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            December 28, 2008 Sunday
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 1268 words

HEADLINE: Md. Director Casts Aside Cliches About Indian Immigrants

BYLINE: N.C. Aizenman; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Vishal is an Indian computer whiz with a roguish smile. He has
melt-your-heart eyes and big dreams of becoming a software mogul in the United
States. That's where the plot of an Indian song-and-dance movie being shot in
the Washington area parts company with typical Bollywood fare.

   Docile, marriage-minded heroines are out. Instead, the leading lady Vishal
meets after moving to Washington is Preeti, a geeky gal from his home city of
Bangalore who has blossomed into a poised executive and is now -- gasp! -- his
boss. There's also Neelu, a U.S.-raised television reporter who throws a fit
when her Indian parents try to "accidentally" introduce her to Vishal as a
marriage prospect. Rounding out the love tangle is Nick, a half-Indian,
half-American accountant trying to connect with his roots by dating Indian girls
-- only to discover they're even less traditional than he is.

   "I want to portray what life is actually like for 20-something Indian
immigrants here," said Indian-born, Maryland-raised director Shilpa Priya
Jagadeesh (known to her Indian audiences as Priyabharati Joshi). "The romantic
struggle of not wanting our parents to arrange a marriage for us because that's
not the environment we grew up in, but also of not having a lot of experience
finding someone on our own because our parents restricted our dating when we
were younger. . . . It's kind of 'Bridget Jones meets Bollywood.' "

   So rather than setting the film's show-stopper dance numbers in what
Jagadeesh calls "the Indian movie version of Washington" -- marble monuments,
ethnic Indian restaurants and sari shops -- she has chosen the sort of backdrops
against which life really plays out for many first- and second-generation
immigrants here: offices of Northern Virginia high-tech firms; the upscale,
make-your-own-meal restaurant Dinner Zen in Reston; a suburban ice-skating rink;
and a mixer held by NetSAP, the network of South Asian professionals, at the
Willard Hotel, where the music of choice is not bhangra but salsa.

   "I'm not setting this in Washington because of the pretty architecture,"
explained Jagadeesh, 29, who has worked on television movies in India and has
brought in several well-known Indian film actors to play the leads. She said her
aim is to correct some Indian misconceptions about immigrant life in America.

   "There's this stereotype in Indian movies that Indian girls raised here are
morally debauched and end up being rude to their parents, promiscuous and losing
their (Hindu vegetarian) religion -- you know, eating meat right and left," she
said. "Also, the women characters are either long-suffering, self-sacrificing
mother types who are put on a pedestal, or jezebel vamps to be reviled. Well,
what about the rest of us who are just trying to live our lives?"

   Of course, there are already several well-received nonmusical films that
explore the nuances and contradictions of Indian immigrant life, including such
English-language hits as "The Namesake" and "Monsoon Wedding."

   But Jagadeesh said the Indian-language song-and-dance "Masala" genre that is
the staple of commercial Indian cinema is a better vehicle to spread her message
because of its mass appeal in India.

   Indian audiences will also recognize stars Diganth Manchale -- think Ashton
Kutcher's looks and mischievous grin -- and Tejaswini Prakash, who enjoys a
sweetheart status along the lines of "Ugly Betty's" America Ferrera.

   Technically, Jagadeesh's movie, "e-Preeti," is not a product of Bollywood,
which refers to the Hindi-language film industry based in Mumbai, but of
"Sandalwood," the nickname for films produced in the Southern Indian city of
Bangalore in a regional language called Kannada. Because Hindi is India's
national language, Bollywood films tend to play across the country and are
better known overseas. But India's more than half-a-dozen regional film
industries are also bustling enterprises that attract tens of millions of fans
within their regions.

   Because movie-going is a such major habit in India -- young city dwellers
might catch as many as three new releases a week -- there is also a steady
market for even relatively low-budget productions. That is a boon to a
first-time feature director like Jagadeesh, who has raised less than a million
dollars from private investors in India and the United States.

   To cut costs, Jagadeesh has drawn on the Washington area's tightly knit
Southern Indian community. Dozens of friends of friends have offered her their
businesses, apartments and homes to use as shoot locations free of charge.
Jagadeesh's own parents agreed to put up several of the actors in their spacious
Rockville house and to allow Jagadeesh to turn their large finished basement
into a fully-functioning production office.

   The scene there on a recent evening had the feel of an unusually efficient
student film project. In one corner, Jagadeesh, who looked younger than her
years in black corduroy jeans and owlish glasses -- was deep in consultation
with her sound engineer over various microphone options. A few feet away,
producer Manan Singh Katohora sat in front of a computer screen, watching a
rough cut of a dance sequence the crew had filmed in India and bobbing his head
to the beat.

   In the next room over, Chief Assistant Director Rajashri Ramachandra was
helping actors Bharath Babu, 19, and Nina Mahesh, 24, rehearse a scene in which
Nick takes Neelu on a date.

   "Why did you bring two bottles of champagne?" Mahesh -- as Neelu -- asks in
Kannada.

   "This one is a nonalcoholic bottle I especially brought for you because I
know you Indian girls don't drink alcohol," answered Babu, as Nick.

   "Not this Indian girl!" said Mahesh, making as though she was reaching for
the alcoholic bottle.

   Jagadeesh's mother, Jaya Shree, 55, a gene therapist with the National
Institutes of Health, walked past the actors, carrying a bowl of chips with a
look of resigned good humor.

   This was not the future that she and her husband, a pharmacist with the Food
and Drug Administration, had envisioned for their daughter when they moved to
the United States almost three decades ago, she said.

   Like many Indian immigrant parents, they hoped that by her late 20s Jagadeesh
would have an engineering or a medical degree and a budding family with a fellow
Indian from a good family. For awhile, Jagadeesh seemed on track. At age 4, she
announced that she wanted to be a "pediatric neurosurgeon." At age 18, she was
valedictorian of Gaithersburg Senior High School. And by 19 she was enrolled as
a pre-med at the University of Maryland.

   But like some of the characters in her movie, Jagadeesh always resisted her
parents' attempts to introduce her to eligible young men.

   "One time, she even got hold of one of their e-mails and wrote, 'Look, my mom
is trying to get me to marry but this is not the right time, so please don't
follow through with this meeting," recalled Shree, shaking her head at the
memory.

   Then a trip to India midway through college inadvertently led Jagadeesh to a
job with a Bangalore television production company. She was hooked.

   "I'm just fascinated with the complexity of telling stories," she said. "I'm
not averse to doing American cinema some day, but the song-and-dance culture is
so engrained in me that I feel like it would be a little boring."

   Meanwhile, Shree said that getting a firsthand look at Jagadeesh's passion
and skill at pulling together such a complex production was helping her overcome
her initial horror at her daughter's career choice.

   "Wherever your children go, you have to follow," she said, half-wistful,
half-laughing. "Everything is an experiment in this country."

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Katherine Frey -- The Washington Post; At the Pentagon Row
ice rink, Tejaswini Prakash, left, and Diganth Manchale take direction from many
hands. Through her choice of locales, Jagadeesh shows "what life is actually
like for 20-something Indian immigrants here," she says.
IMAGE; By Ricky Carioti -- The Washington Post; Shilpa Priya Jagadeesh, center,
the director of "e-Preeti," and Chief Assistant Director Rajashri Ramachandra,
left, consult with costumer Chelsea Marie.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2008


                              274 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                            December 19, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 10C

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gets scrutiny;
Issue under debate, but risk to sports seen as years away

BYLINE: A.J. Perez

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- From East German swimmers in the 1970s, to sprinter Ben Johnson
in the 1980s, to clients of the Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative (BALCO) in
recent years, athletes have sought an edge in a lab.

   In the future, that lab might not produce a steroid or human growth hormone
but genes that, for example, could alter the webbing of a swimmer's hands and
feet.

   "We already have webbed hands and feet," said Andy Miah, a lecturer at
University of the West of Scotland. "It would just be a little bit more. What
... could the world of sports do about that? Absolutely nothing, nor should they
be able to."

   Gene doping, considered by many experts to be the next frontier for athletes
seeking a biologic edge, was the central theme Thursday at a forum hosted by the
American Enterprise Institute, a conservative think tank. The presenters agreed
that doping on the cellular or molecular level likely is years away, and Miah
was in the minority when it came to how it should be handled by sports governing
bodies.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency, which sets the rules on banned substances for
Olympic sports, has outlawed gene doping -- even though there's no evidence it
exists in sports, nor is there a test to detect it.

   "It's going to be difficult (to detect), but we will succeed in the long
run," said Theodore Friedman, a professor at the University of California-San
Diego. "Whether WADA is ahead of the curve or not, time will tell. ...You're
going to be looking for changes in a cell, not testing for a drug."

   Friedman said gene therapy is "an immature field" that's had some "highly
publicized setbacks" in treating disease. Still, U.S. Anti-Doping Agency CEO
Travis Tygart said it's good that the topic is getting attention before it
becomes an issue in sports.

   "This discussion is miles ahead of where we were pre-BALCO, when people were
questioning the need for out-of-competition testing or research," Tygart said.
"It would be naive to think the demand is not there. If you rely on the experts
who study the issue, we're still several years away from it being a legitimate
risk."

   Edwin Moses, one of the best hurdlers in history, said athletes likely won't
look to gene doping until they're forced to.

   "Most guys are still going to be using the (usual) techniques," Moses said.
"They will continue to be doing it as long as there are no tests used to detect
it. Some will always (cut corners). It's like those who drink and drive and
think they can get home without getting caught. Whether it's drugs or cheating
for an exam, there are always going to be people who cheat."

   Then there's the even more far-reaching notion of prospective parents
potentially altering embryos to bring out the attributes more likely to produce
an elite athlete.

   "The direct manipulation of embryos or fetuses is far off in the future,"
said ethicist Thomas Murray, president and CEO of the Hastings Center, a
bioethics research institute. "I can't imagine finding a good argument for
parents to be allowed to do that. But if they did it anyway, what would we do to
their children? It's a disturbing prospect."

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2008


                              275 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           December 18, 2008 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NORTHWEST; Pg. Reg1

LENGTH: 884 words

HEADLINE: Honoring their firm commitment

BYLINE: Joyce Pellino Crane Globe Correspondent

BODY:

   GLOBE NORTHWEST 1

   While much of corporate America is laying off workers, five area companies
were recently lauded by a consortium of business and public officials for
reinvesting in Massachusetts instead of moving out of state.

   Aspect Software, Evergreen Solar, Ophir Optics, Shire Human Genetic Therapies
, and Spire Corp. were recognized by the Massachusetts Alliance for Economic
Development, a nonpartisan group that helps match interested businesses with
available properties, for expanding their workforces or facilities. Last month,
they were among 19 companies or organizations cited during the alliance's annual
Economic Impact Awards ceremony.

   Aspect Software Inc.,

   Chelmsford

   One of five gold award winners, Aspect Software Inc. folded its 2005 Westford
acquisition into its Chelmsford location last year, and now occupies more than
133,000 square feet at 300 Apollo Drive, where 300 are employed.

   MassEcon honored Aspect, said Aleassa Schambers, corporate marketing manager,
because the company's yearlong construction project near the Interstate
495-Route 3 interchange stimulated jobs for local contractors and vendors. "This
was the largest project along the 495 corridor during that time," Schambers said
of the company's $6.4 million investment.

   Aspect provides routing and scheduling software to companies that operate
contact centers for customer service, collections operations, and sales
processes.

   Evergreen Solar, Devens

   Evergreen Solar Inc., another gold award winner, is seeing the investment in
its Devens manufacturing facility already paying off. This summer, the
Marlborough-based company announced a $1.2 billion contract with Germany's IBC
Solar AG with the completion of the plant's first phase. It has a $3 billion
backlog of sales for all contracts through 2013. The global demand has brought
480 new jobs to the 450,000-square-foot plant at a cost of $430 million. The
ongoing second phase will make room for a total of 800 manufacturing workers and
provide $44 million in salaries and benefits. Completion is expected by the end
of next year.

   "The whole renewable energy business has been very, very strong," said Chris
Lawson, Evergreen's director of marketing communications. Lawson said the
company considered building its manufacturing plant in other states, but won
financial incentives and a commitment of support from Governor Deval Patrick's
administration.

   Evergreen manufactures solar cells and photovoltaic solar panels. It has a
proprietary "string ribbon" wafer technology that uses less silicon than a
typical solar panel, helping to lower the cost of production.

   Ophir Optics Inc.,

   North Andover

   In 2003, when Dennis Cope, president of Ophir Optics Inc., opened shop, he
was the company's sole employee. Three years later, he had 50 highly trained
manufacturing workers on board, necessitating a move from the company's
19,000-square-foot Wilmington plant to a larger facility.

   Company officials scoped out locations as far north as Amherst, N.H., said
Julie Long, its finance director, before deciding to remain in the state, and
moved the operation in January to a 32,000-square-foot facility at the former
Lucent Technologies campus in North Andover, earning a bronze award from
MassEcon.

   The decision came down to two considerations, said Long. The building at 1600
Osgood St. had the necessary infrastructure to handle Ophir's complicated
manufacturing process, and the region's workforce was too valuable to lose.

   "The investment we make to train the employees is quite extensive," she said,
"so our focus was retention."

   Long said the company, which manufactures infrared lenses for military and
civilian uses, anticipates hiring about 30 more employees next year.

   Shire PLC, Lexington

   Shire Human Genetic Therapies, a business unit of the British company Shire
PLC, also received a gold award from the alliance for its project to relocate
its Cambridge operation to a 550,000-square-foot facility on the former Raytheon
campus in Lexington over the next four years.

   The company, which invested $394 million in the Patriot Way expansion,
employs about 850 workers between the two sites, and expects to add 680
employees over the next eight years, according to spokeswoman Jessica Cotrone,
including 200 next year.

   Governor Patrick's support of life-sciences research persuaded company
officials to remain in the state, according to Cotrone. Since then, Shire has
become a member of the Lexington Chamber of Commerce and became involved with
Lexington High School's biotechnology program. Shire HGT manufactures specialty
drugs for children with rare genetic diseases.

   Spire Corp., Bedford

   In January 2007, the Spire Corp. employed 120 employees. Today, it has 260
scientists, engineers, technicians, and salespeople on the payroll, while
expanding its 90,000-square-foot Bedford facility to 144,000 square feet, a
success story that earned MassEcon's silver award.

   "The solar industry ... has grown 40 percent every year over the past three
years," said Christian Dufresne, Spire's chief financial officer.

   Current year-to-date revenues of $49 million rocketed from $25 million for
the same nine-month period last year, said Dufresne.

   Spire sells solar energy equipment and manufactures biomedical devices and
semiconductors.

   Joyce Pellino Crane can be reached at crane@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2008


                              276 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           December 13, 2008 Saturday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: Vatican takes bioethics stand;
Document strengthens opposition to embryo use for stem cell research

BYLINE: NICOLE WINFIELD, Associated Press

DATELINE: VATICAN CITY

BODY:

   VATICAN CITY - The Vatican hardened its opposition Friday to using embryos
for stem cell research, cloning and in-vitro fertilization.

   But in a major new document on bioethics, it showed flexibility on some forms
of gene therapy and left open questions surrounding embryo adoption.

   The Vatican's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued "The Dignity
of a Person" to help answer bioethical questions that have emerged in the two
decades since its last such document was published.

   With it, the Vatican essentially confirmed in a single, authoritative
instruction the opinions of the Pontifical Academy for Life, an advisory body
that has debated the issues for years.

   The Vatican's overall position stems from its belief that human life begins
at conception and must be given the consequent respect and dignity from that
moment on.

   The Vatican also holds that human life should be created through intercourse
between husband and wife, not in a petri dish.

   As a result, the Vatican said it opposed in vitro fertilization and related
technologies because it involved separating conception from the "conjugal act"
and often results in the destruction of embryos.

   But it stopped short of issuing an explicit no to "embryo adoption," whereby
infertile couples adopt embryos that were frozen during in vitro techniques and
subsequently abandoned.

   It said that while the intent was "praiseworthy," the result posed legal,
medical and psychological problems.

   Dr. Edmund Pellegrino, emeritus professor of medicine and medical ethics at
Georgetown University and the chairman of the President's Council on Bioethics,
said that vagueness indicated the question of embryo adoption "is still a little
bit open."

   The Vatican also said it opposed the morning-after pill, even if it doesn't
cause an abortion, because an abortion was intended.

   The Vatican did show flexibility in saying that parents could in good
conscience use vaccines for their children that were prepared using cell lines
derived from an "illicit origin," including aborted fetuses.

GRAPHIC: Photo: MAJOR INSTRUCTIONS: Monsignor Rino Fisichella, left, Monsignor
Luis Francisco Ladaria Ferrer, the Rev. Federico Lombardi, Monsignor Elio
Sgreccia and professor Maria Luisa Di Pietro discuss bioethics Friday.
RICCARDO DE LUCA : ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2008


                              277 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           December 13, 2008 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. A-4

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Vatican reinforces ban on harm to embryos

BYLINE: Ann Rodgers, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   New Vatican directives on bioethics uphold bans on harming embryos and on
conception outside of marital intercourse, but they are cautiously open to some
controversial research, including at least one way to produce embryonic stem
cells.

   Dignitas Personae, "The Dignity of a Person," was issued yesterday by the
Vatican's doctrinal office and approved by Pope Benedict XVI. It applies old
principles to new issues.

   "The dignity of a person must be recognized in every human being from
conception to natural death. This fundamental principle expresses a great 'yes'
to human life and must be at the center of ethical reflection on biomedical
research," it said.

   "The body of a human being, from the very first stages of its existence, can
never be reduced merely to a group of cells."

   Archbishop Donald Wuerl of Washington, D.C., said it would provide needed
guidance.

   "Given the complexity of technology today, especially in the area of
reproduction, it is not surprising that many Catholics may have confusion about
the morality of a particular technology. This document provides the context for
us to strengthen our teaching in this area," he said.

   It calls for the benefits of biomedical research to be made available to the
world's poor. And it says it is morally acceptable for parents to allow their
children to be vaccinated with serum made from cell lines from fetuses aborted
decades ago, but that the parents also have a duty to urge the medical community
to find alternate sources.

   As in the past, it rejects in-vitro fertilization, which it says treats
babies as consumer commodities and leads to the deliberate destruction of
embryos. It forbids the freezing of embryos, experiments on embryos and any act
intended to prevent implantation of a fertilized egg or to end gestation.

   Gene therapy intended to cure an individual is approved. But it takes a
cautious approach to efforts to halt the passing of defective embryonic genes to
future generations and to some attempts to produce embryonic-type stem cells
without harming embryos. It discourages, but does not flatly prohibit, "embryo
adoption," in which couples seek to rescue someone else's embryo from a
fertility clinic freezer.

   "There are some issues where the document is not saying 'absolutely not,' but
it is saying that there are concerns here that have not been resolved and that
nobody should assume this is OK, given what we know now," said Richard
Doerflinger, associate director for the U.S. bishops' Secretariat for Pro-life
Activities.

   One of the most controversial bioethical issues is human embryonic stem
cells, which advocates say have unique potential for curing some illnesses and
disabilities.

   The document forbids any procedure that harms or kills embryos to obtain such
cells, but gives consideration to proposed methods of creating them from
so-called "artificial embryos" that proponents say can't develop into real
embryos.

   The Rev. Ronald Cole-Turner, who teaches bioethics at Pittsburgh Theological
Seminary, was disappointed that the document did not embrace proposed "germ line
cell therapy" in which embryonic genes could be altered to prevent disease from
passing to future generations.

   In 2002, he said, the Vatican even proposed a morally acceptable way to
proceed. But the document says current proposals require in-vitro fertilization
and pose uncontrollable risks to future generations. "[I]n its current state,
germ line cell therapy in all its forms is morally illicit," it said.

   Based only on a brief summary he heard, "this document may be discouraging to
scientists who take their faith seriously and have tried to work out morally
acceptable alternatives to some of these procedures," said Dr. Cole-Turner, a
minister of the United Church of Christ. He differs with Catholic teaching on
the status of the embryo but said the Vatican does careful research that is
widely respected.

   Gerard Magill, a professor of bioethics at Duquesne University, said the
document leaves the door open for germ line therapy. "It is quite optimistic in
the sense that things might change in the future," said Dr. Magill, who had
heard only a short summary.

   He has researched induced pluripotent stem cells and believes the Vatican
should have addressed the technique's potential to create human embryos. Bishop
Lori said he didn't believe that was necessary because the use of those stem
cells "would fall under already existing principles."

   The document uses the term eugenics -- a "good breeding" movement in the
1930s that produced medical murder in Nazi Germany and involuntary
sterilizations of black Americans -- to describe genetic engineering for reasons
other than medical treatment. It warned that altering embryos to improve
intelligence, strength or other qualities would violate "the fundamental truth
of the equality of all human beings" and "harm peaceful coexistence among
individuals."

   The document is online at www.usccb.org/comm/Dignitaspersonae.

NOTES: Ann Rodgers can be reached at arodgers@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1416.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008


                              278 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           December 13, 2008 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A21

LENGTH: 378 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BYLINE: From NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   VATICAN CITY

   Gene therapy may be OK

   The Vatican hardened its opposition Friday to using embryos for stem cell
research, cloning and in vitro fertilization. But in a major new document on
bioethics, it showed flexibility on some forms of gene therapy and left open
questions surrounding embryo adoption.

   The Vatican said the intent behind "embryo adoption," whereby infertile
couples adopt embryos that were frozen during in vitro techniques and
subsequently abandoned, was "praiseworthy," the result posed legal, medical and
psychological problems. The Vatican also said parents could in good conscience
use vaccines for their children that were prepared using cell lines derived from
an "illicit origin."

   KABUL, AFGHANISTAN

   Four on bus are killed

   U.S. troops opened fire on a bus carrying civilians Friday in Afghanistan,
killing four passengers after their driver refused to stop, officials said.

   A spokesman for NATO said the troops first fired warning rounds in the air,
then shot into the engine block. The bus kept coming, so they opened fire on the
vehicle in self-defense.

   GENEVA

   U.N. wants U.S. help

   The United States needs to reverse course and play a more active role in the
United Nations' protection of human rights, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
urged Friday.

   Ban, visiting Geneva for the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, said the Human Rights Council created in 2006 was falling short of
expectations, in part because the United States refused to join.

   Washington has frequently criticized the council for spending much of its
time attacking Israel's treatment of Palestinians while downplaying human rights
abuses in other parts of the world.

   MANAMA, BAHRAIN

   Pirate hide-outs at issue

   Days before Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is to ask the United Nations
to authorize "all necessary measures" against piracy from Somalia, the U.S.
military warned against the urge to grasp for a quick and easy military solution
to a complex international problem.

   U.S. Vice Adm. Bill Gortney, commander of the U.S. Navy's 5th Fleet, told
reporters that striking pirate camps in lawless Somalia could open a can of
worms. It is difficult to identify pirates, and the potential for killing
innocent civilians "cannot be overestimated," Gortney said.

NOTES:  digest

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2008


                              279 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           December 13, 2008 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Met 2 Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A01

DISTRIBUTION: Virginia

LENGTH: 1189 words

HEADLINE: Vatican Ethics Guide Stirs Controversy;
Church Decries Stem Cell Research, Infertility Treatments

BYLINE: Rob Stein and Michelle Boorstein; Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:

   The Vatican's first authoritative statement on reproductive science in 21
years triggered intense debate yesterday about some of the most contentious
issues in modern biological research, including stem cells, designer babies,
cloning, and a host of techniques widely used to prevent pregnancy and to help
infertile couples have children.

   The broad 32-page document, from the Catholic Church's highest rule-making
authority, condemns as immoral the destruction of human embryos to obtain stem
cells or treat infertility, and denounces any attempts at more futuristic
possibilities such as cloning people or using gene therapy to enhance the human
race.

   But the church also decries procedures already commonly used to help couples
have children, such as the freezing of unfertilized eggs and embryos, the
injection of sperm into eggs, and genetic testing of embryos to identify those
with defects. In addition, the document condemns the morning-after pill and the
RU-486 abortion pill.

   While many of the arguments in "Dignitas Personae" -- Latin for "the dignity
of a person" -- have been made before by Pope Benedict XVI and his predecessor,
Pope John Paul II, a church "instruction" from the Congregation for the Doctrine
of the Faith is far more authoritative and made a number of new declarations. It
reflects the Vatican's desire to focus attention on ethical questions raised by
a new generation of technologies that are becoming increasingly common in the
United States and elsewhere.

   "This is significant in the sense that the church has now laid down a marker
on these important issues," said Thomas H. Murray of the Hastings Center, a
bioethics think tank. "The church has now dug in and committed itself to an
official position."

   Catholic and non-Catholic scholars were scouring the document -- which
influences Catholic doctors, patients and researchers and guides priests on how
to counsel the 67 million U.S. Catholics -- for any subtle changes in church
positions or insights into its theological reasoning. While many U.S. Catholics
do not follow many of the church's teachings, the church's pronouncements have
spurred years of ethical and philosophical debate.

   "Even in the secular world we take a very careful look at the religious
writings in this field," said Mark A. Rothstein, who directs the bioethics
institute at the University of Louisville School of Medicine.

   The document could also play a role in current political debates.
President-elect Barack Obama, for example, has promised to end restrictions on
federal funding for embryonic stem cell research, just as the Bush
administration is finalizing a broad new federal regulation designed to protect
health-care workers who object to providing therapy or care they find morally
objectionable. The document does not address either of those issues directly but
provides guidance on both.

   "It makes very clear that the church is very closely watching scientific
progress and favors that progress but wants ethics to be part of that," said
Richard M. Doerflinger of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops. "The whole
subject of misuse of technology to demean human dignity is a major concern."

   The document will be distributed to bishops around the world, studied in
seminaries, Catholic schools and hospitals, and provide the basis for a pamphlet
that priests will use to counsel couples before they get married and if they are
struggling with infertility, he said.

   Some Catholic scholars, however, worry about the church being out of step
with many parishioners, who commonly use forbidden birth control and infertility
treatments.

   "The argument that all technological interventions are illicit strikes me as
an overreaction," said Rev. John J. Paris of Boston College.

   The church objects to such technologies for many reasons. Perhaps most
important, it argues that life begins at conception, and so anything that
results in the destruction of an embryo is immoral. The church also objects to
any technology that separates procreation from sex between a married
heterosexual couple, which makes many modern infertility therapies, such as in
vitro fertilization, "illicit." Other types of infertility treatments are
permitted, such as surgery to open blocked fallopian tubes.

   The document also for the first time raises questions about whether it is
moral for people to "adopt" embryos left over from IVF -- a practice President
Bush highlighted when he restricted federal funding of stem cell research. While
the practice may be "praiseworthy" in some ways, the Vatican document warns that
it could help perpetuate the creation of more embryos.

   Megan Corcoran of the Snowflakes Frozen Embryo Adoption Program of Nightlight
Christian Adoptions in Fullerton, Calif., which has arranged for 371 embryos to
be adopted since 1998, was disappointed. "Each life that God has created should
have a chance to be born," she said.

   The church endorsed research using cells from umbilical cord blood and adult
stem cells, and for the first time encouraged research of alternative methods
that have been proposed for obtaining embryonic stem cells, such as from cells
altered so they could never become embryos.

   The document also for the first time said vaccines that originally may have
been developed using cells from aborted fetuses are acceptable.

   "That may settle the question for a lot of people to not refrain from getting
their children vaccinated because of the source of the vaccine," said Kathleen
Raviele, president of the Catholic Medical Association.

   Cristina L.H. Traina, who studies Catholic ethics at Northwestern University,
said she saw several "major departures" in the document.

   A ban on freezing eggs, for example, did not explicitly mention the freezing
of ovaries for women who have cancer and want the organs preserved so they might
be able to have children. "It leaves that possibility open."

   Traina also called it potentially a "major departure" to see the Vatican ban
genetic alterations that would be passed on to generations specifically "in the
present state of research," leaving an opening to more advanced technologies
that are safer.

   But futuristic possibilities such as cloning and genetic engineering allowing
parents to select the traits they want in their babies, in the church's view, in
essence would put humans perilously close to playing the role of God.

   The document, however, drew criticism from many groups.

   "The Vatican's statement on bioethics shows that it is once again on the
wrong side of science and the needs of contemporary society," said Jon O'Brien,
president of Catholics for Choice.

   Infertility doctors and stem cell researchers defended their efforts.

   "It has contributed to the quality of life of patients and families through
the improved ability to have children, which clearly is a worthwhile goal and a
focus of many couples in their life goals," said Robert G. Brzyski of the
American Society for Reproductive Medicine.

   Said George Daley of the International Society for Stem Cell Research: "Cells
are not people and embryos are not people, and my first responsibility as a
physician is to patients -- not cells in a petri dish."

CORRECTION-DATE: December 20, 2008

CORRECTION:

   Â· A headline on a Dec. 13 Page One article said that a Vatican statement
decried stem cell research. The document from the Roman Catholic Church
condemned such research when it involves the destruction of human embryos but
endorsed research using cells from umbilical cord blood and adult stem cells, as
well as the possibility of alternative methods for obtaining embryonic stem
cells, such as from cells altered so they could never become embryos.

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; By Riccardo De Luca -- Associated Press; Monsignor Elio
Sgreccia, the Vatican's top official on bioethics questions, and Maria Luisa Di
Pietro, of the Catholic University of the Sacred Heart in Rome, attend a news
conference on bioethics at the Vatican.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2008


                              280 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            December 9, 2008 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: Directors revolt

BYLINE: Steven Syre

BODY:

   Boston Capital

   It's one thing to go out with a bang. Directors of Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc.
who resigned their board seats quit in an explosion.

   Four of Ariad's nine board members formally stepped down in a Dec. 1 letter
that left no doubt how they felt about Harvey J. Berger, the longtime chief
executive of the Cambridge biotech company. "We have never before witnessed the
egregious misbehavior in which you have engaged during recent weeks," they told
him in the letter disclosed in a public filing last Friday.

   Berger had an answer for them in a conference call for stock analysts
yesterday. The executive summary: Take a hike.

   Berger was much more expansive than that on the call. He emphasized how
Ariad's business plans remained on track and its crucial commercial relationship
with drug giant Merck & Co. was unaffected.

   He also said the letter from his former board members was littered with
distortions and false statements. "While they have told an intriguing story, the
facts speak scrupulously for themselves," Berger said.

   Company directors rarely disagree like this, and they almost never let such
hard feelings spill out into public view. I can't remember the last time any
local company had to report that nearly half its directors quit in protest.

   But the dispute inside Ariad was not a fight for the heart and soul of a
corporate titan. Ariad has been a public company for 14 years, routinely
producing little if any revenue but a reliable record of quarterly losses. Ariad
shares have been pounded this year, down 70 percent, and the company's stock
market value has shrunk to less than $90 million.

   Ariad does have a promising cancer drug in development and a blue-chip
partner in Merck, which could pay as much as $1.1 billion to help develop the
compound. That sounds promising, but, keep in mind, Ariad stock is still worth
less than $90 million.

   The dispute that split the board at Ariad wasn't about the company's cancer
treatment or Merck. The subject of all the angry words barely qualifies as a
subplot to Ariad's business story. Mostly, it's about a deal to buy out minority
shareholders of a company in which Ariad already owned an 80 percent interest.

   Those directors who objected so strenuously are no yahoos. Sandy Smith was
once chief executive of Repligen Corp. and now serves as an executive vice
president of Genzyme Corp. Elizabeth Wyatt was a former Merck executive. Michael
Kishbauch is the chief executive of a small publicly traded biotech company in
New Haven. Burton Sobel is a professor of medicine at the University of Vermont.

   All of them approved the deal to buy the remaining 20 percent of Ariad's
majority-owned business called Ariad Gene Therapeutics Inc., or AGTI. Berger
owned some of that 20 percent and did not vote on the deal.

   The directors who quit said they objected to the way the transaction was
actually executed and how appraisal demands by some AGTI shareholders were
handled in court. But the letter really doesn't spell it out.

   Clearly, there were some hard feelings before those events. "The acts of
unfair dealing against the four independent directors by you and the current
board majority have created a toxic environment within the company's leadership
ranks and inside the boardroom," they wrote in the letter.

   Those board members sounded miffed that Smith was replaced as Ariad's lead
director and his vice chairman's title disappeared earlier this year. They
complain about being cut out of the board's decision-making process.

   Berger spoke at length yesterday refuting those claims and took questions
from stock analysts. He even talked to me later in the day.

   Berger backed his remaining board members. "We unequivocally refute the
misstatements and innuendo" in the letter from the directors who quit, he said
on the conference call.

   "The important message now is that this is much ado about nothing," Berger
told me yesterday.

   I've read and listened to everything I could find about the Ariad dispute. I
still don't know what really happened. But it is a very big deal indeed when
nearly half the board of a public company walks out the door in protest.

   Steven Syre is a Globe columnist. He can be reached at syre@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2008


                              281 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           December 4, 2008 Thursday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Metro West Neighbors

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: OHSU/AmberGlen plan shapes up with revisions

BYLINE: ELIZABETH SUH, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: High-rises, retail   | The 600-acre project may boost perimeter
density and spread out parks

   OHSU/AmberGlen plan

   shapes up with revisions

   ELIZABETH SUH

   HILLSBORO --More than two years after the vision for a community of
high-rises in Tanasbourne --the OHSU/AmberGlen project --began to take shape, it
is up for another revision.

   Working with property owners and others, city leaders finished a concept plan
in March 2007 that mapped out 600 acres by Northwest 185th Avenue and Cornell
Road with retail, condos, offices and research centers, some in 20-story
high-rises.

   Since then, city leaders have continued to meet with property owners and
developers to build buy-in for the vision, said Colin Cooper, city project
manager.

   The project has wide support, he said. The challenge is to foster the kind of
development that will lead up to the market for high-rises by projected
build-out in 20 years, he said.

   The OHSU/AmberGlen project area is bounded to the east by 185th Avenue, to
the south by the MAX line, to the west by 206th Avenue and to the north by
Cornell Road until it meets Amberglen Parkway, where the boundary shifts to
Walker Road.

   The existing Tanasbourne district, Cooper said, has the makings for an urban
center: a vibrant hub of retail and amenities close to high-quality jobs, the
Sunset Highway and public transit.

   "There is something special here," Cooper said. "The foundation for this
vision is really not outlandish. It's really there."

   Cooper said the city plans to refine the idea further, factoring in an
alternate plan by some property owners that deviates from the original by
dispersing parks throughout the area, rather than stacking buildings around a
36-acre central park. It also places higher densities closer to the edges of the
site and winds streets around existing buildings.

   The city hopes to hire a consultant by January, re-form the project's
steering committee and ask the City Council to adopt a plan in late summer. Then
work would move on to zoning districts and financing.

   Developer inquiries have slowed in recent months, Cooper said, but the city
and council are just as committed to the project.

   Recent trends are toward more sustainable and self-contained districts with
amenities and mixed uses, he said.

   "I think it really points to the future," Cooper said. "I think it is the
type of development that will be emerging out of this downturn in the economy
when things are starting to happen again."

   Since Cooper began working for the city in March, he said one national
developer and three others have inquired about the project, particularly the
plot by the Quatama MAX station in the southwest corner of the planning area
that would be easiest to develop first.

   The key tenant in the project area is Oregon Health & Science University,
which has its West Campus off Northwest Amberglen Parkway and 185th Avenue with
the Oregon National Primate Research Center, Neurological Sciences Institute,
Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute and Department of Science and Engineering.

   Some work is under way. OHSU will keep its campus but has sold some of its
property to Polygon Northwest for about 400 housing units --townhomes, condos
and apartments --Cooper said.

   Portland Community College is building a three-floor work force training
center in the project area by the Willowcreek MAX station near 185th Avenue and
Baseline Road.

   There also has been a recent explosion of development adjacent to the
OHSU/AmberGlen area, with new restaurants, retail and housing along Cornell Road
at 185th Avenue.

   Elizabeth Suh: 503-294-5954; elizabethsuh@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2008


                              282 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            November 30, 2008 Sunday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 830 words

HEADLINE: A simple swab and a $149 GENETIC TEST aims to predict ATHLETIC
STRENGTH of children, but some experts are wary;
Sports they were born to play

BYLINE: JULIET MACUR, New York Times

DATELINE: BOULDER, COLO.

BODY:

   BOULDER, COLO. - When Donna Campiglia learned recently that a genetic test
might be able to determine which sports suit the talents of her 2 1/2 -year-old
son, Noah, she instantly said, "Where can I get it, and how much does it cost?"

   "I could see how some people might think the test would pigeonhole your child
into doing fewer sports or being exposed to fewer things, but I still think it's
good to match them with the right activity," Campiglia, 36, said as she watched
a toddler class at Boulder Indoor Soccer, in which Noah struggled to take
direction from the coach between juice and potty breaks.

   "I think it would prevent a lot of parental frustration," she said.

   In health-conscious, sports-oriented Boulder, Atlas Sports Genetics is
playing into the obsessions of parents by offering a $149 test that aims to
predict a child's natural athletic strengths. The process is simple. Swab inside
the child's cheek and along the gums to collect the DNA and return it to a
laboratory for analysis of ACTN3, one gene among more than 20,000 in the human
genome.

   The test's goal is to determine whether a person would be best at speed and
power sports like sprinting or football, or endurance sports like distance
running, or a combination of the two. A 2003 study discovered the link between
ACTN3 and those athletic abilities.

   Test with limitations

   Atlas executives acknowledge that their test has limitations but say that it
could provide guidelines for placing youngsters in sports. The company is
focused on testing children from infancy to about 8 years old because physical
tests to gauge future sports performance at that age are, at best, unreliable.

   Some experts say ACTN3 testing is in its infancy and virtually useless. Dr.
Theodore Friedmann, the director of the University of California-San Diego
Medical Center's interdepartmental gene therapy program, called it "an
opportunity to sell new versions of snake oil."

   Stephen Roth, director of the functional genomics laboratory at the
University of Maryland's School of Public Health who has studied ACTN3, said he
thought the test would become popular. But he had reservations.

   "The idea that it will be one or two genes that are contributing to the
Michael Phelpses or the Usain Bolts of the world I think is shortsighted because
it's much more complex than that," he said, adding performance has been found to
be affected by at least 200 genes.

   Roth called ACTN3 "one of the most exciting and eyebrow-raising genes out
there in the sports-performance arena," but he said that any test for the gene
would be best used only on top athletes looking to tailor workouts to their body
types.

   "It seems to be important at very elite levels of competition," Roth said.
"But is it going to affect little Johnny when he participates in soccer, or
Suzy's ability to perform sixth-grade track and field? There's very little
evidence to suggest that."

   A protein producer

   The study that identified the connection between ACTN3 and elite athletic
performance was published in 2003 by researchers primarily based in Australia.

   Those scientists looked at the gene's combinations, one copy provided by each
parent. The R variant of ACTN3 instructs the body to produce a protein,
alpha-actinin-3, found specifically in fast-twitch muscles. Those muscles are
capable of the forceful, quick contractions necessary in speed and power sports.
The X variant prevents production of the protein.

   The ACTN3 study looked at 429 elite white athletes, including 50 Olympians,
and found that 50 percent of the 107 sprint athletes had two copies of the R
variant. Even more telling, no female elite sprinter had two copies of the X
variant. All male Olympians in power sports had at least one copy of the R
variant.

   Conversely, nearly 25 percent of the elite endurance athletes had two copies
of the X variant - only slightly higher than the control group at 18 percent.
That means people with two X copies are more likely to be suited for endurance
sports.

   Other factors for success

   Still, some athletes prove science, and seemingly their genetics, wrong.
Research on an Olympic long jumper from Spain showed that he had no copies of
the R variant, demonstrating that athletic success is most likely affected by a
combination of genes as well as factors like environment, work ethic, nutrition
and luck.

   "Just think if that Spanish kid's parents had done the test and said, `No,
your genes show that you are going to be a bad long jumper, so we are going to
make you a golfer,' " said Carl Foster, a co-author of the study, who is the
director of the human performance laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-La
Crosse. "Now look at him. He's the springiest guy in Spain. He's Tigger. We
don't yet understand what combination of genes creates that kind of
explosiveness."

   Foster suggested a better way to determine whether a child will be good at
sprint and power sports.

   "Just line them up with their classmates for a race and see which ones are
the fastest," he said.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A YOUNG PRO?: Dr. Ray Howe swabs the cheek of his son, Joseph,
in Boulder, Colo., where DNA is tested for a child's natural athletic strengths.
One dubious expert calls it "an opportunity to sell new versions of snake oil."
KEVIN MOLONEY : NEW YORK TIMES

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2008


                              283 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 30, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Sports Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1655 words

HEADLINE: Born to Run? Little Ones Get Test for Sports Gene

BYLINE: By JULIET MACUR

DATELINE: BOULDER, Colo.

BODY:

   When Donna Campiglia learned recently that a genetic test might be able to
determine which sports suit the talents of her 2 1/2-year-old son, Noah, she
instantly said, Where can I get it and how much does it cost?

     ''I could see how some people might think the test would pigeonhole your
child into doing fewer sports or being exposed to fewer things, but I still
think it's good to match them with the right activity,'' Ms. Campiglia, 36, said
as she watched a toddler class at Boulder Indoor Soccer in which Noah struggled
to take direction from the coach between juice and potty breaks.

     ''I think it would prevent a lot of parental frustration,'' she said.

     In health-conscious, sports-oriented Boulder, Atlas Sports Genetics is
playing into the obsessions of parents by offering a $149 test that aims to
predict a child's natural athletic strengths. The process is simple. Swab inside
the child's cheek and along the gums to collect DNA and return it to a lab for
analysis of ACTN3, one gene among more than 20,000 in the human genome.

     The test's goal is to determine whether a person would be best at speed and
power sports like sprinting or football, or endurance sports like distance
running, or a combination of the two. A 2003 study discovered the link between
ACTN3 and those athletic abilities.

     In this era of genetic testing, DNA is being analyzed to determine
predispositions to disease, but experts raise serious questions about marketing
it as a first step in finding a child's sports niche, which some parents
consider the road to a college scholarship or a career as a professional
athlete.

     Atlas executives acknowledge that their test has limitations but say that
it could provide guidelines for placing youngsters in sports. The company is
focused on testing children from infancy to about 8 years old because physical
tests to gauge future sports performance at that age are, at best, unreliable.

     Some experts say ACTN3 testing is in its infancy and virtually useless. Dr.
Theodore Friedmann, the director of the University of California-San Diego
Medical Center's interdepartmental gene therapy program, called it ''an
opportunity to sell new versions of snake oil.''

     ''This may or may not be quite that venal, but I would like to see a lot
more research done before it is offered to the general public,'' he said. ''I
don't deny that these genes have a role in athletic success, but it's not that
black and white.''

     Dr. Stephen M. Roth, director of the functional genomics laboratory at the
University of Maryland's School of Public Health who has studied ACTN3, said he
thought the test would become popular. But he had reservations.

     ''The idea that it will be one or two genes that are contributing to the
Michael Phelpses or the Usain Bolts of the world I think is shortsighted because
it's much more complex than that,'' he said, adding that athletic performance
has been found to be affected by at least 200 genes.

     Dr. Roth called ACTN3 ''one of the most exciting and eyebrow-raising genes
out there in the sports-performance arena,'' but he said that any test for the
gene would be best used only on top athletes looking to tailor workouts to their
body types.

     ''It seems to be important at very elite levels of competition,'' Dr. Roth
said. ''But is it going to affect little Johnny when he participates in soccer,
or Suzy's ability to perform sixth grade track and field? There's very little
evidence to suggest that.''

     The study that identified the connection between ACTN3 and elite athletic
performance was published in 2003 by researchers primarily based in Australia.

     Those scientists looked at the gene's combinations, one copy provided by
each parent. The R variant of ACTN3 instructs the body to produce a protein,
alpha-actinin-3, found specifically in fast-twitch muscles. Those muscles are
capable of the forceful, quick contractions necessary in speed and power sports.
The X variant prevents production of the protein.

     The ACTN3 study looked at 429 elite white athletes, including 50 Olympians,
and found that 50 percent of the 107 sprint athletes had two copies of the R
variant. Even more telling, no female elite sprinter had two copies of the X
variant. All male Olympians in power sports had at least one copy of the R
variant.

     Conversely, nearly 25 percent of the elite endurance athletes had two
copies of the X variant -- only slightly higher than the control group at 18
percent. That means people with two X copies are more likely to be suited for
endurance sports.

     Still, some athletes prove science, and seemingly their genetics, wrong.
Research on an Olympic long jumper from Spain showed that he had no copies of
the R variant, indicating that athletic success is probably affected by a
combination of genes as well as factors like environment, training, nutrition
and luck.

     ''Just think if that Spanish kid's parents had done the test and said, 'No,
your genes show that you are going to be a bad long jumper, so we are going to
make you a golfer,' '' said Carl Foster, a co-author of the study, who is the
director of the human performance laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-La
Crosse. ''Now look at him. He's the springiest guy in Spain. He's Tigger. We
don't yet understand what combination of genes creates that kind of
explosiveness.''

     Dr. Foster suggested another way to determine if a child will be good at
sprint and power sports. ''Just line them up with their classmates for a race
and see which ones are the fastest,'' he said.

     Kevin Reilly, the president of Atlas Sports Genetics and a former
weight-lifting coach, expected the test to be controversial. He said some people
were concerned that it would cause ''a rebirth of eugenics, similar to what
Hitler did in trying to create this race of perfect athletes.''

     Mr. Reilly said he feared what he called misuse by parents who go overboard
with the results and specialize their children too quickly and fervently.

     ''I'm nervous about people who get back results that don't match their
expectations,'' he said. ''What will they do if their son would not be good at
football? How will they mentally and emotionally deal with that?''

     Mr. Reilly insisted that the test is one tool of many that can help
children realize their athletic potential. It may even keep an overzealous
father from pushing his son to be a quarterback if his genes indicate otherwise,
Mr. Reilly said.

     If ACTN3 suggests a child may be a great athlete, he said, parents should
take a step back and nurture that potential Olympian or N.F.L. star with careful
nutrition, coaching and planning. He also said they should hold off on placing a
child in a competitive environment  until about the age of 8 to avoid burnout.

     ''Based on the test of a 5-year-old or a newborn, you are not going to see
if you have the next Michael Johnson; that's just not going to happen,'' Mr.
Reilly said. ''But if you wait until high school or college to find out if you
have a good athlete on your hands, by then it will be too late. We need to
identify these kids from 1 and up, so we can give the parents some guidelines on
where to go from there.''

     Boyd Epley, a former strength and conditioning coach at the University of
Nebraska, said the next step would be a physical test he devised. Atlas plans to
direct children to Epic Athletic Performance, a talent identification company
that uses Mr. Epley's index. He founded the company; Mr. Reilly is its
president.

      China and Russia, Mr. Epley said, identify talent in the very young and
whittle the pool of athletes until only the best remain for the national teams.

      ''This is how we could stay competitive with the rest of the world,'' Mr.
Epley said of genetic and physical testing. ''It could, at the very least,
provide you with realistic goals for you and your children.''

     The ACTN3 test has been available through the Australian company Genetic
Technologies since 2004. The company has marketed the test in Australia, Europe
and Japan, but is now entering the United States through Atlas. The testing kit
was scheduled to be available starting Monday through the Web site
atlasgene.com.

     The analysis takes two to three weeks, and the results arrive in the form
of a certificate announcing Your Genetic Advantage, whether it is in sprint,
power and strength sports; endurance sports; or activity sports (for those with
one copy of each variant, and perhaps a combination of strengths). A packet of
educational information suggests sports that are most appropriate and what paths
to follow so the child reaches his or her potential.

     ''I find it worrisome because I don't think parents will be very
clear-minded about this,'' said William Morgan, an expert on the philosophy of
ethics and sport and author of ''Why Sports Morally Matter.'' ''This just
contributes to the madness about sports because there are some parents who will
just go nuts over the results.

     ''The problem here is that the kids are not old enough to make rational
autonomous decisions about their own life,'' he said.

     Some parents will steer clear of the test for that reason.

     Dr. Ray Howe, a general practitioner in Denver, said he would rather see
his 2-year-old, Joseph, find his own way in life and discover what sports he
likes the best. Dr. Howe, a former professional cyclist, likened ACTN3 testing
to gene testing for breast cancer or other diseases.

     ''You might be able to find those things out, but do you really want to
know?'' he said.

     Others, like Lori Lacy, 36, said genetic testing would be inevitable. Ms.
Lacy, who lives in Broomfield, Colo., has three children ranging in age from 2
months to 5 years.

     ''Parents will start to say, 'I know one mom who's doing the test on her
son, so maybe we should do the test too,' '' she said.

     ''Peer pressure and curiosity would send people over the edge. What if my
son could be a pro football player and I don't know it?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: CHART: CHROMOSOME 11: Research suggests that elite athletes who rely on
the power of fast-twitch fibers in their muscles, like sprinters, share a common
genotype. These fibers contain a protein produced by the R allele (version) of
the ACTN3 gene. (Sources: Stephen M. Roth, Ph.D., University of Maryland
 American Journal of Human Genetics) (pg.A34)

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2008


                              284 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                           November 29, 2008 Saturday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: SOUTHWEST VALLEY REPUBLIC 5; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 206 words

HEADLINE: Agua Fria schools will offer biotech class

BYLINE: Megan Gordon, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Agua Fria Union High School District is offering a new class next semester
about biotechnology.

   Stuart Charlip, a science teacher at Desert Edge High School in Goodyear
received a grant from Northern Arizona University and TGen, a Phoenix-based
research institute, to learn about biotechnology and its application in a
classroom two years ago.

   With the knowledge gained, Charlip brought the experiments into his Advanced
Placement biology class this semester as part of a lab.

   Next semester, students can enroll in a biotechnology course at Desert Edge
and Millennium high schools, said Lexi Cunningham, assistant superintendent for
educational services.

   The students will learn about DNA fingerprinting and bacterial
transformation, which can help improve personalized medicines, said Charlip.

   "A lot of this is important because the idea in the long run can lead to gene
therapy and personalized medicines to create vaccines," he said. "Most kids
think of biology as dissection. This is a science that they don't normally see,
and it's not a stagnant area of life."

   The school board authorized a new textbook adoption for the class.

   "We completely revamped the class and we wanted a text book with the newest
information possible," Charlip said.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2009


                              285 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            November 23, 2008 Sunday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA; P-com News Local; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Sideshow:

BYLINE: By Tirdad Derakhshani; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   FCC to appeal Jackson case In what is sure to become a landmark in American
jurisprudence, the justices of the U.S. Supreme Court may soon find themselves
debating about Janet Jackson's breasts.

   According to Variety, the Federal Communications Commission is seeking to
appeal a court ruling that it improperly fined CBS for Jackson's "wardrobe
malfunction" during the '04 Super Bowl.

   In July the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in July found the
FCC's $550,000 fine arbitrary and capricious.

   Broken home for Full Houser Full House actress Jodie Sweetin, 26, and hubby
Cody Herpin, 31, who welcomed their first baby, Zoie, in April, have split up
after 16 months of marriage. Sweetin, who once called her hubby a "blessing" for
helping her with her long struggle with methamphetamine addiction, filed court
papers for a legal separation Wednesday.

   Herpin tells People mag he is "dumbfounded." He says Sweetin just up and left
home with Zoie.

   "I'm concerned about our daughter, and I just want [Zoie] home," he says.

   Glenn? She ain't no hooker Former Inquirer reporter Ken Tucker reveals in his
new book, Scarface Nation, that Al Pacino, who played larger-than-life gangster
Tony Montana in Brian De Palma's 1983 Scarface, originally wanted Glenn Close to
play his lover, Elvira. (Michelle Pfeiffer got the role.) According to the New
York Post, which excerpts the book, producer Martin Bregman nixed the idea,
telling Pacino that "Elvira has to be half a hooker. Glenn Close is many things,
but she is not half a hooker."

   Bourne lovers, rejoice! Jonesing for more Jason Bourne pictures? Take heart:
Universal Pictures has signed a deal with the estate of Robert Ludlum (who died
in 2001) for exclusive rights to the character - and first look at Ludlum's
other novels. That's a lot: More than 25 have yet to be adapted for the screen.

   The Matt Damon-starring Bourne trilogy has earned more than $1 billion
worldwide. Matt has already signed for a fourth flick, due out in summer 2010.

   Advice from a first daughter George W. Bush's daughter Barbara - who with her
twin, Jenna, will turn 27 Tuesday - says President-elect Barack Obama's
offspring, Malia, 10, and Sasha, 7, are "really cute, smart girls." Barbara, who
helped take them on a tour of the White House last week, has some advice.

   "When they move, just make really good friends and surround themselves with
people that will protect them," she tells Nightline's Cynthia McFadden.

   Quick hits . . . Tobey Maguire, 33, and his wife, Jen Meyer, 31, who have a
2-year-old girl, Ruby Sweetheart, are expecting their second Spider-Baby.

   The Madonna-Guy Ritchie divorce was finalized Friday in London to the
advantage of Lady Madge, who recently called Guy "emotionally retarded." Guy,
who is worth barely $50 mil, gets not a penny from her $450 mil piggy bank.

   Ashlee Simpson and Pete Wentz named their baby, who was born Thursday, Bronx
Mowgli Wentz.

   Entertainment Weekly says ABC has canceled three new shows: Pushing Up
Daisies and its two best shows in a decade, Eli Stone and Dirty Sexy Money. ABC
had yet to confirm.

   A British photo agency has agreed to pay $79,000 to Sienna Miller to settle a
suit by the thesp, who says its photogs stalked and harassed her.

   Therapy for RonLo? The New York Post and London's The Sun say Lindsay Lohan
and Samantha Ronson's alleged love affair has become tumultuous, even violent.
The Post says the couple cry, scream, yell and insult each other daily in
public. Sam, it seems, is frustrated by LiLo, who is, apparently, very "high
maintenance." So is this the end? No, says an anon source who tells the Post
RonLo is pursuing couples therapy. But a rep tells the Post she's unaware of any
therapy sessions.

   Thompson ready to return Former Sen. Fred Thompson, 66, who in January
dropped out of the GOP presidential primaries, says he is ready to come back
home - to TV. Elected to the Senate in 1994, he's best known for his turn as a
no-nonsense DA on NBC's Law & Order.

   You can't come back again "I don't really like it when they say the comeback.
I've been here the whole time." So says pop star Britney Spears, who has been
staging one of the most successful comeback coups in recent memory. Spears
shares that fast-food nugget of Spearsian MacPhilosophy in the heavily promoted
MTV documentary Britney: For the Record, set to run next Sunday.

   Stop hating Kiss! Rocker Gene Simmons, as famous for his prodigious skills as
a diplomat as for his enormous tongue, is upset that Kiss has not yet been
picked for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In a dis that's lost on me, Gene took
aim at the hall's foundation, which publisher Jann Wenner chairs. "A lot of
those guys on the board can go and get my sandwich when I want, and I mean that
in the nicest way," Gene said.

   This column contains information from Inquirer wire services.

GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2008


                              286 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            November 21, 2008 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B7

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Lab space in suburbs gobbled up in last year

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   So many Cambridge biotech companies have fled to the suburbs in the past year
that there is now a shortage of suburban laboratory space in Greater Boston,
according to a report from Richards Barry Joyce & Partners, a commercial real
estate firm. In fact, the company said there are only three high-end complexes
with more than 5,000 square feet of lab space available.

   Since last year, more than a half-dozen Cambridge biotechs have moved to the
suburbs or unveiled plans to do so. For instance, AMAG Pharmaceuticals Inc.
moved to Lexington a few months ago. Altus Pharmaceuticals Inc. plans to move to
Waltham in October. And earlier this year, Shire Human Genetic Therapies said it
will build a headquarters and manufacturing plant in Lexington.

   Biogen Idec Inc., one of the state's largest biotechnology companies, said
last month it might shift its corporate headquarters from Cambridge to Weston,
though the company is only considering moving executives and administrative
workers - not researchers - and presumably wouldn't need any lab space.

   Richards Barry Joyce & Partners found the overall lab market in the Boston
area has a vacancy rate of 14 percent, with a 12.7 percent vacancy rate in
Cambridge and 10.5 percent in the suburbs.

   Still, because of the economic recession and credit crunch, developers
"remain hesitant" to build additional space on their own in hopes of attracting
prospective tenants, according to the report.

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008


                              287 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                            November 17, 2008 Monday
                                 2-dot Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: Getting through

BYLINE: Jennifer Chambers / The Detroit News

BODY:

   * Getting through

   * Parents learn to teach kids how to communicate, socialize

   * ROYAL OAK - Tasia Smith gives her son a single instruction and waits.

   "Gene, touch the one you watch," the Redford Township mother tells the
4-year-old, who scans three flash cards with images of three unlike objects.

   Gene, who is autistic, moves his small hand slowly across the cards - a Mr.
Potato Head, a baseball cap and a TV set - and quickly slaps his palm on the TV
image.

   "Great job, Gene. Awesome," Smith says as she pops a reward of cereal into
his mouth, knowing such a feat was impossible just 10 weeks ago.

   Just a few feet behind Smith, a certified behavior therapist sits and
watches, because it's not only Gene who is learning to communicate.

   Smith is among a growing number of parents of autistic children who have
chosen a unique program in Metro Detroit that mentors parents in hands-on
training to pull their child from the grips of autism, a complex developmental
disability that renders many youngsters with little ability to communicate or
interact with the world.

   Smith will spend 12 weeks at Beaumont Hospitals HOPE center with Gene,
learning behavioral intervention techniques from therapists whose goals are to
teach autistic children how to communicate, socialize and cooperate with
requests.

   Jamie McGillivary, a psychologist who is the clinical manager of the Group
Intensive Family Training program, said the idea is simple: Teach parents to act
and think like a therapist so when an opportunity to teach comes up, they can
grab it.

   "Parents are with their kids more than any other professionals. They live
with their kids. We want to capitalize on all those teachable moments,"
McGillivary said.

   In the program, one parent and one child are matched with a therapist three
hours a day, five days a week.

   The task at hand - how to count or hold a crayon - is broken down into
stages. The therapist shows the parent what to do and the parent begins
teaching.

   Each time a task is successful, a record is kept, allowing parents and the
center to track progress. The therapist is always on hand to aid in instruction.
But for the most part, the parent and child do all the work.

   The program, which costs $9,600, has produced 48 graduates from ages 2 to 6
and has a waiting list until February.

   McGillivary said it is not uncommon to hear that parents have shelled out
$60,000 or more for autism treatments involving professional therapy, but
problems persist.

   "Many parents have come here so they can gain a sense of empowerment. They
may find effective therapies elsewhere and the child is doing well, but when
they come home the child falls apart," she said.

   Smith has taught Gene how to throw a ball. She did it by standing behind him,
holding his hands out and catching the ball with him again and again, offering
rewards after every success, until he could do it by himself.

   She also taught him how to point to something he wanted instead of constantly
pulling on her shirt or grunting.

   "Imagine someone pulling you around all day long, and I'm like, 'What do you
want?' Now we can communicate," Smith said.

   Most insurance companies do not pay for autism therapies. Christopher Johns,
a Warren father, is suing Blue Cross Blue Shield to get the insurer to pay for
parent-centered therapies like the one at Beaumont. Blue Cross officials said
long-term studies on autism therapies are inconclusive.

   The case is in U.S. District Court, awaiting a date for a hearing. Johns has
requested the case be certified as a class action lawsuit.

   Johns, whose son Donovan has autism and went through GIFT, said allowing
families to invest in early intervention would save insurance companies a
tremendous amount of money down the road.

   Unlike many other autism therapies, GIFT keeps data on every task a child is
asked to perform. McGillivary said the average child makes six months' worth of
gains in 12 weeks.

   Many parents are overwhelmed by the countless alternative therapies offered
to treat autism, many of which are not endorsed by mainstream doctors.

   Options range from diet changes that remove gluten and dairy to controversial
remedies such as chelation, a treatment to remove heavy metals from the body.

   Christine Boyle turned to GIFT after trying speech therapy, floor therapy and
music therapy for her son Matthew, but the Ortonville mother said it was never
enough to bring the toddler of out his shell.

   At the beginning of the program, Matthew did not point to objects he wanted.
Boyle placed some toys high on a shelf and took her son's hand and pointed it
for him over and over again.

   "That seemed artificial, but it was one of those 'ah-ha' moments for him. It
didn't take him long at all to get it, and he had a huge smile on his face," she
said. "I would say it has absolutely worked for him. I was such a fan of the
program. It made such a difference."

   * At a glance

   *There is no known cause or cure for autism.

   *One in every 150 children born in the United States has autism.

   *It is estimated approximately 1 million in the U.S. have this disorder.

   *A new case of autism is diagnosed nearly every 20 minutes.

   *There are 24,000 new cases diagnosed in the U.S. per year.

   *The economic impact of autism is more than $90 billion and expected to more
than double in the next decade.

   *Autism receives less than 5[UTF8]E28082[/UTF8]percent of the research
funding of many less prevalent childhood diseases.

   *Autism is the fastest-growing developmental disability in the U.S. today.

   Source: Talk About Curing Autism

   You can reach Jennifer Chambers at (248) 647-7402 or jchambers@detnews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2008


                              288 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: AIDS Patient Is Reported Cured in Berlin With a Rare Treatment

BYLINE: By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.

BODY:

   Doctors in Berlin are reporting that they cured a man of AIDS by giving him
transplanted blood stem cells from a person naturally resistant to the virus.

     But while the case has novel medical implications, experts say it will be
of little immediate use in treating AIDS. Top American researchers called the
treatment unthinkable for the millions infected in Africa and impractical even
for insured patients in top research hospitals.

     ''It's very nice, and it's not even surprising,'' said Dr. Anthony S.
Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
''But it's just off the table of practicality.''

     The patient, a 42-year-old American resident in Germany, also has leukemia,
which justified the high risk of a stem-cell transplant. Such transplants
require wiping out a patient's immune system, including bone marrow, with
radiation and drugs; 10 to 30 percent of those getting them die.

     ''Frankly, I'd rather take the medicine,'' said Dr. Robert C. Gallo,
director of the Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland School
of Medicine, referring to antiretroviral drugs.

     Moreover, the chances of finding a donor who is a good tissue match for the
patient and also has the rare genetic mutation that confers resistance to
H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, are extremely small. Nonetheless, the man
has been free of the virus for 20 months even though he is not using
antiretroviral drugs, and the success in his case is evidence that a
long-dreamed-of therapy for AIDS -- injecting stem cells that have been
genetically re-engineered with the mutation -- might work.

     The cure was announced Wednesday by Dr. Gero Hutter and Dr. Eckhard Thiel,
blood-cancer specialists at Charite Hospital in Berlin. The case was described
last week in The Wall Street Journal.

     Attempts to use bone-marrow transplants in AIDS treatment have been made
since the 1980s. In one case, a patient with both AIDS and lymphoma died of the
cancer two months later, but was found to harbor no H.I.V.; it was not known if
something in the transplant had protected him.

     And in a famous 1995 case, Jeff Getty, a prominent San Francisco advocate
for AIDS patients, received bone marrow from a baboon, which is resistant to the
human virus. He survived 11 years, but died of AIDS and cancer; the transplant
had not protected him but antiretroviral triple therapy had been invented in
time to help.

     Dr. Hutter said one of the 80 potential donors who matched his patient
closely enough for leukemia treatment also happened to have the mutation.

     That mutation, discovered in a few gay men in the 1990s and known as Delta
32, must be inherited from both parents. With it, the white blood cells produced
in the marrow lack the surface receptors that allow H.I.V. to invade the immune
system.

     Even if it is prevented from replicating by drugs, the H.I.V. can lie
dormant in lymph and nerve cells for years. But without the necessary receptors,
any virus coming out of dormancy has no way to infect them.

     Doctors say the case gives hope for therapies that artificially induce the
Delta 32 mutation.

     For example, Dr. Irvin S. Y. Chen, director of the AIDS Institute at
U.C.L.A. , is working on using RNA ''hairpin scissors'' to cut out the bits of
genetic material in blood stem cells that code for the receptors. The concept is
working in monkeys, he said. Eventually, he hopes, it will be possible to inject
them into humans after wiping out only part of the immune system with drugs. ''I
think that would carry no risk of death,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                              289 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Wire News

LENGTH: 309 words

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   Briefly

   AIDS treatment: An unidentified American man who suffered from AIDS appears
to have been cured of the disease 20 months after receiving a targeted bone
marrow transplant normally used to fight leukemia, his doctors said Wednesday.
While researchers at Charite hospital in Berlin --and the doctors themselves
--caution that the case might be no more than a fluke, others say it may inspire
a greater interest in gene therapy to fight the disease that claims 2 million
lives each year. The virus has infected 33 million people worldwide.

   Castro photo: Fidel Castro, 82, the ailing former president of Cuba, looks
thin and frail but alert in a photograph from last month posted on the Web site
of the Russian Orthodox Church and obtained by The Associated Press on Thursday.

   Congo troops: British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Thursday that he will
support a U.N. plan to send 3,000 more troops to Congo but said the force must
have better leadership and equipment. The U.N. has a 17,000-strong peacekeeping
force in Congo, its largest in the world.

   Happy birthday: Queen Elizabeth II hosted a birthday party at Buckingham
Palace on Thursday for her son, Prince Charles, who turns 60 today.

   Father charged: Austrian prosecutors filed a murder charge Thursday against
Josef Fritzl, the man accused of imprisoning his daughter for 24 years in a
rat-infested cell and fathering her seven children, saying one of the youngsters
who died in infancy might have survived if brought to a doctor. The indictment
also charges Fritzl, 73, with rape, incest, false imprisonment and enslavement.

   Troops to be pulled: The Bulgarian prime minister says his country will
withdraw its small military force from Iraq at the end of the year. Bulgaria has
155 servicemen at a camp near Baghdad, where they handle the security of some
detainees held there.

   -- From wire reports

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2008


                              290 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           November 13, 2008 Thursday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 261 words

HEADLINE: Man appears to be cured of AIDS;
No sign of virus 20 months after undergoing bone marrow transplant

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   BERLIN - An American man who suffered from AIDS appears to have been cured of
the disease 20 months after receiving a targeted bone marrow transplant normally
used to fight leukemia, his doctors said Wednesday.

   While researchers - and the doctors themselves - caution that the case might
be no more than a fluke, others say it may inspire a greater interest in gene
therapy to fight the disease that claims 2 million lives each year. The virus
has infected 33 million people worldwide.

   Dr. Gero Huetter said his 42-year-old patient, an American living in Berlin
who was not identified, had been infected with the AIDS virus for more than a
decade. But 20 months after undergoing a transplant of genetically selected bone
marrow, he no longer shows signs of carrying the virus.

   "We waited every day for a bad reading," Huetter said. It has not come.

   Researchers at Berlin's Charite hospital and medical school say tests on his
bone marrow, blood and other organ tissues have all been clean.

   However, Dr. Andrew Badley, director of the HIV and immunology research lab
at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn., said those tests have probably not been
extensive enough.

   "A lot more scrutiny from a lot of different biological samples would be
required to say it's not present," Badley said.

   This isn't the first time marrow transplants have been attempted for treating
AIDS or HIV infection. In 1999, an article in the journal Medical Hypotheses
reviewed the results of 32 attempts reported between 1982 and 1996. In two
cases, HIV was apparently eradicated, the review reported.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2008


                              291 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                            November 9, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 2023 words

HEADLINE: BAD TO THE BOND - 'QUANTUM OF SOLACE' INTRODUCES A NEW STRAIN OF
SUPER-VILLAIN TO THE 007 FRANCHISE, TAKING THE ULTIMATE SECRET AGENT BACK TO HIS
ROOTS

BYLINE: STEPHEN LYNCH

BODY:

   THE affable Roger Moore holds the record for playing James Bond, having taken
on seven missions to save the world from men with prominent scars and underwater
lairs. He has but one regret. "I would have loved to have been a villain," Moore
says. "They had wonderful speeches like, 'The end of the world is about to
come,' and Bond just listens but doesn't really get to say anything."

   They were awesome, weren't they? Golfer and painter Auric Goldfinger - with
Bond about to be bisected by a laser beam - answering, "Do you expect me to
talk?" with, "No, Mr. Bond, I expect you to die!" Ernst Stavro Blofeld, cat
lover and volcano interior decorator, foolishly allowing Bond a last cigarette
while gloating, "As you can see, I'm about to inaugurate a little war." Dr. No
inviting Bond to a banquet, introducing himself with, "I was the unwanted child
of a German missionary and a Chinese girl of good family, yet I became treasurer
of the most powerful criminal society in China."

   While the Bond series kept delivering action, gadgets and girls in recent
decades, it lost its way in the villainous schemes department. A lowly drug
dealer in "License to Kill"? A North Korean dabbling in gene therapy in "Die
Another Day"? Not the sort to own sharks with freakin' laser beams.

   The nadir came in 1997's "Tomorrow Never Dies," in which the diabolical
madman was . . . a journalist. Trust me, only Sarah Palin thinks that's scary.
But since the Bond series has reinvented everything else for modern times, why
not the bad guys?

   "Quantum of Solace," the 22nd entry in the franchise, opening Friday, is the
formal introduction of a vast criminal organization hinted at in "Casino Royale"
- a nefarious group called Quantum, intended to carry over into future films.
Since Daniel Craig takes his inspiration from Sean Connery's harder-edged Bond
and leading ladies like Eva Green's Vesper Lynd recall the strongwilled European
beauties of the early films, bringing back another '60s trope seems logical. Not
since Blofeld's SPECTRE, a terrorist cabal that haunted six Bond films (and made
a cameo in a seventh), has there been a nemesis of this scope. It's good to be
bad again.

   A VIEW TO A THRILL

   Craig's first outing as Bond, 2006's "Casino Royale," ended with only the
second cliffhanger in 007 history. After bankrupting Le Chiffre, a terrorist
financier, in a game of poker, Bond hopes to use his knowledge to bring down
criminals worldwide. But it turns out Le Chiffre is not a free agent - he works
for a larger group, which kills the banker and gets the money back. Using a clue
left by deceased British treasury official Vesper, who had been blackmailed,
Bond tracks down a mysterious Mr. White. In the final scene of "Royale," Bond
has shot Mr. White through the ankle and is about to interrogate him.

   The only other Bond cliffhanger was at the end of 1969's "On Her Majesty's
Secret Service," in which Bond married the daughter of a crime lord. Blofeld
killed his new bride shortly after the wedding, and the final scene saw Bond
cradling her body in his arms.

   The Bond film that followed, "Diamonds Are Forever," is ostensibly about Bond
seeking revenge on Blofeld. But since both characters are played by different
actors - Sean Connery, back after a disappointing one-off by George Lazenby, is
007, and Charles Gray steps in for Telly Savalas' Blofeld - the tone is lighter,
and Bond never even mentions his wife, so it doesn't seem like a direct sequel.

   Not so "Quantum of Solace." It starts just moments after "Casino Royale,"
with direct references to the previous movie, as Bond peels back the conspiracy.

   Director Marc Forster says Bond producers Barbara Broccoli and Michael G.
Wilson broached the idea of using "Quantum of Solace" as a name, one of the last
Ian Fleming story titles not used in the film series. It worked on two levels,
Forster says. It refers to Bond's hunt for peace following Vesper's death, and
to set up the villainous group's name, Quantum.

   "We wanted something sort of like SPECTRE in the old movies," Forster says.
"A multilayered international organization, where it's hard to tell who's really
behind it."

   Bond's investigation leads him to another Quantum agent, Dominic Greene
(Mathieu Amalric), a supposed environmentalist. The inconvenient truth is that
he's really out to control the water supply of Bolivia and use it to destabilize
nations. The scheme sounds less maniacal than, say, blackmailing America with a
nuclear bomb, but Forster points out that one does not need to rule the world by
force. "If you control natural resources, you're literally taking over the
world."

   Greene differs from the madmen of old in one respect, though. Except for the
unfashionably oversize bow tie on his tux, he has no physical maladies. Heck,
even Le Chiffre cried blood! "No scars, no hooks," Forster says. "Mathieu said,
'What will I use as a crutch?' I said, 'You don't need a crutch, you need to
look like you blend in. But it will show through your eyes.' "

   SCOUNDRELS ARE FOREVER

   The idea of a worldwide criminal conspiracy might sound silly, but some
academics (yes, there are Bond academics) argue that, in terms of villains, the
007 films were prescient. Fleming, writing just after World War II, primarily
used the Soviets as his enemies. Henchmen worked for SMERSH, named after a
real-life KGB assassin squad.

   But for one of the first attempts at bringing Bond to film, Fleming
collaborated on an original screenplay with writer Kevin McClory, and they
invented SPECTRE, the Special Executive for Counter-intelligence, Terrorism,
Revenge and Extortion for a movie called "Thunderball." Its criminal mastermind
is the bald, heartless Blofeld, whose only friend is a plush white cat.

   Fleming incorporated SPECTRE into later Bond books, and though the filmmakers
decided not to kick things off with "Thunderball," they changed the group behind
"Dr. No" from SMERSH to SPECTRE. So while Bond seems like he's a relic of the
Cold War, he was really fighting terrorists all along.

   "Remarkably, the Bond villains - including Dr. No, Goldfinger and Blofeld -
have always been post-Cold War figures," argues Richard J. Aldrich, a professor
of International Security at the University of Warwick, in England.

   "Bond's enemies are in fact very close to the real enemies of the last two
decades - part master criminal, part arms smuggler, part terrorist, part
warlord," Aldrich says. "They endanger not only the security of single country,
but the safety of the whole world. Like our modern enemies, they thrive on the
gaps between sovereign states and thrive on secrecy."

   SPECTRE could have continued forever, but McClory fought the producers for
the rights and eventually won permission to make his own Bond film, "Never Say
Never Again." Roger Moore took the Bond role in a more comic-book direction, and
schemes became larger than life. Blofeld was left hanging in an escape pod in
"Diamonds Are Forever," his fate unknown, though Moore's Bond kills a Blofeld
look-alike (never named for legal reasons), by dropping him from a helicopter in
"For Your Eyes Only."

   Forster says "Casino" and "Quantum" leave open the notion that there's a
mastermind behind Greene and Mr. White. Daniel Craig's Bond films could be
something different for the series: a serial. "They have the opportunity to make
a trilogy out of it, or start completely new," he says.

   And if Quantum does get its Blofeld, Forster has one request: "I want to
bring the cat back."

   THE SPY WHO BROKE THE BANK

   12 ASTON MARTINS FOR ONE CHASE

   $261 million $ BUDGET

   1,700 EXTRAS IN AN OPERA SCENE

   "Quantum of Solace" is the most expensive James Bond movie ever, and perhaps
the most expensive film in history. Rival studios estimate the cost at $261
million for the 105-minute movie. (Sony, the studio behind "Solace," disputes
this figure) What does $2.5 million a minute buy you?

   *  Most locations ever in a Bond film: Panama, Chile (as Bolivia), Mexico,
Italy, Austria and the UK.

   *   For a 15-minute chase scene, a dozen identical copies of Bond's signature
ride, the Aston Martin DBS (left), were used.

   *   Bond's 11 costume changes required nine suits for each scene: three
perfect, three bloodied and blown up and three bloodied, blown up and soaking
wet.

   *   After the success of "Casino Royale," Daniel Craig had his salary doubled
to about $7 million. For the first Bond film, "Dr. No," Sean Connery reportedly
made about $14,000.

   *  For a scene in which Bond runs across Italian rooftops, the production
reroofed all the buildings so that the centuries-old tiles wouldn't break.

   100 MEEEEELION DOLLARS!   A quick master class in Bond's arch-enemies

   SPECTRE

   (Special Executive for Counter-in-telligence, Terrorism, Revenge and
Extortion)

   *  Diabolical villain:  Ernst Stavro Blofeld

   *  Nefarious plots:  Disrupt American rockets ("Dr. No"); start war between
UK and Russia ("From Russia With Love"); use nukes to blackmail West for 100
meeeellion dollars ("Thunderball"); spark conflict by destroying American and
Soviet spacecraft ("You Only Live Twice"); decimate the world's food supply for
cash and a royal title ("On Her Majesty's Secret Service"); build a giant space
laaaaser beam out of diamonds ("Diamonds Are Forever").

   *  Trivia:  The terrorist group was invented not in one of the Bond books,
but in a screenplay written by 007 creator Ian Fleming and Kevin McClory.

   SMERSH & COMMUNISTS

   (Short for Smert Shpionam, which means "Death to Spies")

   *  Diabolical villains: Red Grant ("From Russia With Love"), General Gogol
("The Spy Who Loved Me" and five more), Colonel Tan-Sun Moon ("Die Another
Day").

   *  Nefarious plots:  Sometimes the Russians work with the British (like Agent
XXX in "Spy Who Loved Me") sometimes against (hunting a sub in "For Your Eyes
Only"). General Gogol, in a recurring role, often helped Bond try to stop
hard-line Russians from starting a war ("Octopussy," "Goldeneye"). In "Die
Another Day," a North Korean wants to invade the South using a giant laaaaaser
beam.

   * Trivia:  Fleming used SMERSH, the name of a real Soviet spy agency, as his
primary villain in the novels. (Dr. No worked for them.) For the most part, it
was mutated into SPECTRE in the films.

   DARWINIAN MADMEN

   * Diabolical villains:  Karl Stromberg ("The Spy Who Loved Me"), Hugo Drax
("Moonraker")

   * Nefarious plots:   Destroy planet (using nukes or killer spores) and start
over with a master race underwater ("Spy") or in space ("Moonraker").

   * Trivia:  The Bond movie after "Spy" was suppose to be "For Your Eyes Only."
But after the success of "Star Wars," producers fast-tracked "Moonraker," which
copied the plot of "Spy" - and even used sequences cut from the previous film.

   MERCENARIES

   * Diabolical villains:   Auric Goldfinger ("Goldfinger"), Mr. Big ("Live and
Let Die"), Max Zorin ("A View to a Kill"), Franz Sanchez ("License to Kill"),
Alec Trevelyan ("Goldeneye"), Elliot Carver ("Tomorrow Never Dies"), Elektra
King ("The World Is Not Enough").

   * Nefarious plots:  Irradiate gold supply to corner the market
("Goldfinger"), flood Silicon Valley to dominate microchip biz ("A View to a
Kill"), control America's narcotics trade ("Live and Let Die," "License to
Kill"), use electromagnetic pulse to cover up Bank of England heist
("Goldeneye"), start UK war with China to boost TV ratings ("Tomorrow Never
Dies"), irradiate Turkey to control oil shipments ("The World Is Not Enough").

   Trivia:  In the novel "Goldfinger," the main character wants to use an atomic
bomb to open Fort Knox, then steal the gold. The radiation plot was invented for
the film, and the twist has inspired countless heist movies (and other Bond
films).

   QUANTUM

   * Diabolical villain:   Mastermind unknown. Henchmen: Le Chiffre ("Casino
Royale") and Dominic Greene ("Quantum of Solace")

   * Nefarious plots:   Bankroll terrorists ("Casino Royale"), control Bolivian
water supply ("Quantum of Solace").

   * Trivia:  Named for a Fleming short story, but with no resemblance to that
plot. Producers have left open the door to future plots involving Quantum and
the possibility that there's a Blofeld-type character pulling the strings.

GRAPHIC: GERT FROBE AS AURIC GOLDFINGER. MADS MIKKELSEN AS LE CHIFFRE IN "CASINO
ROYALE". MATHIEU AMALRIC AS GREENE IN "QUANTUM OF SOLACE." DONALD PLEASENCE AS
BLOFELD IN "YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE." MICHAEL LONSDALE AS HUGO DRAX IN "MOONRAKER."
SEXY SPYS:  Daniel Craig is 007 and Olga Kurylenko is Camille, another Bond babe
with a titillating talent for weapons.  GERT FROBE AS AURIC GOLDFINGER. MADS
MIKKELSEN AS LE CHIFFRE IN "CASINO ROYALE". MATHIEU AMALRIC AS GREENE IN
"QUANTUM OF SOLACE." DONALD PLEASENCE AS BLOFELD IN "YOU ONLY LIVE TWICE."
MICHAEL LONSDALE AS HUGO DRAX IN "MOONRAKER."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2008


                              292 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            November 4, 2008 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: UC discovery could lead to gastric relief

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell pofarrell@enquirer.com

BODY:

   pofarrell@enquirer.com

   "Knocking out" a single gene could knock out acid reflux, peptic ulcers and
other stomach ailments that afflict millions of people, according to new
research from the University of Cincinnati.

   Researchers led by nephrologist Manoocher Soleimani discovered the gene that
helps control production of stomach acid.

   Gastric acid, which the body uses to break down and digest food, is made up
mostly of hydrochloric acid.

   Earlier research identified the gene that produces the hydrogen half of
gastric acid.

   Soleimani and his colleagues discovered the gene that produces chloride.

   When they developed mice without the chloride-producing gene, acid secretion
in the stomach stopped.

   Now that they've found the gene, Soleimani said, researchers are looking for
a way to modify the way it works, and dial back the production of acid.

   "We believe the complete inhibition may not be healthy long-term," he said.
"You want to turn it down, not turn it off completely."

   Deactivating the gene entirely would be impractical because people need some
gastric acid to digest food and absorb critical nutrients, Soleimani said.

   But too much can be dangerous.

   Excess stomach acid causes peptic ulcers.

   When stomach acid backs up into the esophagus, people develop acid reflux, or
gastroesophageal reflux disease. The acid erodes the lining of the esophagus
and, in some cases, leads to cancer.

   Several medications are available for acid reflux, but they have limitations,
Soleimani said.

   Some, like antacids, work only for a short time. Others, like proton pump
inhibitors, work well but can interfere with some medications and can cause
health problems if used long term.

   If researchers can find a way to inhibit the action of the chloride-producing
gene, they might be able to develop effective long-term treatments for acid
reflux, Soleimani said. "With this information, we hope to one day be able to
administer gene therapies to patients and avoid this painful and damaging
problem altogether," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2008


                              293 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            October 28, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: METRO - EDITORIAL; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 150 words

HEADLINE: Jazz and Razz

BODY:

   JAZZ

   MR. GREEN GENES was designed for science, not star power. But the fluorescent
tabby cat, the result of gene therapy research at the AUDUBON CENTER FOR
RESEARCH OF ENDANGERED SPECIES, acted like a veteran performer when he appeared
on "The Today Show" Thursday.

   RAZZ

   A mural on a cinderblock wall in Bywater that was painted with the property
owner's consent got hit by ANTI-GRAFFITI ACTIVISTS. Four men wearing Operation:
Clean Sweep T-shirts were caught trying to blot out the elaborate artwork with
gray paint. That's not activism, it's vandalism.

   JAZZ

   LYNN FOY, a first-grade teacher at Craig Elementary School, received a 2008
Milken National Education Award, a $25,000 award that recognizes excellence in
teaching. Ms. Foy devised her own tools and books after Hurricane Katrina
destroyed classroom materials. Her students have shown significant improvement
on an exam that tests reading abilities.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2008


                              294 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            October 24, 2008 Friday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Audubon cat shines on 'The Today Show';
Fluorescent tabby travels to Big Apple

BYLINE: From staff reports

BODY:

   Without saying a word, Mr. Green Genes made his New York debut Thursday. And
he glowed.

   Mr. Green Genes, a 7-pound orange tabby cat who appeared on "The Today Show,"
is the first fluorescent cat in the United States. He was created this year at
the Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species as part of a process that
could lead to gene therapy.

   To show that a treatment could get where it was supposed to go, the cat's DNA
was augmented with a gene that would glow if it hit the right spot.

   Appearing with host Amy Robach under studio lights, a calm Mr. Green Genes
was his normal orange self. But when the lights went off and ultraviolet light
went on, the only things visible were his green ears, eyes, nose and mouth.

   If Mr. Green Genes were shaved, his skin probably would glow, too, said
center Director Betsy Dresser, who accompanied the cat to New York with animal
trainer Kelly Trimble and spokeswoman Sarah Burnette.

   The segment, which can be seen on the show's Web site, lasted slightly more
than 90 seconds, "but we said all we needed to say" about the process, Burnette
said, "so we're very happy."

   At the NBC studio, the New Orleans contingent had a reunion with "Today" host
Hoda Kotb, a former reporter and anchor at WWL-TV, Burnette said.

   Mr. Green Genes' appearance happened less than 24 hours after the center got
the call that he was wanted for Thursday's program, Burnette said.

   Despite what could have been a disorienting change of scenery, "he was very,
very calm," she said. "He really was great."

GRAPHIC: COURTESY OF 'THE TODAY SHOW'
'Today Show' host Amy Robach, left, pets Mr. Green Genes, who glows under an
ultraviolet light, of the Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species. The
center's director, Betsy Dresser, center, and trainer Kelly Trimble came with
the cat. [4444312;4444312]

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2008


                              295 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            October 20, 2008 Monday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: SEE SPOT GLOW;
With an eye toward fighting human diseases, Audubon scientists mark cat with
green gene

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Everyone knows that cats can see in the dark, but that wasn't good enough for
some New Orleans scientists. They produced Mr. Green Genes, a cat that glows in
the dark and is destined to be more than just a novelty for Halloween parties.

   He's a nearly 6-month-old orange tabby but, under ultraviolet light, his
eyes, gums and tongue glow a vivid lime green, the result of a genetic
experiment at the Audubon Center for Research of Endangered Species.

   Mr. Green Genes is the first fluorescent cat in the United States, said Betsy
Dresser, the center's director.

   The researchers made him so they could learn whether a gene could be
introduced harmlessly into the feline's genetic sequence to create what is
formally known as a transgenic cat. If so, it would be the first step in a
process that could lead to the development of ways to combat diseases via gene
therapy.

   The gene, which was added to Mr. Green Genes' DNA when he was created earlier
this year in the Audubon center's laboratory, has no effect on his health,
Dresser said.

   Cats are ideal for this project because their genetic makeup is similar to
that of humans, said Dr. Martha Gomez, a veterinarian and staff scientist at the
center.

   To show that the gene went where it was supposed to go, the researchers
settled on one that would glow.

   The gene "is just a marker," said Leslie Lyons, an assistant professor of
population health and reproduction at the School of Veterinary Medicine at the
University of California, Davis, who is familiar with the Audubon center's work.

   "The glowing part is the fun part," she said.

   --- Nobel feat ---

   Glowing creatures made international news earlier this month when the Nobel
Prize in Chemistry was awarded to three scientists who had discovered the gene
through their work with jellyfish. They used the gene, whose formal name is
enhanced green fluorescence protein, to see how things work inside animals and
even inside cells.

   Mr. Green Genes  --  his name comes from Mr. Green Jeans, a character on the
long-departed "Captain Kangaroo" television show  --  is deeply suspicious of
strangers. He spends most of his days napping, and he doesn't like being held
when he doesn't want to be cuddled.

   In normal light, the 7-pound cat, who lives at the center, looks and acts
like any other feline.

   But turn out the room lights and switch on some black light, and you can see
glowing ears, nostrils, eyes and gums. Those body parts light up because the
protein is more likely to express itself in mucous membranes, Lyons said.

   "You can't lose that cat at night," said C. Earle Pope, the center's senior
scientist.

   In theory, his litter box could glow, too, because cat droppings include
epithelial cells, where the gene can be found. But there is entirely too much
other stuff around them to allow for readily visible glowing without messy lab
work, Gomez said.

   --- 'The frozen zoo' ---

   The Audubon center, which hugs the Mississippi River levee on Algiers' Lower
Coast, started its animal-cloning experiments in 2001. Two years later,
Ditteaux, an African wildcat, was born there. He was the world's first cloned
wild carnivore.

   Cloning starts with cells  --  generally skin cells, Gomez said, because
retrieval isn't too invasive  --  and the cells' genetic material is stored in a
tank of liquid nitrogen where the temperature is 316 degrees below zero. The
Audubon center has 12 such tanks of genetic specimens awaiting use; Dresser
calls them "the frozen zoo."

   For work with felines, eggs are collected from a donor cat  --  usually a
domestic cat  --  and the DNA is removed and replaced. To create Mr. Green
Genes, the fresh DNA included the fluorescent gene.

   Then the fertilized egg is inserted into a surrogate mother cat for a
pregnancy lasting 65 to 70 days.

   After Ditteaux's arrival, Gomez was invited to discuss it before a group of
gene-therapy specialists, who, she said, were interested in the prospect of
creating a genetic model for fighting diseases.

   The Audubon scientists want to use their technique to develop a gene-therapy
treatment for cystic fibrosis, an incurable hereditary disease for which, Gomez
said, there are no gene-therapy models.

   The fluorescence gene will go alongside the cystic-fibrosis gene and make it
easy to spot. The long-term goal of this process, for which there is no
timetable, is the production of what Gomez calls a "knockout gene."

   Work on this project is under way, she said. "We are getting some preliminary
data, but we don't have the full funds for it."

   --- 'He is my baby' ---

   Mr. Green Genes' next role for the center will combine science and sex. He
will become a stud so the Audubon team can determine whether the fluorescence
gene can be transmitted. That should take no more than two breeding cycles,
Gomez said.

   "If he is fertile and if the female is fertile, it should be quick," she
said. "The idea is not to have a lot of green cats around, but to demonstrate
that the gene can be passed."

   After that, he will retire to Gomez's home, where two cats already live.

   "I feel that he is my baby," said Gomez, who led the team that created him.

   "You have to realize that this is our first transgenic cat," she said. "I
don't want him to go to just anybody. I feel he is mine."

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3317.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY RUSTY COSTANZA / THE TIMES-PICAYUNE RUSTY COSTANZA / THE
TIMES-PICAYUNE
In normal light, Mr. Green Genes, who lives at the Audubon center, looks and
acts like any other feline. [4417342]

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2008


                              296 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            October 12, 2008 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. L7

LENGTH: 898 words

HEADLINE: Engineering and Science

BYLINE: Barbara Claire Kasselmann

BODY:

   YOUR CAREER

   Crumbling infrastructure, growing environmental concerns, burgeoning
biotechnology developments, and large-scale retirements have been increasing
demand for specialists in some fields of engineers and scientists in the Bay
State.

   Despite overall economic woes, most of these fields continue to grow, as
needs for a cleaner environment, improved bridges and highways, and medical
devices and services are urgent. Years of stagnant enrollment in some area
engineering schools, along with neglect of an aging infrastructure, have led to
dire shortages.

   "Graduation numbers are not nearly good enough to fill current and future
needs in Massachusetts," explained Abbie Goodman, chief executive of The
Engineering Center, which manages engineering and related societies. "I know
they're looking for them, because they're calling me. People graduating now are
like gold," she said, with needs high in civil, structural, environmental,
mechanical, and electrical engineering.

   There is also an increasing need for people to design and build
energy-efficient structures using solar and geothermal energy and greener
materials. "As we harness the built environment, we've got to protect the
natural environment," Goodman emphasized.

   In the life sciences, growth is evident, as some pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies continue to expand in the area, and salaries go up in
keeping with demand.

   For professional and career connections, check www.nspe.org,
www.engineers.org, and www.sciencecareers.org.

   BIOLOGICAL SCIENTISTS

   Average salary: $78,910

   Demand: Very good. Job markets in biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and most
biological sciences continue strong in the Greater Boston area, as some
companies expand operations here. Stem cell research is on the rise, and cancer,
gene therapy, and Alzheimer's disease study receive heavy investments. Demand is
strong in sales, marketing, and applied research, but competition can be tough,
especially for PhDs.

   Qualifications: PhD for pure research; master's for applied research or
product development; bachelor's sometimes sufficient for sales.

   CHEMISTS

   Average salary: $81,740

   Demand: Mixed. In pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, and in medical
and environmental research, funding and demand are good. Those in declining
chemical manufacturing industries fare less well, as research and development
budgets are pared.

   Qualifications: PhD required for independent research; master's for applied
research, sales, and marketing.

   CHEMICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $89,050

   Demand: Mixed. The market is good in energy, biotechnology, nanotechnology,
and pharmaceuticals, but, as with chemists, chemical manufacturing is offering
fewer opportunities.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree; continuing study necessary in a
competitive market.

   CIVIL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $82,950

   Demand: Strong. One of the hottest job markets as demand grows for engineers
to maintain and replace aging water and sewer systems, buildings, highways, and
bridges, to find and harness new energy resources, and to protect the
environment.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree in civil engineering, plus state licensure.
Must keep current in new technologies.

   ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $96,830 (electrical); $89,880 (electronics)

   Demand: Strong. These engineers are needed in medical device, biotechnology,
energy management, wireless electronics, and other industries.

   Qualifications: Bachelor's degree required; must be creative, analytical, and
current in latest technologies.

   ENGINEERING AND NATURAL SCIENCE MANAGERS

   Average salary: $134,730 (engineering); $136,480 (natural science)

   Demand: Very good. Managers are needed in research, design, and development
in such fields as environmental and biomedical engineering, pharmaceuticals,
biotechnology, and other life sciences.

   Qualifications: Degrees, experience, and thorough knowledge in the field;
management and communications skills; some fields require MBA or master's in
engineering management.

   MECHANICAL ENGINEERS

   Average salary: $86,570

   Demand: Strong. These engineers are needed for designing fuel cells, wind
turbines, and other alternative energy systems, as well as for medical devices
and more efficient infrastructure systems. Retirements increase need.

   Qualifications: Mechanical engineering degree; keep current in new
technologies.

   GEOLOGISTS, GEOPHYSICISTS, AND OCEANOGRAPHERS

   Average salary: $84,100 (geoscientists); $90,040 (oceanographers)

   Demand: Good. As the need to deal with effects of climate change and
dwindling energy resources becomes more critical, these scientists are in demand
to study the state of water, earth, and undersea life. New technologies enable
more advanced research undersea and retirements increase opportunities.

   Qualifications: Graduate degrees for research; bachelor's for entry level;
ability to travel, second language important in some fields.

   PHYSICISTS AND ASTRONOMERS

   Average salary: $109,020 (physicists); $121,720 (astronomers)

   Demand: Mixed. Market is good in energy, defense, and applied research and
development, but competition is tight for some positions and funding has been
cut for many areas of research.

   Qualifications: Doctorate and postdoctoral training required for university
teaching and research; master's can qualify for applied research and product
development; bachelor's degrees can be sufficient for work in engineering or
computers.

GRAPHIC: In the life sciences, growth is evident as some pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies continue to expand in the area.The need for a cleaner
environment is raising demand for engineers who specialize in innovative ways to
deliver energy, as well as build energy-efficient structures.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2008


                              297 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            October 10, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: USF Ranked 35th In Patent Research

BYLINE: TED JACKOVICS, tjackovics@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   Sensors, gene therapy break ground.

   By TED JACKOVICS

   tjackovics@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA - The University of South Florida ranks 35th nationwide in patent
research, The Patent Board's 2008 Universities Patent Scorecard shows.

   The University of California ranked first, the University of Central Florida
eighth, the University of Florida 32nd and Florida State University 104th.

   The Chicago-based institution tracks and analyzes the business value of
patent assets. The scorecard includes ratings of industry impact, links to
science and numbers of patents.

   "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod Casto,
USF's associate vice president for technology development. "They provide
protection for ideas so that further investments in research, development, and
commercialization will occur."

   A strong technology transfer program enables universities to recruit top-tier
faculty, Casto said. That furthers local economic development and industry
partnerships, he added.

   The portfolio of technologies that have been developed at USF range from
environmental sensors to gene therapy, said Valerie Landrio McDevitt, director
of the Division of Patents and Licensing at USF.

   Examples include:

   *Voda LLC, a Florida company providing underwater mass spectrometers for
environmental testing and monitoring the water quality of oceans and lakes.

   *IRx Therapeutics, a privately held company started with USF technologies for
treating patients with head and neck cancer.

   *Rehab Ideas, a Florida company developing new technologies that will improve
the lives and mobility of combat veterans who use wheelchairs.

   USF has been issued 25 patents so far this year and landed 27 in 2007, the
university reported.

   (CHART) UNIVERSITY PATENT RANKINGS

   1. University of California

   2. Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   3. California Institute of Technology

   4. Stanford University

   5. Rice University

   8. University of Central Florida

   32. University of Florida

   35. University of South Florida

   104. Florida State University

   Source: The Patent Board

   Reporter Ted Jackovics can be reached at (813) 259-7817.

   Photo credit: Tribune photo by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER

   Photo: "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod
Casto of USF's technology program. He said a strong technology transfer program
helps universities recruit top faculty and aids local economic development.

   Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2008


                              298 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            October 10, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL NEWS BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: USF Ranked 35th In Patent Research

BYLINE: TED JACKOVICS, tjackovics@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   Sensors, gene therapy break ground.

   By TED JACKOVICS

   tjackovics@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA - The University of South Florida ranks 35th nationwide in patent
research, The Patent Board's 2008 Universities Patent Scorecard shows.

   The University of California ranked first, the University of Central Florida
eighth, the University of Florida 32nd and Florida State University 104th.

   The Chicago-based institution tracks and analyzes the business value of
patent assets. The scorecard includes ratings of industry impact, links to
science and numbers of patents.

   "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod Casto,
USF's associate vice president for technology development. "They provide
protection for ideas so that further investments in research, development, and
commercialization will occur."

   A strong technology transfer program enables universities to recruit top-tier
faculty, Casto said. That furthers local economic development and industry
partnerships, he added.

   The portfolio of technologies that have been developed at USF range from
environmental sensors to gene therapy, said Valerie Landrio McDevitt, director
of the Division of Patents and Licensing at USF.

   Examples include:

   *Voda LLC, a Florida company providing underwater mass spectrometers for
environmental testing and monitoring the water quality of oceans and lakes.

   *IRx Therapeutics, a privately held company started with USF technologies for
treating patients with head and neck cancer.

   *Rehab Ideas, a Florida company developing new technologies that will improve
the lives and mobility of combat veterans who use wheelchairs.

   USF has been issued 25 patents so far this year and landed 27 in 2007, the
university reported.

   (CHART) UNIVERSITY PATENT RANKINGS

   1. University of California

   2. Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   3. California Institute of Technology

   4. Stanford University

   5. Rice University

   8. University of Central Florida

   32. University of Florida

   35. University of South Florida

   104. Florida State University

   Source: The Patent Board

   Reporter Ted Jackovics can be reached at (813) 259-7817.

   Photo credit: Tribune photo by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER

   Photo: "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod
Casto of USF's technology program. He said a strong technology transfer program
helps universities recruit top faculty and aids local economic development.

   Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2008


                              299 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            October 10, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: USF Ranked 35th In Patent Research

BYLINE: TED JACKOVICS, tjackovics@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   Sensors, gene therapy break ground.

   By TED JACKOVICS

   tjackovics@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA - The University of South Florida ranks 35th nationwide in patent
research, The Patent Board's 2008 Universities Patent Scorecard shows.

   The University of California ranked first, the University of Central Florida
eighth, the University of Florida 32nd and Florida State University 104th.

   The Chicago-based institution tracks and analyzes the business value of
patent assets. The scorecard includes ratings of industry impact, links to
science and numbers of patents.

   "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod Casto,
USF's associate vice president for technology development. "They provide
protection for ideas so that further investments in research, development, and
commercialization will occur."

   A strong technology transfer program enables universities to recruit top-tier
faculty, Casto said. That furthers local economic development and industry
partnerships, he added.

   The portfolio of technologies that have been developed at USF range from
environmental sensors to gene therapy, said Valerie Landrio McDevitt, director
of the Division of Patents and Licensing at USF.

   Examples include:

   *Voda LLC, a Florida company providing underwater mass spectrometers for
environmental testing and monitoring the water quality of oceans and lakes.

   *IRx Therapeutics, a privately held company started with USF technologies for
treating patients with head and neck cancer.

   *Rehab Ideas, a Florida company developing new technologies that will improve
the lives and mobility of combat veterans who use wheelchairs.

   USF has been issued 25 patents so far this year and landed 27 in 2007, the
university reported.

   (CHART) UNIVERSITY PATENT RANKINGS

   1. University of California

   2. Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   3. California Institute of Technology

   4. Stanford University

   5. Rice University

   8. University of Central Florida

   32. University of Florida

   35. University of South Florida

   104. Florida State University

   Source: The Patent Board

   Reporter Ted Jackovics can be reached at (813) 259-7817.

   Photo credit: Tribune photo by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER

   Photo: "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod
Casto of USF's technology program. He said a strong technology transfer program
helps universities recruit top faculty and aids local economic development.

   Copyright  2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008


                              300 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            October 10, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: USF Ranked 35th In Patent Research

BYLINE: TED JACKOVICS, tjackovics@tampatrib.com

BODY:

   Sensors, gene therapy break ground.

   By TED JACKOVICS

   tjackovics@tampatrib.com

   TAMPA - The University of South Florida ranks 35th nationwide in patent
research, The Patent Board's 2008 Universities Patent Scorecard shows.

   The University of California ranked first, the University of Central Florida
eighth, the University of Florida 32nd and Florida State University 104th.

   The Chicago-based institution tracks and analyzes the business value of
patent assets. The scorecard includes ratings of industry impact, links to
science and numbers of patents.

   "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod Casto,
USF's associate vice president for technology development. "They provide
protection for ideas so that further investments in research, development, and
commercialization will occur."

   A strong technology transfer program enables universities to recruit top-tier
faculty, Casto said. That furthers local economic development and industry
partnerships, he added.

   The portfolio of technologies that have been developed at USF range from
environmental sensors to gene therapy, said Valerie Landrio McDevitt, director
of the Division of Patents and Licensing at USF.

   Examples include:

   *Voda LLC, a Florida company providing underwater mass spectrometers for
environmental testing and monitoring the water quality of oceans and lakes.

   *IRx Therapeutics, a privately held company started with USF technologies for
treating patients with head and neck cancer.

   *Rehab Ideas, a Florida company developing new technologies that will improve
the lives and mobility of combat veterans who use wheelchairs.

   USF has been issued 25 patents so far this year and landed 27 in 2007, the
university reported.

   (CHART) UNIVERSITY PATENT RANKINGS

   1. University of California

   2. Massachusetts Institute of Technology

   3. California Institute of Technology

   4. Stanford University

   5. Rice University

   8. University of Central Florida

   32. University of Florida

   35. University of South Florida

   104. Florida State University

   Source: The Patent Board

   Reporter Ted Jackovics can be reached at (813) 259-7817.

   Photo credit: Tribune photo by MICHAEL SPOONEYBARGER

   Photo: "Patents are one of the primary foundations of innovation," said Rod
Casto of USF's technology program. He said a strong technology transfer program
helps universities recruit top faculty and aids local economic development.

   Copyright  2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008


                              301 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             October 3, 2008 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: Biogen Idec may shift headquarters to Weston Biotech would join other
Cambridge firms seeking lower suburban rents

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   Biogen Idec Inc., one of the state's largest biotechnology companies, is
considering moving its corporate headquarters from Cambridge to Weston, which
would add it to a growing list of Cambridge biotechs that have jumped to the
suburbs because of lower rents and more options for office space.

   "It's sort of the natural evolution of these things," said Biogen Idec chief
executive Jim Mullen. "The cost of running a business in Cambridge is pretty
high."

   Mullen said it makes sense to move corporate jobs to the suburbs, where rents
are half as much as in Cambridge and workers would have an easier commute from
Worcester, southern New Hampshire, and other areas where housing costs are
lower.

   "It's an employee attraction," he said. "If you want to live in the city, you
still can."

   But Mullen added that it is vital to keep Biogen Idec's research operations
in Kendall Square, near the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to make it
easier to retain and recruit scientists. It also plans to keep a small drug
manufacturing plant in Cambridge.

   In the past a year, more than a half dozen Cambridge biotechs have moved to
the suburbs. Amag Pharmaceuticals Inc. moved to Lexington last month. Altus
Pharmaceuticals Inc. plans to move to Waltham later this month. And earlier this
year, Shire Human Genetic Therapies said it will build a headquarters and
manufacturing plant in Lexington.

   Mullen said Biogen Idec is in "reasonably well advanced" negotiations to
lease a 350,000-square-foot building scheduled to be built on Boston Post Road,
just west of the routes 128 and 20 interchange in Weston. The company is also
considering other options, such as expanding in Cambridge or moving to an
alternate site in Waltham. But for now, Mullen said, "The Weston site looks like
it is the best fit for what we are doing." The company plans to make a final
decision by the end of the year.

   Biogen Idec has 1,600 employees in Cambridge and another 200 in Wellesley. If
the company goes forward with the Weston site, Mullen said, it would likely
shift a few hundred corporate jobs from Cambridge and Wellesley to the new
offices. The new site would also provide space for new employees.

   But the move probably wouldn't take place for about two years. "There's
nothing there," Mullen said of the Weston location. Boston Properties Inc.,
which owns the site, declined to comment. But Susan Haber, Weston's town
planner, said the company has secured the necessary permits to build.

   Another prominent Cambridge biotech, Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc., has been
considering moving its corporate headquarters to a new building in Boston's
growing Fan Pier neighborhood as the company outgrows its campus in
Cambridgeport. Joshua Boger, Vertex chief executive, said the company plans to
make a decision about where to expand by year's end.

   While Cambridge and Boston remain desirable for companies, companies often
have more options if they are willing to move farther out. Commercial real
estate firm Colliers, Meredith & Grew estimated that as of the third quarter,
there was a 17.8 percent vacancy rate in the suburbs, compared to 12.2 percent
for Cambridge and 9.3 percent in Boston. Rents averaged around $24 per square
foot for most office space in the suburbs, compared with $43 in Cambridge and
$51 in Boston.

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2008


                              302 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            October 2, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section G; Column 0; Style Desk; SKIN DEEP; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1449 words

HEADLINE: Buying Face Cream? Grab a Glossary

BYLINE: By NATASHA SINGER

BODY:

   STEM cells. Gene therapy. Immune protection. Growth hormone.

     Once the province of academic journals, the latest concepts in science are
trickling down to fashion magazines in the form of advertising campaigns for
beauty products.

     This month, for example, advertisements for the Olay Regenerist line of
face treatments tout the company's ''Aquacurrent Science'' as a skin care
technology ''that helps reverse the look of lines and wrinkles.'' According to
promotional material, the technology was inspired by the discovery of aquaporin
water channels (pores that conduct water in and out of cells) for which Dr.
Peter Agre won a Nobel Prize in chemistry.

     Meanwhile, from L'Oreal comes Skin Genesis. The line includes a gel
cleanser that offers ''cellular level cleansing,'' according to magazine
advertisements.

     Call it skinflation, the spiraling increase in beauty marketing that
employs science  buzzwords whose meaning may be lost on consumers.

     ''Because you really don't know what they are talking about, it seems like
the product will work better because they are smarter than you,'' said Dyan
Diaz, 30, a train dispatcher for the Long Island Rail Road, as she was having
her hair cut last Friday at the Patrick Melville Salon in Manhattan. ''Women are
duped into thinking it will work better than anything that is said in layman's
terms,'' she added.

     In layman's terms, the products do work. Olay Aquacurrent Science
(pgbeautyscience.com/aquacurrents.html) includes products that use a form of
vitamin B to increase water concentration in the outermost layer of the skin,
Lesley Bride, a principle scientist at P & G Beauty, a division of Procter &
Gamble, wrote in an e-mail message. In other words: it helps moisturize the
skin.

     Meanwhile, in the advertisement for the cleanser from the L'Oreal Skin
Genesis line, ''cellular level cleansing'' refers to the ''action of promoting
cell turnover at the surface level,'' Jennie James, a spokeswoman for L'Oreal,
wrote in an e-mail message. In other words: it helps exfoliate the skin.

     For decades, cosmetics companies have coined their own multisyllabic
pharmacological-sounding words for proprietary ingredients used in skin care
formulas. But now market researchers are reporting a spate of face-cream labels
that borrow terminology from popular science.

     ''There is a tremendous increase in the number of products that use DNA,
growth factor and stem cells in labels or marketing claims,'' said Taya
Tomasello, a senior beauty analyst at Mintel International Group Ltd., a market
research firm. This year, beauty companies introduced 311 face products that
promise to work on skin at a ''cellular level'' compared with 116 face products
that make more generic anti-aging claims, according to Mintel's new products
database.

     ''You see 'cellular' and you think, 'this is really going to help with my
anti-aging,' '' Ms. Tomasello said.

     Medical-sounding affixes like bio-, micro- and pro- also abound (think
biologic, microscopic and probiotics). Some terms found last week at cosmetics
retailers and in fashion magazines included: ''biomolecular'' eye cream;
''microtechnology bio active'' foundation; ''pro-collagen'' serum;
''microsmoothing'' face serum; and a ''bio-stimulating'' night cream with
''microlift.''

     Industry analysts, scientists and consumers interviewed for this article
offered a variety of theories for the increased use of such jargon: it lends
face creams the air of high technology; it helps distinguish one product from a
myriad of others; it helps justify the price tag.

     ''If you are trying to decide between a 16-ounce bottle of Suave lotion and
a one-ounce $300 jar of Perricone, if it doesn't have sciency-sounding words in
there, people are going to feel a little foolish at plopping down that money,''
said a cosmetic chemist who often blogs under the name Left Brain on the Web
site thebeautybrains.com. (Contributors to the blog wish to remain anonymous in
the interest of their continued employment with cosmetics companies. Left Brain,
interviewed by phone last week, has not worked for any brands mentioned in this
article.)

     Erin McKean, a lexicographer who is the editor of the second edition of the
New Oxford American Dictionary, offered a more textual analysis. Words and
phrases like cellular, regeneration, bio-stimulating and cell-strengthening
connote health, she said.

     ''The idea is, it is not vanity, it is medicine,'' Ms. McKean said. ''Sure,
you are going to look great, but what you are really doing is helping your skin
on the inside.''

     The Food and Drug Administration defines cosmetics as topical products that
alter neither the structure nor function of the skin. Cosmetic manufacturers are
responsible for their own marketing claims.

     John Bailey, chief scientist at the Personal Care Products Council, an
industry trade group, said cosmetics companies employ scientists who conduct
high-level research into skin aging, and incorporate their discoveries into
product development and marketing. ''They do have an obligation to have the
science to back up the claims they are making,'' he said.

     Laure Rittie, a research investigator in dermatology at the University of
Michigan, said that simple skin physiology could account for the fancy
microbiological-sounding claims on some beauty products. She explained that dead
cells compose the very top layer of skin and that any product (even a washcloth
or sandpaper) that exfoliates the dead cells, exposing underlying skin cells,
might call itself regenerative, multicellular or biologically stimulating.

     ''If you remove this dead layer of cells, you could say every cleanser will
work at the cellular level,'' said Dr. Rittie, who has a Ph.D. in biochemistry
and molecular biology.

     But Dr. Rittie said she had doubts about cosmetics that use terms like stem
cells or growth hormones to suggest that the products reverse aging by altering
the structure of the skin.

     A study published earlier this year by researchers at the University of
Michigan reported that three treatments -- topical retinoic acid, carbon dioxide
lasers and injections of cross-linked hyaluronic acid -- have been proven to
help repair the internal scaffolding of aging skin.

     Dr. Rittie said that the same level of published scientific evidence did
not exist for cosmetics that invoke stem cells or growth hormone, which she said
is generally too big a protein to penetrate the skin. Moreover, such treatments
might not be beneficial -- mouse studies have shown that increased growth
hormone decreased skin thickness, she said.

     Scientists at the Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology at Rockefeller
University in Manhattan have engineered a special mouse with hair follicles
containing a greater number of proliferative stem cells. Because of the
increased activity of the stem cells, the mouse's hair follicles do not go
through a resting phase like other mice, said Elaine Fuchs, the head of the lab.
Such overstimulation might exhaust the mouse's supply of follicular stem cells.

     ''If you cause them to deplete early, the mouse could become bald,'' said
Dr. Fuchs, who has a Ph.D. in biochemistry. She added that researchers do not
know whether such stimulation of stem cells might also promote tumor growth.
''The mouse may pay for it later,'' she said.

     Dr. Rittie stressed that rodent stem cells and human stem cells behave very
differently. But she said that researchers would like to see published clinical
trials on the safety and efficacy of cosmetics that suggest they use growth
hormone or stimulate  stem cells.

     In Dr. Rittie's lab, a hormone applied to human skin had an unexpected
effect. In a study, published last month in Archives of Dermatology, she
reported that an estrogen hormone called estradiol, which 70 volunteers put on
their skin for two weeks, had no effect on the arms or faces that had been
exposed to the sun for decades. But the hormone did stimulate collagen
production in the unexposed skin on people's hips. Researchers also found that
the topical hormone dramatically increased estrogen levels in people's blood, a
systemic side effect.

     www.asa.org.uk/asa/Even if they use medical-sounding terminology, most
cosmetics do not claim such druglike effects.

     But Ms. McKean, the lexicographer, evinced delight at the linguistic
dexterity required to lard face creams with the sheen of popular science.

     ''These marketing people are geniuses because, if you pull out any single
word, you don't know what it means,'' Ms. McKean said. ''But, taken as a whole,
the overall effect is youth, beauty, science, positivity and renewal.''

     She added: ''I can't wait until they start using the word 'mitochondrial.'
''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY NATASHA SINGER) (pg. E3)  DRAWING (DRAWING BY ALLI
ARNOLD)

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2008


                              303 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 2, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 022

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: Donald Mozes

BODY:

   OBITUARY

   Sandoz managing director, of Summit, 56

   Donald Mozes, 56, of Summit and East Orleans, Mass., passed away Monday,
Sept. 29, 2008, at Overlook Hospital, Summit.

   A memorial service will be Friday, Oct. 3, 2008, at 3 p.m. at Central
Presbyterian Church, 70 Maple St., Summit. Arrangements are by Dangler Funeral
Home, Summit.

   Donald worked in the pharmaceutical industry for over 35 years. As an
international manager of marketing and development, Donald led teams in sales,
strategy and emerging technologies, such as anti-cancer research and gene
therapy. Much of his career was spent at Sandoz Pharmaceuticals, including five
years as managing director of the Sydney, Australia, division.

   Donald received his MBA in pharmaceutical marketing from

   Fairleigh Dickinson University. Over the years, Donald was active in his
alumni and community organizations as well as serving as a trustee for the
Kessler Institute for Rehabilitation in West Orange.

   Born and raised in Summit, Donald was devoted to his neighborhood, family,
friends and leaves many behind to cherish his memory. Surviving him are his
mother, Mrs. Betty Mozes of Basking Ridge, his brother, David Mozes of
Springfield, and his devoted wife, Carolyn and beloved daughter, Leigh.

   Memorial donations may be made to The American Cancer Society, 507
Westminster Avenue, Elizabeth, N.J. 07208.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2008


                              304 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           September 29, 2008 Monday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 336 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IS BEST HOPE TO TREAT SMA

BYLINE: Mark Roth

BODY:

   Spinal muscular atrophy has no known cure, but scientists around the world
are working on drug treatments and possible genetic therapy for the disorder.

   This particular form of muscular dystrophy is caused by the absence of normal
SMN1 genes -- the letters stand for "survival motor neuron" -- which are
critical for establishing adequate nerve connections between the spinal cord and
muscles.

   Patients are forced to rely instead on a sort of backup gene called SMN2,
which creates some neuromuscular connections, but far fewer than normal, and
that leads to the overall muscle weakness they suffer, according to Arthur
Burghes, a leading researcher at Ohio State University.

   Generally, the more copies of the SMN2 gene patients have, the better they
do, according to the advocacy group Families of Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

   The holy grail of SMA research would be to use stem cell therapy to grow new
muscle neurons in patients' bodies, Dr. Burghes said, but scientists are years
away from being able to do that.

   In the meantime, they are focusing on drugs that offer the hope of boosting
the amount of protein produced by the suboptimal SMN2 genes, he said.

   Stem cell therapy would involve taking stem cells, which can differentiate
into different types of cells in the body, and getting them to grow new muscle
neurons in patients.

   As with many other types of stem cell research, Dr. Burghes said, scientists
have been able to coax stem cells to change into muscle neurons in laboratory
cultures, but have not yet figured out how to get them to do that effectively in
humans.

   The best immediate hope may be to find a way to strengthen particular muscle
groups in SMA patients, even if their other muscles remain weak, he said.

   If researchers could figure out how to bolster chest and diaphragm muscles,
that could normalize patients' breathing and reduce the lung infections that are
their primary cause of death. Another goal would be to strengthen hand muscles
so that patients could regain some of their fine motor control.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2008


                              305 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           September 29, 2008 Monday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1673 words

HEADLINE: 'SYMPHONY OF MOTION' KEEPS BROTHERS ON THE MOVE

BYLINE: Mark Roth, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   When morning arrives in the DeYoung household in Murrysville, it sets off
what Joan DeYoung calls "a symphony of motion."

   As with any family, the DeYoungs must get out of bed, shower, dress, eat and
go to work or school.

   But in the case of Joan DeYoung's sons, Henry, 23, and Andrew, 21, all of
this takes much longer than normal because they both have a muscle-weakening
disorder known as spinal muscular atrophy, which makes it impossible for them to
stand, walk, feed themselves, type or do any of the million other quotidian
tasks most of us take for granted.

   Both are brilliant students at Carnegie Mellon University. Henry is starting
a doctoral program in computer science and was the school's top undergraduate in
computer science last spring. Andrew is a fourth-year student majoring in
chemistry.

   They spend many of their waking hours in front of computers, but just getting
them there takes the symphony that Mrs. DeYoung must orchestrate.

   The first challenge is to get each young man onto the wheeled therapy tables
that were custom-built by their father, David, an Alcoa research engineer. To do
that, she employs a Hoyer lift, a metal frame with a sling that she uses to
hoist her sons from their beds onto the tables, and later, from the tables into
their motorized wheelchairs.

   They then take the first of two daily treatments with a nebulizer, which
bathes their airways with a medicated mist that eases their breathing.

   The most dangerous aspect of spinal muscular atrophy is weakness of the chest
muscles and diaphragm, which makes it hard for those with the disorder to cough
and clear their lungs of infections.

   Both Henry and Andrew have spent time in the hospital with serious chest
infections. As Henry put it, "It's not so much that I have extra vulnerability,
but when I do get sick, it's harder to get rid of the cold."

   "Sometimes I've even been in the hospital for respiratory things," Andrew
said, "and I was pretty close to being called by the Lord." One time, only his
mother's intervention, pushing on his chest, kept him from choking to death.

   So the morning and nighttime breathing treatments are vital, Mrs. DeYoung
said.

   As an extra precaution, they also don electrically powered vibrating vests --
the same kind used by cystic fibrosis patients -- which help shake loose
secretions in the lungs so germs won't settle there.

   Another feature of SMA is spinal curvature, so the next step in the morning
routine is for Henry and Andrew to put on body braces beneath their clothes so
they can sit up in their wheelchairs.

   Even with the braces, though, they can only remain in a sitting position for
a limited time, Henry said. The brace, he said, "fits pretty good, but it
doesn't fit so good if I'm up for more than six hours."

   Even when they are sitting, they are never still. The motors on their chairs
frequently whine into action as they shift the position of the backrests to
avoid pressure sores.

   As a final aid to their lungs, they also wear BIPAP breathing tubes, which
snake over their heads to their nostrils and are held in place with straps. The
acronym stands for bi-level positive air pressure, which means pressurized air
flows into their noses when they inhale, but the pressure then decreases to make
it easier for them to exhale.

   For most of the brothers' lives, Joan and David DeYoung handled these daily
chores themselves. Once their sons reached high school, though, the family began
to rely more on volunteers from their congregation, Murrysville Community
Church, and on students and nurses.

   One of the volunteers is Irene Winkler, who has known the DeYoungs since
before the boys were born. Like many of the community aides, she is there
primarily to help them complete their demanding schoolwork, which poses
challenges of its own.

   Both Henry and Andrew can make limited use of a computer mouse, sometimes
calling up an on-screen keyboard to type papers that way. For the highly
technical scientific papers and homework each must do, though, it's easier to
dictate to volunteer typists.

   While using the on-screen keyboard is laborious, dictating is a lot of work,
too, Ms. Winkler said.

   "I typed a lot for Henry for his computer programming course," she said, "and
he has to say things like 'open brace, closed brace,' or 'open bracket, closed
bracket,' so when there's some English sentences, I love that. We may work for
four hours on the same problem and it's not necessarily finished by then."

   While both Andrew and Henry are full-time students at Carnegie Mellon, they
are not often on campus, partly because of their limited tolerance for staying
in the wheelchairs, and partly because of the risk of picking up germs.

   To accommodate them, the school videotapes most of their lectures and
webcasts them so the brothers can watch them at home on their computers. They
often attend the smaller discussion classes known as recitations, but the school
has been flexible in helping them schedule those visits.

   The arrangements have been a learning process for both Carnegie Mellon and
the family, David DeYoung said, but the tone was set early on by computer
science professor Mark Stehlik.

   When Dr. Stehlik was presented with the challenge of how Henry would be able
to go to school there, Dr. DeYoung said, "His response was: Yeah, so we've got a
kid who got these top grades in high school and has so many AP credits and he
wants to learn -- why not? Let's let him learn."

   When the chemistry department required Andrew to attend laboratory sessions,
it gave him a graduate student to do the physical work in the lab, but also made
sure that the student didn't do anything without getting instructions from
Andrew first.

   "Even when I had to use a burette" -- a glass measuring tube -- "I would have
to look at it and say, 'OK, how about adding two more drops,' " Andrew recalled.

   While they use a whole cadre of people to type their schoolwork, "I think
Carnegie Mellon knows there's no academic help coming from home, that's for
sure," said Mrs.DeYoung with a laugh.

   David DeYoung agreed. When Henry took an initial calculus class at Carnegie
Mellon, he asked his father, who is a metallurgical engineer, to help him with
some of the axioms.

   "This one problem, all weekend I thought about it," Dr. DeYoung said, "and
I'd have the problem on the dresser when I got up in the morning, and I think by
Monday I'd figured out the answer to that one problem, and I said to Henry,
'You're on your own from now on. I'm going to be of absolutely no help to you.'
"

   When the boys were first diagnosed with SMA, Dr. DeYoung said, " I remember
the neurologist said these kids with SMA tend to be brighter than average."

   But Arthur Burghes, a noted SMA researcher at Ohio State University, said
that notion came from older studies, and today, "I think most experts would say
it's debatable whether their intelligence in general is higher than the general
population."

   SMA patients do tend to be articulate and do well in school, though, he
added, partly because "if you cannot move around very quickly, you're likely to
concentrate a lot more on the books."

   Both brothers are interested in research careers, but when it comes to the
future, they are acutely aware of how little they control.

   "I guess it's mostly the same as for anyone else," Henry said. "You just have
to trust that God has a plan for you and try to live each day with what he gives
you that day."

   Thinking back to last year's Minneapolis bridge collapse, Andrew put it this
way:

   "I'd like to try to live how God wants me to live, and live for his glory and
not mine, because you don't know when the bridge is going to collapse under you
when you're driving to work.

   "I enjoy what I am studying, and I am so, so blessed to have extraordinary
and loving parents.

   "Many, many, many, many folks with SMA and other neuromuscular conditions do
not have the opportunity to go to college. Most probably live in group homes.

   "Henry and I are just so, so blessed to have the loving parents that we do."

   GENE THERAPY IS BEST HOPE TO TREAT SMA

   Spinal muscular atrophy has no known cure, but scientists around the world
are working on drug treatments and possible genetic therapy for the disorder.

   This particular form of muscular dystrophy is caused by the absence of normal
SMN1 genes -- the letters stand for "survival motor neuron" -- which are
critical for establishing adequate nerve connections between the spinal cord and
muscles.

   Patients are forced to rely instead on a sort of backup gene called SMN2,
which creates some neuromuscular connections, but far fewer than normal, and
that leads to the overall muscle weakness they suffer, according to Arthur
Burghes, a leading researcher at Ohio State University.

   Generally, the more copies of the SMN2 gene patients have, the better they
do, according to the advocacy group Families of Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

   The holy grail of SMA research would be to use stem cell therapy to grow new
muscle neurons in patients' bodies, Dr. Burghes said, but scientists are years
away from being able to do that.

   In the meantime, they are focusing on drugs that offer the hope of boosting
the amount of protein produced by the suboptimal SMN2 genes, he said.

   Stem cell therapy would involve taking stem cells, which can differentiate
into different types of cells in the body, and getting them to grow new muscle
neurons in patients.

   As with many other types of stem cell research, Dr. Burghes said, scientists
have been able to coax stem cells to change into muscle neurons in laboratory
cultures, but have not yet figured out how to get them to do that effectively in
humans.

   The best immediate hope may be to find a way to strengthen particular muscle
groups in SMA patients, even if their other muscles remain weak, he said.

   If researchers could figure out how to bolster chest and diaphragm muscles,
that could normalize patients' breathing and reduce the lung infections that are
their primary cause of death. Another goal would be to strengthen hand muscles
so that patients could regain some of their fine motor control.

   -- Mark Roth

NOTES: Mark Roth can be reached at mroth@post-gazette.com or 412-263-1130.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Andrew DeYoung, a Carnegie Mellon University student with spinal
muscular atrophy, watches a recording of his physical organic chemistry class at
his Murrysville home.
\ PHOTO: Michael Henninger/Post-Gazette: David DeYoung, right, jokes with his
son Henry at their dinner table. Mr. DeYoung has cut spaces into the table so
his two sons can get close to it in their wheelchairs.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2008


                              306 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           September 29, 2008 Monday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS INSIDER; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1199 words

HEADLINE: STILL TICKING;
Fifty years ago, doctors in Sweden resorted to a desperate measure to save a
severely ill patient: They implanted a pacemaker to pulse his heart.

BYLINE: JANET MOORE, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Take one hollowed-out tin of Kiwi shoe polish and stuff it with crude
circuitry and gum it all together with some medical-grade epoxy. Place this
"pacemaker" inside a desperately ill patient -- with the idea of using
electricity to pace his foundering heart. Then, when the first pacemaker shorts
out within three hours of the open-heart operation, repeat this procedure.

   A recipe for disaster? On the contrary.

   It's the story of Arne Larsson, a 43-year old Swedish man who was the
recipient of the world's first (and second) implantable pacemaker at Sweden's
Karolinska Hospital in October 1958.

   Minnesota is well known as a medical-device haven after Medtronic co-founder
Earl Bakken invented the first battery-powered pacemaker in 1957. But St. Jude
Medical Inc. has a stake in the evolution of the device as well.

   Through Oct. 26, Little Canada-based St. Jude will celebrate the 50th
anniversary of the implantable pacemaker with a historical exhibit at the
American Swedish Institute in Minneapolis.

   Elema Schonander, the Swedish company that developed the implantable
pacemaker, was ultimately absorbed by St. Jude, which maintains large
manufacturing and development operations at its European base in Jarfalla,
Sweden.

   With $1 billion in annual pacemaker revenue, St. Jude is now the world's No.
2 maker of pacemakers behind market-leader Medtronic of Fridley.

   As medical devices go, pacemakers seem to attract little notice from the
investment community, even though the worldwide market for the device is more
than $4 billion, and the device's growth in recent years has been steady, if
unspectacular.

   Most Wall Street analysts seem obsessed with the device's technologically
sexier cousin, the implantable cardioverter defibrillator, which treats a
different heart condition called tachycardia and sells for three times the price
of a pacemaker.

   These days, pacemakers are a far cry from that Kiwi shoe-polish tin. They're
as small as a quarter and can last a decade inside a patient. They provide
electrical stimulation only when needed, and send diagnostic information over
the Internet to the patient's doctor. The original implantable pacemaker had
just two transistors; today's models can have as many as 20 million in each
device.

   In the decades following the first procedure in 1958, no one would understand
the technological continuum more intimately than Larsson, who was implanted with
22 pacemakers over his lifetime until his death in 2001. Remarkably, Larsson did
not die of heart disease but of cancer -- and he outlived the inventor of the
device and his implanting physician.

   The Star Tribune recently spoke with Dr. Paul Levine, St. Jude's vice
president of medical services, about the history -- and the future -- of the
pacemaker. Here is a condensed version of the interview:

   Q In the modern history of medical devices, how would you rank the invention
of the pacemaker?

   A It's major because it has increased the longevity and the quality of life
in literally millions and millions of patients. It's interesting, when you go
back over the medical literature from the early 1960s that talk about this new
technology -- pacemakers -- it says there may be a role for it, but it would be
very limited ... major centers would implant maybe a half-dozen a year. Now
(pacemaker surgery is done) in virtually every hospital in this country and in
most hospitals around the world.

   Q Was the pacemaker controversial back in 1958?

   A Oh, yes. Putting a metallic, foreign object into the body to artificially
stimulate the heart went up against the will of God, according to some members
of the clergy, who were preaching this from the pulpit. And there were newspaper
columnists in Sweden at the time who said the procedure should not be done (for
the same reason).

   Q What's the real story behind the shoe polish tin story?

   A Arne Larsson suffered from heart block, and was in the hospital for two
months, fainting up to 30 times a day. His wife, Else-Marie, heard about a
temporary pacemaker that was being developed and pleaded with Dr. (ake) Senning,
"Can't you do something to help my husband?" He and Dr. (Rune) Elmqvist said a
temporary pacemaker wouldn't work: It's temporary, putting wires through the
skin to the inside of the heart would lead to infection, and there would be all
sorts of problems.

   Q So that called for an implantable device?

   A But they knew they couldn't put the whole device into the patient; with all
the circuits exposed, it would short out. ... So they cleaned out a Kiwi shoe
polish tin, put the various circuitry in it, backfilled it with a medical-grade
epoxy and the wires were hard-wired into it. They opened the chest and sewed the
wires onto the surface of the heart and they put the pulse generator in the
upper area of the abdomen.

   They put it in and everything was fine. Three hours later, when (Larsson) had
a spell, guess what wasn't working? The pacemaker. Dr. Elmqvist had made two
pacemakers. So in a single 24-hour period, Arnie Larsson not only got the
world's first fully implanted pacemaker, he got the world's second fully
implanted pacemaker.

   Q Could the shoe polish tin story happen today? It seems so crude.

   A The bottom line is, physicians are doing this kind of innovation all of the
time, even if it's not FDA-approved. If you've done everything you know how to
do, and the patient is still not responding, that's when individual physicians
often try desperate maneuvers.

   Like the use of pacemakers to treat heart failure. From a physiology
standpoint, this makes absolutely no sense. Then a doctor in Austria published a
paper back in 1990 reporting on 16 patients who had severe end-stage heart
failure. Their option was to get a heart transplant or die. Not knowing what
else to do, she put dual-chamber pacemakers in these 16 patients. Within three
weeks, everyone was out of the hospital. There was still a high mortality rate
over time, but four of them were still alive five years later.

   Q What sort of future advances can we expect from the pacemaker?

   A The same technology can be applicable to any tissue in the body that is
capable of being electrically stimulated. That includes the brain, using
neurostimulation to treat pain, tremor, spasticity, paraplegia to restore action
to the muscles so people can walk again. We could stimulate the stomach when
someone starts to eat so they may feel like they're full, so they stop eating,
treating obesity. It's almost unlimited.

   Q With stem cell and gene therapies being developed to treat heart disease,
do you see the pacemaker fading away ultimately?

   A It won't go away entirely. But yes, a lot of the conditions we treat with a
pacemaker today ... we may treat with stem cells, with genetic engineering. We
may be able to regrow specific parts of the heart so that in the future we may
not have to implant a device.

   Janet Moore - 612-673-7752

   PACEMAKER EXHIBIT

   Where: the American Swedish Institute,

   2600 Park Av. S., Minneapolis;

   612-871-4907

   (www.american swedishinst.org)

   When: Today through Oct. 26

   What: Exhibit celebrating the 50th anniversary of the world's first
implantable pacemaker, with video footage of the first implant, hands-on
displays of medical devices and a history of pacing

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2008


                              307 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                           September 29, 2008 Monday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS INSIDER; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 1188 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells: Time to make good on promises;
It's no longer enough to tout the anticipated treatments and even cures;
real marketable products and profits need to be seen.

BYLINE: THOMAS LEE, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   MADISON, WIS. - If a mathematical equation could demonstrate the commercial
vitality of stem cells, it would probably look something like this:
Hype/Reality=Anxiety.

   For all of the ooohs and ahhhs on display at last week's World Stem Cell
Summit, there was also a prevailing sense among some investors and industry
officials that all of this great technology must soon put up -- or shut up.

   "We have to hit milestones with the public in order to sustain our momentum,"
said Linda Powers, co-founder and managing director of Toucan Capital in
Bethesda, Md., a venture capital firm that invests in stem-cell start-ups. "This
is a relatively young discipline, but there is a (large) amount of hype and
expectations. When will the public's expectations expire?"

   Despite tantalizing chatter about treatments and even cures of diseases such
as Parkinson's, cancer and heart failure, the prospect of a stem-cell company
actually selling real products and making real profits has never seemed so
distant. Amid high development costs, lengthy approval times and skeptical
investors, a sobering reality emerges.

   Commercialization is "excruciatingly slow," said Michael Haider, CEO of BioE
Inc., a St. Paul company that extracts stem cells from blood in human umbilical
cords. "I'm not aware of a successful stem-cell company. If you thought gene
therapy was difficult, then (stem cells) are astronomically difficult."

   Cutting-edge technology, of course, takes time to develop. Stem cells'
enormous potential, however, is well worth the wait, some investors say.
Drug-coated stents and implantable cardioverter defibrillators once seemed like
the stuff of medical science fiction but today are multibillion-dollar
businesses.

   In Minnesota, research institutions such as the University of Minnesota and
Mayo Clinic are developing stem cells that can repair damaged heart tissue and
thus prevent total heart failure. Major medical device makers such as Medtronic
are developing ways to best deliver the stem cells into the body.

   Stem cells carry their own unique possibilities -- and baggage. The cells
form the basis of regenerative medicine, an emerging field in which science can
help the body heal itself.

   A blank slate of sorts, stem cells can continuously replenish themselves and,
under the right conditions, grow into specialized cells that instruct the heart
to beat or the pancreas to produce insulin. Scientists, for instance, are
coaxing stem cells to grow into dopamine-producing neurons, a key strategy in
treating neurological disorders such as Parkinson's.

   Controversy a distraction

   Stem cells can be harvested from adults and embryos, and the latter case has
attracted enormous controversy. Those who view embryos as human life object to
the destruction of the embryos to cull stem cells. In 2001, President Bush
issued guidelines that limited federal funding to embryonic stem cell lines
already in existence.

   For stem-cell advocates, the controversy has become a distraction because
some people, including those in the industry, continue to lump together adult
and embryonic stem cells.

   "The biggest disappointment from the summit is that stem cells automatically
equals embryonic stem cells," Haider said. "This makes it more difficult for the
rest of the industry. Stem cell has become a word like Kleenex, a brand name for
everything. We spend great deals of time educating people, getting their heads
to turn back."

   Dale Wahlstrom, a former Medtronic executive who now leads the BioBusiness
Alliance of Minnesota, said major companies such as Medtronic are working on
stem-cell research but prefer to keep the work quiet because of political
sensitivities.

   Beyond the controversy, stem cells face significant technical challenges,
experts say. Companies still need to manufacture stem cells in large quantities
and maintain consistency and quality. Haider of BioE also says it's unclear
whether a patient's body will accept stem cells harvested from another person.

   Stem-cell advocates also blame overcautious regulators for unnecessarily
delaying the technology.

   "People on Capitol Hill are obsessed with ... safety," said Michael Werner,
president of the Werner Group, a Washington, D.C.-based consulting and lobbying
firm. "There is a real sense of risk aversion. Patients have been waiting for
this work to be commercialized. We don't need additional hurdles."

   There are unknowns, risks

   Said Powers of Toucan Capital: "There is a race to meet public expectations.
The expectation times get smaller but the development time gets longer.
Something's wrong here. We have lost sight of the (fact) that when something is
new, there are unknowns, there are risks."

   So far, wary investors have been reluctant to place large bets on stem-cell
technology, especially during today's tough economic climate. From 1995 to 2007,
venture capital firms have invested $1.1 billion in companies performing
stem-cell work, an annual average of $85 million (modest by VC standards),
according to the MoneyTree Report by PricewaterhouseCoopers and the National
Venture Capital Association based on data from Thomson Financial.

   "Doctors are conservative," said Jonathan Gertler, head of biopharma
investment banking at Leerink Swann & Co. in Boston. "Most investments are based
on obvious incremental improvements. Cell therapy suffers from the lack of
confidence in the investor community. Venture capitalists are under huge
pressure to return capital to their investors."

   Despite the roadblocks, some investors say the breakthrough treatments
offered by stem-cell science are just too good to pass up. The University of
Minnesota, led by Dr. Doris Taylor, is using stem-cell technology to grow
replacement organs such as hearts, kidneys and livers. The Minneapolis Heart
Institute is conducting a clinical trial to test whether stem cells can repair
diseased heart tissue. The technology, developed by Angioblast Systems Inc. and
Abbott Labs, aims to prevent total heart failure.

   "We are looking for innovative technologies, the next thing," said Michael
Ott, managing partner of Minneapolis-based Somerset Asset Management, which is
looking to invest in the stem-cell industry. "People make money as investors
seeing something ahead of everyone else. If we wait for complete certainty, then
the opportunity might not be as good. It could be a terrific win or we could go
to zero."

   Thomas Lee - 612-673-7744

   TOWARD THE GOAL LINE

   Getting stem-cell products to market has been agonizingly slow, but some
companies are getting close.

   OSIRIS THERAPEUTICS INC.

   Headquarters: Columbia, Md.

   Business: The company is conducting a Phase III clinical trial of a stem-cell
therapy used to treat graft vs. host disease, in which the immune cells from a
transplanted bone marrow attack the cells of the recipient.

   ATHERSYS INC.

   Headquarters: Cleveland

   Business: The start-up is developing stem-cell therapies to treat
cardiovascular and neurological diseases and cancer.

   ALDAGEN INC.

   Headquarters: Durham, N.C.

   Business: The company just started a Phase III clinical trial of a stem-cell
treatment to improve umbilical cord blood transplants for kids with inherited
metabolic diseases.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2008


                              308 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           September 29, 2008 Monday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. D02

DISTRIBUTION: Every Zone

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: With Finance Gig, Mott Comes Full Circle

BODY:

   David M. Mott, former chief executive of MedImmune, is pushing Washington to
become one of the nation's top biotechnology hubs.

   Mott began his career in finance, as a Wall Street investment banker. Now,
after 16 years at MedImmune, the darling of the local biotech scene, he's come
full circle. This month he started his new job as a general partner at New
Enterprise Associates, a Chevy Chase venture capital firm, financing and growing
biotech and specialty pharmaceutical start-ups.

   "I want to help give birth to the next generation of MedImmunes," he said.

   For years, the region has eyed the life cycle  of the biotech powerhouses in
California and Massachusetts: An entrepreneur launches a start-up. Its success
catches the eye of big pharma, which buys out the biotech. Then, that executive
--  with pockets full of cash -- is thrown back into the marketplace to craft a
new company, igniting the cycle once again.

   But that hasn't been the story in Maryland. Companies clustered around
Interstate 270, known as DNA Alley, have introduced few commercial drugs into
the market.

   Then last year, Maryland biotech hit a growth spurt, following  a string of
big pharmaceutical deals that swept Montgomery County. British drug giant
AstraZeneca's $15.6 billion acquisition of MedImmune, one of the biggest in
recent history, secured Maryland a place on the biotech map and launched some
executives into second careers.

   Mott, who grew up on a farm outside Hagerstown and played football and
lacrosse at  St. James School, said he knows the region's complaints and
obstacles all too well.

   "I kept hearing various governors over time and county executives reason that
Maryland wasn't succeeding in biotech because there weren't enough venture
capital dollars," he said. But Mott says that's not true: "What we need to do is
build great management teams to start companies. The money will find it."

   Peter J. Barris, a managing general partner at New Enterprise, agreed.

   "Instead of spending a lot of time on airplanes, we would much rather invest
locally," he said.

   After the MedImmune sale, Mott became a member of AstraZeneca's new executive
team, spending a lot of time flying between London and Washington. He was
spending more time on  general management duties and less on strategizing and
development.

   "Being part of a large multinational corporation isn't as emotionally
rewarding or engaging," he said. "I needed to get back to my roots -- being
creative, entrepreneurial, helping people."

   So earlier this summer, Mott announced he would be leaving MedImmune at the
end of July.

   In June, he called on longtime friend James Barrett, a general partner at New
Enterprise who had served on MedImmune's board. Barrett's start-up, Genetic
Therapy, which was backed by New Enterprise, was also one of Mott's clients
while he was  working at Smith Barney's health-care investment banking group in
New York.

   Over coffee, Mott and Barrett talked about taking an executive role at a big
pharmaceutical company. They kicked around the idea of launching another
biotech.

   "Dave's range of alternatives was like drinking from a fire hose," Barrett
said.

   They also talked about New Enterprise.

   "When I see a guy I've known for 20 years happier and more engaged than I've
seen a long time, I tried to figure out what he did," Mott said.

   Mott had already showed signs that he wanted to re-enter  the financing
world. In 2002, he established MedImmune Ventures, a $100 million corporate
venture fund that invested in start-ups working in areas of interest to
MedImmune, such as infectious diseases, cancer and inflammatory diseases.

   "It whet my appetite," he said.

   But moving into venture capital might take some adjustment, said Barrett, who
ran three start-ups prior to joining New Enterprise.

   "You lack day-to-day control," he said. "That frustrates us, but we have to
behave ourselves and let the CEO run the company."

   -- Kendra Marr

GRAPHIC: IMAGE; David Mott, chief executive of New Enterprise Associates

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2008


                              309 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                           September 26, 2008 Friday
                                Regional Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A17

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Report Advance in Stem Cell Alternative

BYLINE: Rob Stein; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists reported yesterday that they have overcome a major obstacle to
using a promising alternative to embryonic stem cells, bolstering prospects for
bypassing the political and ethical tempest that has embroiled hopes for a new
generation of medical treatments.

   The researchers said they found a safe way to coax adult cells to regress
into an embryonic state, alleviating what had been the most worrisome
uncertainty about developing the cells into potential cures.

   "We have removed a major roadblock for translating this into a clinical
setting," said Konrad Hochedlinger, a Harvard University stem cell researcher
whose research was published online yesterday by the journal Science. "I think
it's an important advance."

   The development is the latest in the rapidly advancing and politically
charged field of stem cell research.

   "This is a huge step forward -- it could be the breakthrough we've been
looking for," said Robert Lanza, a stem cell researcher at Advanced Cell
Technology in Worcester, Mass.

   Embryonic stem cells are believed capable of becoming any type of cell in the
body. Researchers hope to eventually  use them to create replacement tissue and
body parts tailored to individual patients. But the work has run into moral
objections because the cells were originally obtained by destroying early-stage
embryos. As a result, President Bush has restricted federal funding for such
work.

   Scientists last year shook up the scientific and political landscape by
discovering how to manipulate the genes of adult cells to convert them into the
equivalent of embryonic cells -- entities dubbed "induced pluripotent stem
cells," or iPS cells -- which could then be transformed into any type of cell in
the body. Subsequent work has found that the cells can alleviate symptoms of
Parkinson's disease and sickle cell anemia in mice.

   But the first iPS cells were created by ferrying four genes into the DNA of
adult cells using retroviruses, which can cause cancer in animals. There was
also concern because the viruses integrated their genes into the cells' DNA. In
the new work, Hochedlinger and his colleagues used a different type of virus,
known as an adenovirus, to carry the same four transformative genes into the DNA
of mouse skin and liver cells. The adenovirus does not integrate its genes into
a cell's DNA and therefore is believed to be harmless.

   "The adenovirus will infect the cells but then will clear themselves from the
cells. After a few cell divisions there are no traces of the virus in the cell,"
Hochedlinger said. "You can't tell the virus was ever there."

   As with iPS cells produced using retroviruses, tests showed that the new
cells were indistinguishable from embryonic stem cells and could be transformed
into any type of tissue, including lung, brain, heart and muscle; unlike the
retrovirus-engineered cells, they do not produce cancerous tumors.

   "What our experiment shows is you can do this without an integrating virus.
You do not need integration of the DNA into the genome to produce iPS cells,"
Hochedlinger said.

   Rudolf Jaenisch, a professor of biology at the Whitehead Institute in
Cambridge, Mass., praised the work but noted that the process is 100 times less
efficient than using retroviruses.

   Hochedlinger said his team is working to streamline the conversion, perhaps
by supplementing the introduced genes with chemicals that flip biological
switches. Many researchers suspect they will eventually find ways to transform
cells much more cleanly without transferring genes at all.

   Although additional work will be necessary to prove that the new approach
will work with human cells, Hochedlinger said he is confident it will.

   "There's no reason to believe it would not work," he said.

   Lanza said the advance should unleash a flurry of work on iPS cells.

   "Although the advent of iPS cells has been exciting, it has been extremely
frustrating not being able to use these cells clinically to help people.
Clinical translation has been dead in its tracks," he said. "The use of iPS
cells to treat or even cure human disease may not be far away."

   Critics of embryonic stem cell research said the work offered yet more
evidence that research on embryonic cells is unnecessary. Last month, another
Harvard team announced that it had converted adult cells directly into another
type of adult cell, possibly offering another less contentious alternative.

   "This is the latest in a line of studies showing that the practical problems
associated with using 'reprogrammed' adult cells are rapidly being solved,"
Richard Doerflinger of the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops said in an
e-mail.

   But Hochedlinger and others said it is important to continue to work on
embryonic stem cells as well as adult stem cells and reprogrammed adult cells,
because it remains far from clear which will eventually prove most effective.

   "We just don't know yet which ones will be useful for which types of
treatment," said Mark A. Kay, a gene therapy researcher at Stanford University.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2008


                              310 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           September 15, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: YOUR CHEATING HEART MAY BE GENETIC

BYLINE: SUSAN REIMER, susan.reimer@baltsun.com

BODY:

   It looks like there might be a genetic mutation in men that makes it easier
for them to cheat, and if it is true, the nature of marriage, not to mention
country music, could be changed forever.

   The hormone vasopressin, known in rarefied scientific circles as "the cuddle
chemical," is released in men under the direction of a particular gene.

   Swedish researchers found that men who have extra copies of that gene
actually produce less of the hormone, and those men are less likely to marry.

   They also appear to struggle with monogamy when they are in relationships.

   Meanwhile, the women in their lives report feeling less secure and less
loved.

   I am not making this up.

   The research from Stockholm's Karolinska Institute appeared in Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, which may be experiencing an up-tick in the
demand for subscriptions about now.

   Apparently, the reluctance of some men to marry and remain faithful is much
more complicated than "Why buy the cow when the milk is free?"

   It is genetic, like male pattern baldness or brown eyes. They, like, can't
help it.

   "Just what we need," women everywhere muttered under their breath. A genetic
predisposition to be a lying snake. Women immediately christened this gene "the
rat gene" or "the cheating gene," and became active in the cause of stem cell
research.

   The mothers of teenage girls are advocating for cheek swabbing and DNA
testing before boys are permitted to enter high school in the prom-date
equivalent of "Have they had all their shots?"

   They are also demanding money for research into gene therapy. They want to
know, "Can these guys be fixed?"

   Women voters, too, are asking for genetic testing for political candidates,
wondering if we might not be saved the despair of giving our hearts to a
handsome populist only to find out that he was cheating on his cancer-stricken
wife. (Some female political activists have begun to call it "the John Edwards
gene.")

   This is all great fun and a lark if we are talking about that incredibly rich
father of four, Balthazar Getty, being snapped with a half-naked Sienna Miller
on his boat.

   But it is something else again when your child's best friend's father blows
up the family by announcing that he has found his soul mate in a woman 25 years
younger than his wife.

   Women are looking longingly at nature for some comfort only to learn that
swans and osprey are not nearly as monogamous as scientists once thought.

   They are just better at hiding their cheating than Eliot Spitzer.

   Instead, many animals "pair bond" and practice a kind of social monogamy
wherein Dad agrees to hang around and help support and raise the kids, and Mom
puts up with his philandering as part of the bargain. Not an unheard-of
arrangement among humans, either.

   Fidelity would not matter so much to researchers and to women if it were
measured by, say, feet and inches instead of by the emotional land mine that is
sex.

   All of this came up in my own life recently when my son declared that the
fact that my husband and I had been together for 25 years, and his fiancee's
parents had been together for longer than that, meant good things for the two of
them.

   "What are you thinking?" I asked, exasperated. "Marriage is a lot of hard
work. It isn't genetic, for heaven's sake. It's not like you can inherit it from
your parents."

   Now, of course, it appears that you can.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. Actor Balthazar Getty was recently photographed kissing a woman on his boat.
2. Former presidential candidate John Edwards has admitted to having an affair.
 1. Photo: Associated Press 2. Photo: Getty Images

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2008


                              311 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            September 7, 2008 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: IDEAS; Pg. K10

LENGTH: 1089 words

HEADLINE: A talk with James Hughes Physicists, zombies, rogue nanobots, and
other long-odds threats to life as we know it.

BYLINE: By Peter Bebergal

BODY:

   Q&A

   ON WEDNESDAY, HUNDREDS of feet below ground in Europe, a proverbial switch
will be pulled on the Large Hadron Collider, a new multibillion dollar machine
designed to smash subatomic particles together at immense speeds. The device
could help physicists rewrite the rules of the universe. It could also, just
possibly, do something else: create a tiny black hole that would result in the
end of all life as we know it.

   Most scientists are confident that the danger is vanishingly small, and a
number of research papers have concluded the experiment is safe. But are the
potential gains to science really worth even a tiny risk of eradicating the
earth? This question, writ large, is the province of a group of scholars who
study potential global catastrophe. At the center of their work lies an almost
unanswerable question: How should we deal with very unlikely threats that also
carry the potential to extinguish human civilization?

   This past July, specialists convened in Oxford, England, for the first Global
Catastrophic Risks Conference. The group included philosophers, physicists, and
sociologists; aside from the huge particle accelerator, they looked at the
threat of massive asteroid collisions, gamma ray bursts from supernovas that
could sterilize the planet, man-made nanobots that could replicate and consume
the earth's surface, and out-of-control artificial intelligence.

   James Hughes, a lecturer in public policy at Trinity College and the
executive director of the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies, spoke
at the conference on how apocalyptic fears (and hopes) inhibit clear thinking
about catastrophic risks. A sociologist by training, Hughes is optimistic that
humanity will be sufficiently technologically savvy by the time it faces some of
the more awful possible predicaments. But he also suggests that we do need to
start focusing on some long-term threats.

   Ideas spoke with Hughes by phone at his home in Willington, Conn.

   IDEAS: What are some of the man-made risks we should be concerned about?

   HUGHES: Well, there are the traditional 20th-century man-made risks that most
people think about, the weapons of mass destruction risks: nuclear weapons,
bioterrorism. Chemical weapons are not really part of the picture. But
bioterrorism could theoretically create some kind of agents that could wipe out
most of humanity.

   IDEAS: Is there a way to keep new and dangerous technologies at bay?

   HUGHES: I think one of the reasons why people are extremely pessimistic about
this is that we don't have a global regime that would make it possible to ban
technologies on a global level yet. Some people see the risk of the creation of
such a regime as such a risk in of itself.

   IDEAS: Who needs to be thinking about this kind of threat - the researchers
at the conference, or the scientists creating the technology?

   HUGHES: In this case we were saying, "Well, this is really philosophical
about how we assess risk, and once we figure all that out, we'll advise the
government." In fact, we had a one day seminar for the British version of
Homeland Security. . . . They think about a whole different category of risk -
the things that are in a five-year time horizon like floods. Asteroids and all
these other things weren't ever on their table, so we were kind of talking past
each other. But it was the right conversation to have.

   IDEAS: With asteroid collisions, is there enough risk that we should be
investing huge amounts of money into making sure we're safe?

   HUGHES: Well, I think there's a general consensus among catastrophic-risk
people that . . . it deserves at least as much money as we put into other
science and military endeavors.

   IDEAS: Do you feel a little heart-heavy when you realize that we're barely
prepared to help a major American city survive a hurricane?

   HUGHES: Yes, I'm heart-heavy. . . . At every single level you have these
huge, seemingly insurmountable obstacles. The public and policy makers seem to
jump from risk to risk without any serious considerations. The risk of an
American dying of a terrorist attack is smaller than the risk of being hit by
lightning. So why did we spend almost a trillion dollars over the last eight
years on the war on terror, and not people getting hit by lightning?

   IDEAS: What about the Hadron Collider? How do you decide ultimately to turn
the thing on?

   HUGHES: I think there is some threshold of risk at which you have to say,
"OK, even though it's a really small risk, if it's the end of everything, then
you shouldn't do that." The argument that I found convincing was that the nature
of the risks of the Hadron Collider creating a catastrophe was on the same level
at which you're driving down the road and having your car spontaneously turn
into a horse through simple quantum fluctuation.

   IDEAS: Should scientists be held accountable, or should they be allowed to do
their work unfettered?

   HUGHES: I think we all have an obligation as individuals to try to assess the
future consequences of our actions. . . . But, that said, scientists are neither
prepared to assess the consequences of their actions or the ethical nature of
their actions. And like all people in all occupations in all walks of life, they
have vested interest.

   IDEAS: In terms of man-made technology, can we evolve faster than our ability
to destroy ourselves?

   HUGHES: I think Einstein may have even said it - we weren't wise enough for
how fast our technology is evolving. With the nuclear weapons and bioterrorism,
we have a pretty good idea of how to assess these risks. We've known what to do
for 50 years, and we haven't really done it - which is to create strong
transnational institutions that monitor everybody who's doing nukes.

   IDEAS: And yet we're continuing to work on technologies that could lead to
threats in the future.

   HUGHES: We're not going to give up Google because of the hypothetical
possibility that everything that's connected to Google will suddenly wake up and
take over the Net. Google is just too useful to us.

   IDEAS: So ultimately should short-term progress trump longer-term risk?

   HUGHES: If you saw . . . the Will Smith movie ["I Am Legend"] . . . what
creates this global zombie apocalypse is the mutant version of a cancer drug. .
. . I can't say there's no possibility that gene therapy for cancer, or stem
cell research for cancer, might lead to a zombie apocalypse, but it's extremely
unlikely. So at some point you have to say, "What is the real risk?"

   Peter Bebergal is a frequent contributor to the Globe. He has a blog at
mysterytheater.blogspot.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008


                              312 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           September 6, 2008 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A38

LENGTH: 253 words

HEADLINE: Keep it in your genes

BODY:

   For centuries, the romantics among us have searched for the secret of a happy
marriage. They've looked in the bedroom, in the kitchen and everywhere in
between.

   Now researchers at Sweden's Karolinksa Institute have found what may be the
answer. It lies, apparently, not in the jeans but in the genes.

   Men with a particular "allele," or gene variant, are significantly likelier
to have had serious marital problems. In a study of about 1,000 heterosexual
couples, about 40 percent of men had at least one copy of the variant gene; some
had two.

   Those with two copies were even more likely to have problems with the
concepts of fidelity and monogamy - and to be living with a partner without
marrying her.

   Women married to men with the gene variant reported lower levels of cohesion,
consensus and satisfaction in the relationship.

   The gene in questions controls receptors for a hormone called vasopressin.
Its discovery raises important scientific and even ethical questions. Among
them: Should women test their sweeties to see if they have the right stuff for
marriage?

   Sure, it sounds harmless. But before long, there would be experimental gene
therapy aimed at curing vasopressin receptor deficit. Beer sales would plummet,
football would disappear from television and scores of National Enquirer
reporters suddenly would be unemployed.

   It may be time to re-write that old Hank Williams tune:

   Your cheatin' genes will make you weep

   You'll cry and cry and try to sleep.

   Your baby left, she's gone away.

   The problem's in your DNA.

NOTES:  Our View  |  Short Take OPINION

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2008


                              313 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           September 2, 2008 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 950 words

HEADLINE: Spreading out in the suburbs Companies are leaving Boston for
developing space

BYLINE: Casey Ross Globe Staff

BODY:

   Massachusetts companies large and small are rapidly expanding their
operations in communities outside of Boston, eschewing the cachet of city
headquarters for the comfort and convenience of gleaming new office parks.

   The demand for space is fueling an explosion of commercial growth along the
Massachusetts Turnpike and Route 128, where nearly 30 office complexes are in
development. In Waltham alone, seven new office projects are being built,
including a 1.2 million-square-foot development at the former Polaroid Corp.

   In the latest move, Boston developer Dean Stratouly has purchased three
parcels along the Mass. Pike in Framingham, launching plans for a
350,000-square-foot office development in the shadows of Bose Corp., Genzyme
Corp., and nearby TJX Cos.

   "It's a signature site, a real billboard opportunity," Stratouly said. "A
number of corporations have anchored themselves in that corridor, and success
breeds success."

   Developers, like Stratouly, welcome the suburban migration as soaring
construction costs and a tight credit market continue to constrain new building
in Boston. The suburbs allow for faster permitting, greater design leeway, and
rents high enough to turn a substantial profit.

   The pockets of expansion in the suburbs have gradually shifted the epicenter
of the state's commercial office market, with companies such as National Grid,
International Business Machines Corp., and The MathWorks Inc. pursuing new space
or consolidating operations outside Boston. Several smaller start-ups, such as
Phase Forward Inc., a data management firm, and medical device maker Astra Tech
Inc., are also leasing new space along Route 128.

   That has caused the suburbs to steadily close the gap with Boston in terms of
overall office space. Boston now has 3.8 million square feet more office space
than communities along Route 128; in 2000, the gap was 10.4 million square feet,
according to the real estate firm Cushman & Wakefield.

   "Boston was the epicenter, but with all of the mergers, and the lack of new
construction downtown, we're certainly seeing some of the financial firms and
traditional downtown users looking to the suburbs," said J.R. McDonald, a senior
director with Cushman & Wakefield.

   Much of the suburban activity has involved consolidations by large firms. IBM
is moving most of its Massachusetts operations and about 3,400 employees into
new offices in Littleton and Westford - a move to create a massive software
campus that would be difficult to build in the city. National Grid wants to
consolidate several offices in a complex proposed along Route 128.

   Another national firm, Adobe Systems Inc., is looking to update and expand
its office space, moving from Newton to Overlook Center, an eco-friendly
building under construction in Waltham. The facility will include a cafe, a
fitness center, 360 covered parking spaces, and a courtyard.

   Real estate professionals say those amenities are a significant draw to
executives who once thought of the suburbs as a business backwater. In
communities like Waltham and Burlington, new office campuses can incorporate
walking and bike trails, as well as convenient parking and close proximity to an
array of retail shops.

   "It's not just about the building anymore, it's about creating an environment
that will be attractive to the labor pool," said Tamie Thompson, a managing
director for the real estate firm Jones Lang LaSalle. She said companies are
looking for proximity to high-end entertainment venues and restaurants, such as
the Capital Grille steakhouse that opened last year in Burlington. "There's been
a huge evolution in that regard," she said.

   In addition to moves by national firms, a number of locally based companies
with growing operations have chosen to move to the suburbs. Since 2001, more
than two dozen biotech companies have moved from Boston and Cambridge to
Lexington and Waltham; 19 of them left Cambridge, according to Cushman &
Wakefield.

   In Burlington, developer Patriot Partners LLC is trying to capitalize on the
trend by building a 2 million-square-foot life sciences campus. Laboratory space
along Route 128 is roughly half the cost of equivalent space in Cambridge,
making it attractive to growing firms looking to snap large chunks of space.

   In March, Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc. disclosed plans to move its
corporate headquarters to a Patriot Partners development in Lexington, leaving
Cambridge and its rich labor pool to consolidate operations in an office park
with plenty of space to grow.

   "Basically, we had no more space to put people in Cambridge," said Jessica
Cotrone, communications director for Shire's business unit. "Lexington is
beautiful, and convenience-wise it helps our business operations. It's a space
where we can build and have everyone at one central campus."

   Real estate professionals say they expect the growth in the suburbs to
continue as long as economics make it more difficult to build in the city.
Construction of office space in Boston has remained extremely slow, with little
new supply hitting the market in recent months.

   The lack of new space has kept rents at high levels, providing even further
incentive for firms to consider space in the suburbs. That dynamic could ease
slightly with the opening of new offices at Russia Wharf and Two Financial
Center in Boston, but developers are struggling to raise financing for any new
construction downtown.

   "The debt crisis has really put the brakes on," said Alexander Dauira, an
executive vice president for Jones Lang LaSalle. "Nothing is being built without
a tenant, and developers know the amenities, location, and environmental
sustainability have to be spot on."

   Casey Ross can be reached at cross@globe.com

GRAPHIC: The six-story structure at 5 Wall St. in Burlington will have 181,700
square feet of space. Construction at 5 Wall St. in Burlington. Lab space along
Route 128 is roughly half the cost of equivalent space in Cambridge.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2008


                              314 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Living - How We Live; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 1023 words

HEADLINE: PULSE behind the news

BYLINE: Paige Parker, Andy Dworkin, Joe Rojas-Burke, The Oregonian

BODY:

   Shake, shake, shake

   for a slimmer waist? Could be

   In a study that gives women reason to hope that time spent in a massaging
pedicure chair might whittle the waistline, Oregon State University researchers
report whole-body vibration can slow weight gain --at least in rats.

   Researchers from the university's department of nutrition and exercise
science placed 7-month-old rats on a vibration platform and let the little
fellers shake for 30 minutes a day, five days a week.

   After 12 weeks, the vibrated rats weighed less, showed no changes in lean
muscle mass and had a lower overall percentage of body fat than the rats that
hadn't been vibrated. Inexplicably, they also developed a preference for
martinis shaken, not stirred.

   OK, not really.

   Here's the actual buzz: The results, like those of other recent studies,
point to whole-body vibration as a promising weight management tool, something
with an energy burn akin to walking at a moderate intensity. Researchers
elsewhere have shown whole-body vibration regimes also affect bone formation and
muscle strength.

   The entire study can be found in the latest issue of the International
Journal of Obesity.

   -- Paige Parker

   Your tummy really

   may not 'hear' all that fat food

   If you had a bunch of ear infections as a kid, you might be more likely to
gorge on fatty foods until you're obese, scientists reported at the American
Chemical Society's national meeting.

   The ear-belly connection might sound bizarre. But a nerve that runs through
the middle ear helps the body process taste sensations, according to
psychologist Linda Bartoshuk at the University of Florida's Center for Smell and
Taste.

   Her research team studied 245 adults who had moderate-to-severe ear
infections as children, comparing them to 1,055 peers without that history. The
earache crowd reported a much greater love of fatty foods and was twice as
likely to be obese as the comparison group.

   The scientists said more research is needed to confirm the connection and
answer questions such as how many infections it takes to affect food taste.

   -- Andy Dworkin

   More moles may face

   a sniff test for one skin cancer

   Dermatologists might soon have to face a new cocktail party question: Does
this smell like cancer to you, doc?

   Dogs offered the first hint that skin cancer might have a signature scent. In
experiments, several pups picked out the bouquet of melanoma, the deadliest skin
cancer.

   Inspired, a Philadelphia chemistry lab collected and identified chemicals
wafting from the skin of people with basal cell carcinoma, a common (but rarely
deadly) skin cancer. Compared to noncancerous skin, the samples had notably
different levels of several chemicals, scientists said at the American Chemical
Society annual meeting. Researchers hope to craft a sensor, like a computerized
nose, that could sniff out that chemical signal and diagnose skin cancers early.

   -- Andy Dworkin

   Attack food allergy

   issues as school year begins

   Sending a child with food allergies to school can give parents stressful
visions of classroom cupcakes or shared lunches ending in a hospital trip.

   So parents can and should take several steps to limit kids' exposure to
problem foods and train school staff how to respond to allergy attacks, say
experts at the American Academy of Allergy Asthma & Immunology. The allergists
say parents should:

   * Tell teachers, cafeteria staff and the school nurse what foods your child
must avoid and suggest safe alternatives.

   * Pack your child's lunch and stress the importance of not sharing food with
friends.

   * Send snacks your child can eat when the class has parties or snacks.

   * Urge your school system to pass "no eating" policies on buses.

   * Have your child's doctor complete a plan that tells staff how to respond to
different allergy symptoms. A sample "Food Allergy Action Plan" and more tips on
allergy, asthma and school are available at: http://tinyurl.com/6pw2hs

   -- Andy Dworkin

   Conventional, organic

   produce the same nutritionally

   The nutrient content of organic fruits and vegetables rated no better than
produce grown with pesticides and chemical fertilizers in a new Danish study.

   Researchers compared five crops --carrots, kale, peas, apples and potatoes
--grown in two consecutive seasons under matching climate conditions.

   Measurements of essential minerals, such as calcium, magnesium, potassium,
iron and zinc, showed no consistent differences between the organic and
conventional crops, University of Copenhagen researchers reported in the Journal
of the Science of Food and Agriculture. They also found no difference in the
absorption of minerals by rats fed equal amounts of the fruits and vegetables in
dried form.

   Previous studies have established that organic produce tends to have higher
levels of vitamin C, but research on other nutrients has been contradictory or
inconclusive. The new study, funded by Denmark's International Centre for
Research in Organic Food Systems, found that climate differences between years
caused the largest differences in nutrient content. The authors pointed out that
some organic crops might prove higher in minerals if measured fresh rather than
dried because they contain less water than their conventional counterparts.

   -- --Joe Rojas-Burke

   Advance reported in

   gene therapy for hearing loss

   In a step toward gene therapy for hearing loss, researchers in Oregon and
California have shown that they can grow working hair cells in the ears of mice.

   Hair cells convert sound waves into electrical pulses sent to the brain.
Damaged hair cells are the most common cause of hearing impairment. The body
can't grow replacements.

   John Brigande of Oregon Health & Science University and others transferred a
gene called Atoh1 into the ears of fetal mice in the womb. Previous research has
shown that the gene directs the production of a protein that can prompt
nonspecialized cells to develop into what look like highly specialized hair
cells.

   The new study, reported this week in the journal Nature, showed that induced
hair cells are capable of transmitting electrical pulses. But whether the
gene-transfer technique can restore hearing in deaf animals remains to be seen.

   -- --Joe Rojas-Burke

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2008


                              315 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             August 24, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: Brain Candy

BYLINE: By DANIEL J. LEVITIN.

   Daniel J. Levitin is a professor of psychology and behavioral neuroscience at
McGill University and the author, most recently, of ''The World in Six Songs:
How the Musical Brain Created Human Nature.''

BODY:

   HUMAN

     The Science Behind What Makes Us Unique

     By Michael S. Gazzaniga

     447 pp. Ecco/HarperCollins Publishers. $27.50

     My dog, Shadow, does not have an intact disgust module. Neither did the
succession of best friends who preceded him. Dogs will eat or roll in
practically anything, without any trace of an emotion that seems to be uniquely
human. Human infants don't show disgust until they're 5 to 7 years old.

     Disgust, Michael S. Gazzaniga argues in his new book, ''Human,'' is one of
the five emotional modules that distinguish us from other species. Other modules
are common across species. Neither adults, nor human infants nor wallabies, for
example, have to be explicitly taught to avoid certain dangers. Encountering a
large, fast-approaching creature with sharp teeth -- even if you have never
encountered it before -- causes an automatic fear and avoidance reaction.
Evolution has hard-wired a general fear response into our brains, rather than a
fear of specific things -- you never know what you might encounter, and you
don't want to sit there ruminating about it while you become lunch. Speaking of
rumination, part of what makes human brains special is that we are the only
animals who even bother to ask the question of why we're special.

     Gazzaniga, a cognitive neuroscientist at the University of California,
Santa Barbara (and one of the inventors of the field), takes us on a lively tour
through the latest research on brain evolution. (Full disclosure: the book
discusses three of my papers, among hundreds by others.) Human brains turn out
to be less different from other animal brains than you might think. Language and
social cognition fall along a continuum across species. Deception, for instance,
long thought to be unique to humans, is present in monkeys and crows, which can
even hide their attempts to deceive. Counterintuitively, much of what makes us
human is not an ability to do more things, Gazzaniga writes, but an ability to
inhibit automatic responses in favor of reasoned ones; consequently, we may be
the only species that engages in delayed gratification and impulse control
(thank you, prefrontal cortex).

     Gazzaniga doesn't shy away from hard problems, like why humans, alone among
species, have art. The attraction to stories, plays, paintings and music --
experiences with no obvious evolutionary payoff -- is puzzling. ''Why does the
brain contain reward systems that make fictional experiences enjoyable?'' he
asks. Part of the answer, he argues, is that fictional thinking engages innate
''play'' modules that enhance evolutionary fitness (that is, the ability to
propagate one's genes) by allowing us to consider possible alternatives --
hypothetical situations -- so that we can form plans in advance of dangers or
even just unpleasant social situations. ''From having read the fictional story
about the boy who cried wolf when we were children,'' he writes, ''we can
remember what happened to him in the story and not have to learn that lesson the
hard way in real life.'' Art may be more than a leisure activity. Artistic,
representational thinking could have been fundamental in making us the way we
are. As Gazzaniga concludes, ''The arts are not frosting but baking soda.''

     In a hair-raising final chapter, Gazzaniga turns to the question of whether
technology may eventually make us something other than human, exploring such
potential enhancements as brain implants and germ-line gene therapy, which
alters the DNA in sperm, egg or embryo (thus passing the changes on to future
generations). It's one thing to eliminate genes that cause cystic fibrosis or
muscular dystrophy, which tests already allow us to detect in developing
embryos. But what happens, Gazzaniga asks, when we identify genes that indicate
a high probability of developing diabetes or heart disease in middle age? Will
we toss the embryo, ''start all over again and try for a better one?'' Or change
the offending genes based on probabilistic outcomes?

     You may reject out of hand the idea of a neural implant, a computer chip
grafted to your brain. But the lines become blurred. We already alter our
neurochemistry through caffeine and alcohol (not to mention Prozac). People with
thyroid or pituitary problems use pills or injections to restore their hormonal
balance. Others have cochlear implants or electrodes to stimulate injured parts
of the brain. If a chip could mediate thyroid function, that doesn't seem so
different. A neural implant might also stimulate the prefrontal cortex and brain
stem the way caffeine or Ritalin or Prozac do. But will we accept an implanted
memory restorer for people with Alzheimer's? What about intelligence-enhancement
chips for schoolchildren? Gazzaniga imagines the conversation: ''Honey, I know
that we were saving this money for a vacation, but maybe we should get the twins
neural chips instead. It is hard for them in school when so many of the other
kids have them and are so much smarter.'' If this is fundamentally different
from discussions about glasses, hearing aids or Ritalin, that difference is not
obvious.

     And if neural implants could keep Shadow from rolling in dead squirrel,
maybe they wouldn't seem so disgusting after all.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2008


                              316 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            August 23, 2008 Saturday
                                  1ST Edition

SECTION: ZONE SOUTH - GREENWOOD STAR; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: Nathan's Battle outing carries hope;
Fundraiser will benefit research into neurological disorder that parents believe
has been slowed in 2 sons by gene therapy

BYLINE: JASON THOMAS JASON.THOMAS@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Encouraged by a landmark gene therapy study, a Greenwood couple whose sons
are battling a rare neurological disease vow to continue the fight.

   They need your help.

   Nathan Milto, 14, and his brother, P.J., who turns 11 on Monday, are in the
throes of Batten disease -- a fatal, degenerative neurological disorder.

   As a way to fight back against the disease, the eighth annual Nathan's Battle
Golf Outing will be held Thursday at Dye's Walk in Greenwood, marking the
group's largest fundraiser of the year.

   "Anyone can make a difference," said the boys' father, Phil, who, along with
wife, Tricia, and sons, Nicholas, 12, and Joey, 4, who do not have Batten, live
in the Eagle Trace subdivision. "One community can change the future."

   The brothers, who have been blinded by the disease, participated in the first
clinical trial targeting Batten, which affects about 500 children worldwide.

   Results of the study, conducted at Cornell University's Weill Medical
College, were published in May -- four years after the study began. The
replacement gene therapy has showed promising results, and the Miltos believe
the therapy has slowed the progression of the disease in their boys.

   "The next stage is to treat other people sooner, before they are severely
affected," Phil Milto said. "What it does is put us on a platform to leverage
the technology to fight other diseases."

   Milto said researchers around the globe are applying the Cornell study
against similar neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.

   But the research has not come without a cost. The Nathan's Battle Foundation
owes Cornell more than $176,000.

   As funds are raised, work continues to help two boys overcome the odds.

   "The most important thing to me is it let this wonderful community know that
what they have contributed to has produced the results we set out to do," Milto
said of the study. "Hopefully we can change the future so that kids won't have
to go through what my kids have gone through."

   Call Star reporter Jason Thomas at (317) 444-2708.

   _____________________________________________

   Fore! For a Cause

   What: 8th annual Nathan's Battle Golf Outing.

   When: Thursday

   Time: Registration, 10:30 a.m. to noon; shotgun start, noon; silent auction,
10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; cocktail reception, 5 p.m.; dinner and awards banquet,
5:30 p.m.

   Where: Dye's Walk Country Club, 2080 S. Ind. 135, Greenwood.

   Miscellaneous: Four chances to win $1 million and a chance to win a car.

   More information: www.nathansbattle .com or (317) 882-2962.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2008


                              317 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                             August 22, 2008 Friday
                                 no-dot Edition

SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell research, medical pot on ballot

BYLINE: Gary Heinlein / The Detroit News

BODY:

   * Stem cell research, medical pot on ballot

   * Backers of government reform to ask courts to put issue up for vote.

   * LANSING - Michigan voters will decide at least two statewide ballot
proposals Nov. 4: one allowing stem cell research, the other permitting
seriously ill people to use marijuana legally.

   But the battle continues to rage over a wide-ranging overhaul of the state
constitution that, among many things, would reduce the size of the Legislature,
Supreme Court and Court of Appeals, and reduce the salaries paid to lawmakers
and judges.

   The so-called Reform Michigan Government Now plan was kicked off the ballot
by the Court of Appeals Wednesday for being too broad. Supporters said they'll
appeal, as early as today, to the Michigan Supreme Court, and if they fail
there, they will head into the federal courts.

   "We're going to pursue every available avenue to get this before the voters,"
said Reform Michigan Government Now attorney Andrew Nickelhoff.

   The proposal to relax state law on embryonic stem cell research was approved
for the ballot Thursday by the Board of State Canvassers, which determined that
backers had turned in nearly a half-million valid signatures - more than 100,000
beyond the required minimum. The board on Thursday approved the ballot wording
of brief summaries for the stem cell proposal and the marijuana plan, whose
signatures already had been deemed sufficient.

   Proponents and opponents of the stem cell question are expected to spend a
combined $20 million or more on their campaigns.

   Joe Schwarz, a Battle Creek physician who heads the group backing the stem
cell proposition, predicted voters will approve it.

   "This is a step forward," said Schwarz, who served in both the Michigan
Legislature and Congress. "Nearly all of the therapy that evolves in the 21st
century is going to be genetic therapy and cellular therapy.

   "This research is going on in other states and should be going on here. We
have some of the finest research facilities in the world at the University of
Michigan, Michigan State University, Wayne State and others."

   Critics oppose the measure on religious and moral grounds.

   David Doyle, representing opponents, said it would undo a 1978 law banning
the destruction of human embryos and leave in question a 1998 law prohibiting
human cloning.

   "It goes too far, has too many loopholes and would allow unlimited
experimentation on human embryos," Doyle said.

   Passage of the marijuana proposal wouldn't grant users immunity from
prosecution, since marijuana use remains illegal under federal law. But as a
practical matter, federal authorities haven't looked to prosecute those who use
it for medical purposes in the dozen states where it's legal.

   An estimated 50,000 Michigan adults with a "debilitating medical condition"
may qualify for medical marijuana use. Patients would need doctor's approval,
and carry a state ID card identifying them as legal pot users.

   Advocates say it can alleviate symptoms of HIV/AIDS, cancer, hepatitis C and
Alzheimer's.

   Medically approved patients could legally possess 2.5 ounces of marijuana,
although the ballot proposal is silent about where they could obtain it.

   * Ballot language

   * Proposal 1: A Legislative Initiative to Permit the Use and Cultivation of
Marijuana for Specified Medical Conditions

   The proposed law would:

   * Permit physician approved use of marijuana by registered patients with
debilitating medical conditions including cancer, glaucoma, HIV, AIDS, hepatitis
C, MS and other conditions as may be approved by the Department of Community
Health.

   * Permit registered individuals to grow limited amounts of marijuana for
qualifying patients in an enclosed, locked facility.

   * Require the Department of Community Health to establish an identification
card system for patients qualified to use marijuana and individuals qualified to
grow marijuana.

   * Permit registered and unregistered patients and primary caregivers to
assert medical reasons for using marijuana as a defense to any prosecution
involving marijuana.

   * Proposal 2: A Proposal to Amend the State Constitution to Address Human
Embryo and Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research in Michigan

   The proposed constitutional amendment would:

   * Expand use of human embryos for any research permitted under federal law
subject to the following limits: the embryos -

   -- are created for fertility treatment purposes;

   -- are not suitable for implantation or are in excess of clinical needs;

   -- would be discarded unless used for research;

   -- were donated by the person seeking fertility treatment.

   * Provide that stem cells cannot be taken from human embryos more than 14
days after cell division begins.

   * Prohibit any person from selling or purchasing human embryos for stem cell
research.

   * Prohibit state and local laws that prevent, restrict or discourage stem
cell research, future therapies and cures.

   You can reach Gary Heinlein at (517) 371-3660 or gheinlein@detnews.com

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2008


                              318 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 21, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: S.D. company's Lucanix extended lives in early tests; Phase 3 begins;

Lung cancer vaccine shows great promise

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Oncologist Lyudmila Bazhenova has a new weapon in her arsenal to help
late-stage lung cancer patients fight for survival: an experimental cancer
vaccine called Lucanix, developed in San Diego by privately held NovaRx.

   Whether Lucanix will prove itself a worthy combatant against the world's most
deadly type of cancer won't be known for several years. It must be tested on up
to 700 people in a worldwide Phase 3 clinical trial and treated at 90 sites in
the United States, Canada, India and Europe.

   But early stage trials show it is extending the lives of patients for years,
offering promise to a group of patients whose prognosis has not improved much in
more than a decade. The few drugs for lung cancer approved in recent years have
extended survival only minimally.

   Bazhenova, who works at the Moores Cancer Center at UCSD, injected the first
patient in the clinical trial yesterday. The patient, like all those in the
trial, has advanced non-small-cell lung cancer.

   Lung cancer kills more than 400 people a day in the United States and more
than 2,500 worldwide. Only 30 percent of the people with late-stage lung cancer
live beyond a year.

   As principal investigator of the Phase 3 trial, Bazhenova was enthusiastic
about the therapy.

   "The way I look at it is that only a certain amount of drugs work for a
limited time in this disease. If someone wants to give me an extra bullet, why
wouldn't I take it?"

   Traditional chemotherapy drugs kill tumor cells but also kill healthy cells,
causing debilitating side effects.

   The alternative pathway of Lucanix is the body's immune system, which is
induced by the drug to target the cancer cells.

   There has been a lot of hope for so-called therapeutic vaccines, or
immunotherapies. But none have been successful. The field is littered with
failed clinical trials, including those run by local companies Vical, Favrille
and the now-defunct or merged CancerVax, Epimmune and Collateral Therapeutics.

   Lucanix is different from all those failed vaccines, said Habib Fakhrai,
co-founder of NovaRx. None addressed the suppression of the immune system, he
said.

   The Iranian-born Fakhrai began his work on what would become Lucanix in the
early 1990s, first at San Diego's Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center and, later, as
director of the gene therapy laboratories at UCLA's medical school. He and
fellow researcher Daniel Shawler were trying to develop a gene therapy vaccine
for cancer. Fakhrai was nagged by the role that immune suppression played in
cancer, accounting for secondary infections such as pneumonia. The scientists
thought that if they could boost the immune system, it would benefit their gene
therapy drug, said Shawler, now vice president of operations at NovaRx.

   But the results were lackluster.

   Fakhrai had read research that said cancer cells emitted a substance called
TGF-beta which made them invisible to the body's immune system. So Fakhrai found
a way to suppress the production of TGF-beta, essentially removing the cancer's
cloak of invisibility and calling the body's immune system to attack.

   In the first animal model, a mouse with a brain tumor, Fakhrai's discovery
cured cancer 100 percent. It was also successful in an early stage human trial.

   But brain tumors are rare, so there are few investors looking to develop a
therapy. Fakhrai decided to try Lucanix on lung cancer.

   He chose non-small-cell lung cancer because it kills more people than the
next four highest cancer killers -- breast, colon, prostate and pancreas.

   "Our results were beyond expectation," Fakhrai said.

   In Phase 2 testing of patients with advanced disease who received Lucanix
after minimal chemotherapy, there was a one-year survival rate of 61 percent and
two-year survival rate of 41 percent. The median survival time was 16 months.
Typically these patients would have a one-year survival rate of less than 30
percent.

   In another Phase 2 trial, 59 percent of patients whose disease was stabilized
by chemotherapy lived more than 43 months.

   Some who have been permitted by the FDA to continue taking the experimental
drug are still alive after more than five years, Fakhrai said.

   "And we've seen virtually no side effects," he said.

   NovaRx, which was founded in 1997 and now has 50 employees, needed money if
it was going to push forward with expensive Phase 3 clinical trials. It had been
surviving solely on government grants and private investment.

   Eventually, Justin Murdock, senior vice president of investments for Castle &
Cooke and the Dole Food Co., heard about the company. At the time, Murdock was
expanding investments in the North Carolina Research Campus, a biotech hub.

   The Castle & Cooke companies, an umbrella of businesses that include real
estate, manufacturing and transportation, have about 63,000 employees working in
more than 90 countries.

   "We have a lot of core businesses in things that are necessities and we know
are solid, so a little bit of risk in the portfolio we felt was a good thing,"
Justin Murdock said. "Biotech seemed like a natural progression. It's not a
money thing; we're not looking for the big score."

   Murdock was intrigued by the immune suppression factors of Lucanix. In
October 2006, he invested in NovaRx, becoming majority owner, as well as chief
executive and chairman.

   Four months later, federal regulators granted Lucanix fast-track status,
given to therapies that could serve an unmet need.

   The gold standard for judging a cancer therapy's success is survival, Shawler
said. But NovaRx doesn't look at the goal as buying time, he said.

   "We hope that the survival is long term. Our goal is to have cancer patients
die with the disease, rather than from the disease."

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. LYUDMILA BAZHENOVA; PHOTOBY: 2,3. Eduardo
Contreras / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2008


                              319 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            August 19, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: Lab project poised to rise in N.O.;
Business, research to mix at biocenter

BYLINE: By Kate Moran, Business writer

BODY:

   Construction should begin in the coming weeks on the New Orleans
BioInnovation Center, a business incubator on Canal Street that will help
researchers at the city's major universities take their findings from the
laboratory to the marketplace.

   The project's launch comes after years of deferments and delays, and as city
and university leaders are pushing the development of two new downtown hospitals
to anchor a nascent biosciences corridor. The bioinnovation center is considered
another critical component of that research hub.

   Aaron Miscenich, the center's executive director, said scientists will be
able to use the space to adapt discoveries they make in the academy into salable
technology. Without such a resource, they often have to seek patents through
their university and then sell their idea to a pharmaceutical or biotech company
for development, after which they lose control of its fate.

   Because researchers do not always have experience attracting big-dollar
investment to carry their ideas forward, Miscenich said the center will host
speakers and seminars to help them learn about entrepreneurship. It also will
serve as a gathering place for scientists who want to swap ideas for business
development among themselves.

   "The true value is in the programming and the introductions we can provide to
intellectual property professionals and venture capitalists," Miscenich said.

   --- Modern thrust, N.O. twist ---

   The Legislature approved financing in 2002 for the construction of three
bioinnovation centers, one each in New Orleans, Baton Rouge and Shreveport. The
latter two are up and running, but the local facility hit its first round of
delays when staff identified structural problems in the building at 1441 Canal
St. where it was supposed to locate.

   That building was demolished just days before Hurricane Katrina, and the
center hired two architects after the storm to design a new building to modern
research standards. The drawings they produced look sleek and contemporary, but
they also incorporate elements from traditional New Orleans architecture,
including an interior courtyard and window screens that help block sunlight and
keep the building cool.

   The center will rise four stories above Canal Street and encompass 65,000
square feet of meeting rooms, wet labs and offices that can house 40 to 50
startup companies. Mark Ripple, the lead New Orleans architect, said the
building will have a three-story atrium that will serve as a break room for the
researchers.

   "Sometimes that casual interaction between scientists and lab technicians in
the break room is as powerful as what goes on inside the lab," Ripple said.
"There was a desire early on to provide opportunity for socialization among the
tenants."

   Miscenich said the state will spend $60 million to build the bioinnovation
center. None of the office and lab space on the second and third floors has been
leased yet, but the top floor will be occupied by the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium, a partnership between LSU's health sciences center in New
Orleans, LSU-Shreveport and Tulane.

   The consortium will, among other projects, take cell therapies produced by
those three institutions and try to move them to the clinical trial stage. Such
a facility requires a supreme level of cleanliness, and the air in some parts of
the fourth floor will turn over once a minute to purge viruses and bacteria.

   --- Bridging the gap ---

   Alan Miller, associate senior vice president for health sciences at Tulane,
said the university is "very excited" for construction to start in the coming
weeks. He said researchers in New Orleans often sell their findings to biotech
companies that sometimes end up neglecting them. With the launch of the
bioinnovation center, researchers can take steps to ensure their findings become
commercially viable.

   "You may be a scientist who has invested a great deal of your heart and soul
into an investigation, and then the company decides something else is more worth
pursuing, and your idea will stay on the shelf for years, or perhaps forever,"
Miller said. "If we can do little startup companies and take it through the next
levels of development, including going through preliminary trials, all of a
sudden you're demonstrating that this idea a winner."

   Joe Moerschbaecher, vice chancellor for academic affairs at LSU's health
sciences center, said the center is also a vital recruitment tool for the
universities.

   "When you're trying to recruit a large research group that may be involved in
translational research, the availability of this type of facility is critical,"
he said, noting that it also would provide high-paying jobs to technicians and
others who help with research.

   The bioinnovation center will host a groundbreaking Wednesday evening, where
university leaders and Mayor Ray Nagin are scheduled to speak. Miscenich said
contractors already have driven test pilings, and construction should begin in
earnest in a few weeks. The target opening date is December 2009.

   . . . . . . .

   Kate Moran can be reached at kmoran@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3491.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2008


                              320 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                             August 11, 2008 Monday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: VALLEY & STATE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Girl with brain tumor celebrates milestone

BYLINE: Chelsea Schneider, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Mark Olsen slid a small pink shoe on his soon-to-be 3-year-old daughter,
Briannah, as mom Tammy grabbed her camera.

   It's the smallest of milestones the Gilbert family celebrates.

   This month was the first time Briannah wore shoes.

   But a year after Briannah made headlines as the family fought for her to have
an experimental treatment at a Texas clinic to treat her inoperable brain tumor,
the Olsens have milestones to celebrate.

   Briannah's tumor has shrunk 20 percent since she began the non-toxic
gene-therapy treatment at Houston's Burzynski Clinic.

   She's also the same size as kids her age, which is a feat for the girl who
was 7 pounds at birth but gained only 2 pounds in the first months of her life.

   Early setbacks inhibiting her recovery are gone. Briannah was allergic to
conventional chemotherapy, so the family turned to the Burzynski Clinic and
found a doctor to look after Briannah in Phoenix, which was required if the
Olsens didn't move to Houston for the $6,400-per-month treatment.

   Briannah's doctors at Phoenix Children's Hospital declined to sign the
co-investigator form required by the Food and Drug Administration for the study.

   The family was leaving for Houston when another Valley doctor agreed to sign.

   A year later, a tube pumps the therapy's solution non-stop into her body.

   The Burzynski Clinic uses anti-neoplastons, a derivative of naturally
occurring peptides and amino acids.

   While she's beginning to briefly sit by herself, doctors don't know how much
Briannah can see, and she also has been having seizures.

   But recent MRI scans give her parents hope that she'll one day be cured.

   "We just never even considered giving up," said Mark Olsen, who added,
"Sometimes doors open for you, and sometimes you need to kick them in."

   To continue the experimental treatment, Briannah must have her blood drawn
three times a week.

   She has MRIs done at Phoenix Children's Hospital, where doctors also monitor
shunts that alleviate fluid buildup around her brain.

   Tammy Olsen recently took Briannah's sisters, Savannah, 9, and Hannah, 12,
shopping. When they saw the pink shoes, the girls knew Briannah had to have
them.

   A day later Tammy Olsen couldn't stop taking pictures as Briannah shook her
feet, feeling the shoes.

   "We make the most of each day and always hope for tomorrow," Tammy Olsen
said. "We enjoy her as if nothing is wrong.

   "It's not a denial thing. It's about making life the best it can be."

   |

   Golf fundraiser for Briannah

   When: 7 a.m. Oct. 11, Briannah's third birthday.

   Where: Western Skies Golf Club, 1245 E. Warner Road, Gilbert.

   Cost: $57 per person, which includes green fees, golf cart, barbecue lunch
and prizes for first, second and third places.

   Information: www.spectrumgolftournament.com or 480-726-8080.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2008


                              321 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                             August 11, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Main News; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1077 words

HEADLINE: Olympian challenge: catching cheaters;
Beijing Olympics;
Finding all variants of prohibited drugs is scientists' task

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   As athletes flocked to Beijing to compete in the Summer Olympics, teams of
scientists were already starting a round-the-clock marathon of drug testing to
keep the Games free of illicit athletic enhancement.

   The experts are part of a passionate and growing international scientific
community running a year-round endurance race to develop tests for new doping
techniques as fast as the shadow economy of crafty drug suppliers can develop
them.

   No Olympiad has ever seen as intensive a drug screening program as the
Beijing Games. The China Anti-Doping Agency alone will conduct 4,500 tests,
according to a comprehensive review of the testing program by Marc Reisch in
Chemical & Engineering News' online issue being released today.

   China's $10 million lab in the Beijing Olympic Sports Center is stuffed with
mass spectrometers, gas chromatography instruments and other equipment provided
by manufacturers such as Agilent and Thermo Fisher Scientific, Reisch said.

   But authorities say it's still a challenge to detect all possible variations
of prohibited drugs with tests valid enough to stand up to legal scrutiny if an
athlete appeals a suspension for doping.

   "Drug users and their assistants are working around the clock to beat
analytical scientists," Dr. Don Catlin, an anti-doping leader on the scene in
Beijing, told the chemistry journal.

   But the competition between the scientists and their opponents won't end when
the Beijing flame goes out.

   Researchers may rewrite the record books of the Beijing Games in years to
come. The new tests they are developing may later reveal performance-enhancing
compounds in blood or urine samples kept in storage long after the competition
is over.

   Already, disgraced Olympians have been forced to surrender their medals. The
multiple triumphs of Marion Jones at the 2000 games in Sydney were erased after
Catlin figured out how to identify the "designer steroid" she was accused of
taking as an alleged client of the notorious BALCO lab in Burlingame. Catlin
founded UCLA's Olympic Analytical Laboratory in 1982 and now runs his own firm,
Anti-Doping Research Inc. in Los Angeles.

   Some officials who have devoted themselves to the anti-doping fight don't
seem to focus their wrath on the young athletes like Jones who risk their health
and reputations for a possible competitive edge.

   "I think even more alarming are the manipulative, coercive, subversive
individuals in sports who encourage illicit drug use," said Dr. Andrew Pipe, who
helped found Canada's anti-doping agency after the nation's Olympic sprinter Ben
Johnson was stripped of his gold medal in 1988 based on signs of steroid use.
"Sometimes, those are coaches, doctors, fringe scientists, so-called sport gurus
and entrepreneurs."

   The BALCO lab, whose federal investigation accelerated the growth of
anti-doping efforts, distributed a steroid specifically designed by a rogue
chemist to evade testing. Scientists are trying to refine tests for such known
threats, including steroids, growth hormones and EPO or erythropoietin, which is
used to boost endurance by stimulating the production of red blood cells.

   But authorities fear that drug suppliers soon will move beyond steroids and
stimulants and make use of cutting-edge biotechnology techniques such as gene
therapy and chemical gene inhibition. For example, crooked athletes might inject
extra genes that help create EPO in the body.

   Evidence of this so-called "gene doping" has yet to be found, but experts
such as Catlin don't think it will take long.

   So researchers are already searching for tip-off signals of gene tampering
that could be found in blood and urine samples. In a review article in the
Journal of Internal Medicine last month, Catlin said such tests must be ready in
advance, because some athletes will experiment with any new substance that might
give them an edge, regardless of the dangers.

   "They do not wait for regulatory approvals," he said. "If they can obtain a
supply, they will try it."

   Academic researchers and drug developers are joining the fight as they learn
that their work is being tracked by sophisticated observers connected with the
sports world who are mining the scientific literature for compounds that might
build muscle or blood supply, even if their safety as drugs has never been fully
tested.

   UC San Diego Professor Theodore Friedmann, a veteran gene therapy researcher,
got involved in the late 1990s after rumors surfaced that sports trainers were
snooping around his field. While gene therapy is emerging as a powerful tactic
against life-threatening diseases, Friedmann said, it can be unpredictable even
in the hands of research specialists. But eager sports trainers apparently were
undaunted by accounts of the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, after an
experimental gene therapy treatment, or the development of leukemia in some
children treated for genetic immune system deficiencies.

   Friedmann, who organized the first conference on gene doping in 2002, is
developing tests to detect gene tampering under a grant from the World
Anti-Doping Agency. He is also developing a bioinformatics unit at UC San Diego
to evaluate results of worldwide research on gene doping. Athletes who try
illicit gene therapy, he said, could develop tumors or catastrophic immune
system reactions.

   "I suspect when things go wrong in this area, they'll go seriously wrong," he
said. "People could die."

   Dr. Pipe, who is in Beijing as a physician for the Canadian Olympic team,
said sports doping will never be eradicated. But he said the odds are higher
that it can be substantially reduced because of the increased coordination among
governments and units such as the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency and the World
Anti-Doping Agency.

   Expert opinion varies on the prevalence of doping. Worldwide data from a
range of sports in 2007 showed violations in 1.97 percent of more than 25,000
samples, Reisch reported.

   "The data may underestimate the degree," Pipe said. But still, most athletes
aren't relying on drugs to win, he said. "This involves a very small subset of
that overall population."

Olympics on TV

     ·    Yes, Michael Phelps swims again tonight, but the top TV pick is a
          local hero.
     ·    NBC, 8 p.m.: Natalie Coughlin - she of connections to Cal, Lafayette,
          Emeryville, Concord and Vallejo - swims for gold in her specialty, the
          100-meter backstroke.
     ·    Channel guide: NBC is Channel: 3 Comcast or Channel: 11 DirecTV, Dish
          Network for most Bay Area viewers. Full TV listings on Page C8.


LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2009


                              322 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                             August 10, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: IDEAS; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 1353 words

HEADLINE: CHASING CHEATERS;
OLYMPIC OFFICIALS, ALREADY WAGING A BATTLE AGAINST ATHLETES' USE OF PERFORMANCE-
ENHANCING DRUGS, NOW WORRY ABOUT A NEW TREND: GENE DOPING

BYLINE: David Kohn, Sun reporter

BODY:

   Over the past few weeks, even before the torch was lit, dozens of athletes
from around the world have tested positive for banned drugs and have been barred
from the Beijing Olympics.

   Sports officials say this shows their new anti-drug attack is working. "The
gap between regulators and cheaters has narrowed, and it will continue to
narrow," says David Howman, director of the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), the
international organization that oversees drug testing for the Olympics.

   WADA and the International Olympic Committee will perform more than 4,500
doping tests during the Olympics, almost 1,000 more than four years ago. The
IOC's Beijing lab operates around the clock with 180 scientists and staffers. It
has added two new tests for human growth hormone and erythropoietin, two
previously undetectable drugs that by most accounts have been widely used by
elite athletes.

   Still, that may not be enough.

   Many knowledgeable observers say that cheating remains rampant, and that
athletes, coaches, and trainers - as well as the doctors and scientists they
work with - have found new ways to outmaneuver existing tests, and have
developed new doping technologies for which no tests exist. The competition in
Beijing, they say, will feature hundreds, perhaps thousands, of athletes who
have eluded WADA's chemical dragnet.

   "They're ostriches, hiding their heads in the sand," Dr. Mauro Di Pasquale
says of WADA and other agencies that oversee testing. A Toronto sports medicine
specialist who has decades of experience working with elite athletes, he
estimates that more than a third of the 11,000 Olympians in Beijing have used a
banned substance in the year or so leading up to the Olympics.

   He and others say that many key tests have severe limitations. Take, for
instance, the test for human growth hormone (HGH): It can only detect the
substance in the 24 to 48 hours after the drug is injected. To avoid a positive
test, an athlete simply has to stop injections a few days before being tested.
That interruption would almost certainly not affect performance because the
benefits of HGH, which appears to increase muscle mass and strength, can last
for weeks or months. (Athletes can be tested randomly, but these tests are
infrequent; in any case, observers say, it is relatively easy to avoid these
tests by not answering calls or "going out of town.")

   Timing is key, says nutrition and training expert Victor Conte: He says
athletes generally use performance-enhancers months before competition. "These
are training drugs," says Conte, who in 2005 pleaded guilty to conspiracy to
distribute steroids as part of the BALCO scandal. "You use them in the
offseason, to train better. In-competition, tests are worthless. These athletes
aren't dumb."

   The tests themselves may also make errors. A recent study by scientists at
the Copenhagen Muscle Research Center found that the test for synthetic
erythropoietin has a high false negative rate; in other words, it lets lots of
cheaters through. Known as EPO, erythropoietin is a go-to enhancer for endurance
athletes such as long-distance runners and swimmers. It increases red blood
cells, making more oxygen available to muscles.

   Another loophole: Although WADA and its allies test for many steroids such as
nandrolone and stanozolol, experts say it is not difficult for a reasonably
competent chemist to develop slightly altered "designer" versions. Such
compounds have the same effects as the recognized drugs - increased strength and
muscle growth - but are invisible to the tests.

   "It's really not that complicated to develop a new steroid," says William
Llewellyn, a chemist who is the author of Anabolics, a steroids encyclopedia
used by doctors and athletes. He talks regularly with athletes, trainers and
coaches, and says it is still possible for athletes in Beijing to evade tests by
using designer steroids.

   Authorities "absolutely have not closed it down," he says.

   Another potential trick: Athletes may be able to avoid positive tests by
taking a cocktail made up of low doses of several drugs, including steroids,
growth hormone and EPO, as well as other substances and hormones.

   Then there are the drugs that are not yet banned. According to several people
familiar with doping trends, many athletes are using Viagra, as both a training
aid and a performance-booster during competition. The drug works via the same
mechanism by which it improves erections: It brings more blood to muscles, says
John Romano, senior editor of Muscle Development, a Web site devoted to training
and performance enhancement.

   Howman says WADA knows about Viagra, and is studying it. The agency may ban
it in the future, he says.

   The latest enhancement trend is gene doping. This approach involves injecting
the body with a gene that triggers growth in specific tissues such as muscle.
Because the muscle increase isn't produced by a foreign substance, but by the
body's own genetic instructions, it could be very difficult to detect in a test.

   So far, research on gene doping has only occurred in animals. But the results
have been astonishing. "You can get enormous growth," says Se-Jin Lee, a Johns
Hopkins University molecular biologist who discovered the muscle-building gene
pathway a decade ago.

   In recent tests, he's found that with just two injections over two weeks, he
can increase muscle mass in mice by 60 percent. This effect occurs with no
training at all.

   He says it wouldn't be difficult to try the approach on humans. "Any small
lab out there, even an individual who knows what they're doing, could do this.
The technology is relatively straightforward," he says. The estimated cost of
such an operation: between $20,000 and $50,000.

   For an athlete with the opportunity to earn millions, that is a relatively
small amount. And this, many observers say, is the crux of the issue: In the
end, the battle between cheaters and testers comes down to money. WADA's
research budget is about $6 million a year, probably a good bit less than what
the other side spends.

   "The bad guys probably have a lot more money to pursue their illicit work
than we have to pursue our legitimate work," says Theodore Friedmann, a gene
doping expert at the University of California, San Diego. "But it's a noble
battle."

   Lee emphasizes that he has no plans to use his technique on humans, and
thinks that doing so would be "nuts," given that the treatment has never been
tested in people for either safety or effectiveness.

   But others may be more audacious. Romano and Di Pasquale say they've heard of
several elite athletes who have undergone gene doping treatment, and many
observers expect the practice to become widespread. "All the fervor over
steroids and HGH will be passe by the next Olympics," says Romano. "Gene doping
will take over."

   WADA agrees. For several years, the agency has been working on tests for gene
doping. "Athletes and trainers are all aware of this technology," says
Friedmann, who directs the agency's gene therapy research program. "The sporting
world is following this at a very high level."

   Even so, Friedmann is confident. "There's always a clue," he says. "All of
these methods have molecular signatures that we will be able to detect."

   Beyond genes, another booster looms: stem cells. Researchers around the world
are growing these malleable cells into all sorts of tissue, from muscle to nerve
to bone. In theory, stem cells could be used to augment an athlete in ways
similar to gene therapy. Most scientists say stem cell technology isn't yet
advanced enough for athletic use. But last month, German journalists released a
documentary showing a Chinese doctor offering to inject stem cells into a
swimmer for $24,000.

   Was the doctor making a legitimate offer? "There's no way to know," says
Friedmann, "but nothing would surprise me."

   Di Pasquale, who favors testing, says authorities will always lag behind
cheaters. "If the demand is there, you'll always be able to get it. It's just
like cocaine and heroin. It will never be under control. WADA will be behind
every time."

   david.kohn@baltsun.com

   Online

   Comprehensive Olympics coverage at baltimoresun .com/olympics

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. "You can get enormous growth," says Se-Jin Lee, a Johns Hopkins University
molecular biologist, about gene doping. So far, research on gene doping has only
occurred in animals. 2. TESTING POSITIVE Marion Jones: A sprinter and long
jumper, she won five gold medals at the 2000 Olympics and made millions from
endorsements. In the BALCO scandal, she admitted to taking a designer steroid
and HGH, and is now serving a six-month prison term for lying to federal agents.
3. Justin Gatlin : A sprinter who won a gold medal in the 100 meters at the 2004
Olympics, he is now serving a four-year ban after testing positive for a banned
substance, reportedly steroids. 4. Floyd Landis : He won the 2006 Tour de France
but was stripped of his title after tests showed unusually high levels of
testosterone.
 1. Amy Davis [Sun photographer] 2. [Getty Images] 3. [Associated Press] 4.
[Associated Press]

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2008


                              323 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            August 9, 2008 Saturday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: GILBERT REPUBLIC 12; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: Milestones give child's parents hope

BYLINE: Chelsea Schneider, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Mark Olsen slid a small pink shoe on his soon-to-be 3-year-old daughter
Briannah as mom Tammy grabbed her camera.

   It's the smallest of milestones the Gilbert family celebrates. Last Friday
was the first time Briannah wore shoes.

   But a year after Briannah made headlines as the family fought for her to have
an experimental treatment at a Texas clinic to treat her inoperable brain tumor,
the Olsens have a handful of big milestones to celebrate.

   Briannah's tumor has shrunk 20percent since she began the nontoxic
gene-therapy treatment at Houston's Burzynski Clinic.

   She's also the same size as kids her age, which is a feat for the girl who
was 7 pounds at birth but gained only 2 pounds in the first months of her life.

   Early setbacks inhibiting her recovery are gone. Briannah was allergic to
conventional chemotherapy, and other treatments Tammy researched weren't as
successful as the mother would have liked.

   So the family turned to the Burzynski Clinic and found a doctor to look after
Briannah in Phoenix, which was required if the Olsens didn't move to Houston for
the $6,400-per-month clinical treatment.

   Briannah's doctors at Phoenix Children's Hospital declined to sign the
co-investigator form required by the Food and Drug Administration for the study.
The family was leaving for Houston when another Valley doctor agreed to sign.

   A year later, Briannah napped in a pink tutu, rhinestone shirt and pink shoes
in the family's living room. A tube pumps the therapy's solution non-stop into
her body. The Burzynski Clinic uses anti-neoplastons, a derivative of naturally
occurring peptides and amino acids.

   While she's beginning to briefly sit by herself, doctors don't know how much
Briannah can see, and she also has been having seizures.

   But recent MRI scans give her parents hope that she'll one day be cured.

   "We just never even considered giving up," said Mark said, who later added.
"Sometimes doors open for you, and sometimes you need to kick them in."

   The Olsens say their youngest daughter has come a long way since Tammy
dressed Briannah in her first Christmas outfit in 2005, and grew scared when she
felt how skinny her little girl was.

   "I mean it was skin to bone," Tammy said. "It was horrible."

   To stay on the study, Briannah must have her blood drawn three times a week.
She has MRIs done at Phoenix Children's Hospital, where doctors also monitor
shunts that alleviate fluid buildup around her brain.

   Briannah doesn't have to go back to Houston, since treatment material is
mailed.

   Last week, Tammy was having a rough day when she took Briannah's sisters
Savannah, 9, and Hannah, 12, to go shopping. When they saw the pink shoes, the
girls knew Briannah had to wear them.

   A day later Tammy couldn't stop taking pictures as Briannah shook her feet,
feeling the shoes.

   "We make the most of each day and always hope for tomorrow," Tammy said. "We
enjoy her as if nothing is wrong. It's not a denial thing. It's about making
life the best it can be."

   **

   Baby Briannah golf fundraiser

   When: 7 a.m. Oct. 11, Briannah's third birthday.

   Where: Western Skies Golf Course, 1245 E. Warner Road, Gilbert.

   Cost: $57 per person includes green fees, golf cart, barbecue lunch and
prizes for first, second and third places.

   Information: www.spectrumgolftournament.com or 480-726-8080.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2008


                              324 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            August 6, 2008 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 950 words

HEADLINE: Cancer test patient -- with a wet nose;
Dog is the first to try an experimental treatment that could work on incurable
brain tumors in people and dogs.

BYLINE: JOSEPHINE MARCOTTY, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Batman has always been a hero to Anna and Eric Baker. Not the comic book
variety, but a furry, 38-pound, bat-eared one who patiently lets their toddler
climb all over him.

   Now, if all goes well, he may also become a hero for the thousands of people
-- and tens of thousands of dogs -- who each year have brain tumors diagnosed
that are equally fatal in both.

   Tuesday, Batman was the first patient to get an experimental therapy that
researchers at the University of Minnesota hope will cure his brain cancer,
which is the same kind that Sen. Ted Kennedy has. If it works for Batman and
other dogs, they say, it holds enormous promise as an effective treatment for
people, too.

   Batman has joined a relatively new field of research called comparative
oncology, where researchers leverage what they learn from pets for both animals
and people. Advances in molecular and genetic testing show that many diseases in
animals don't just look the same in humans, they are the same, said Dr. Jaime
Modiano, professor of comparative oncology at the university's veterinary
school.

   The approach is gaining momentum because testing experimental treatments in
animals is also a lot faster and easier than testing them in people. There is no
federal regulatory approval process, for one. Since dogs and most other animals
don't live as long as humans, both their diseases and treatments progress or
fail seven to ten times faster.

   That means the Bakers will know within three to seven months, rather than
years, whether Tuesday's surgery and the experimental treatment will prevent
Batman's cancer from returning.

   A hefty vet bill is avoided

   The price is right, too. Because it's part of a federally funded cancer
research trial, the Bakers are spared a $6,000 to $9,000 vet bill for surgery
and painful radiation that might have done their dog as much harm as good.

   "He was always the most popular member of our family," said Eric Baker, 45.
"Now he's the most popular and the most famous."

   "And the one with the best medical care," added Anna Baker, 37.

   She and her husband, who live in Minneapolis, found him while they were
graduate students in Berlin, Germany, in 1999. They threw a party. Two hundred
people and one bat-eared dog showed up.

   He is 10 years old now. Two weeks ago he had a seizure. Then in a matter of
days he had two more. A university vet said he might be fine. Or he might have a
brain tumor. Only a $1,400 MRI could tell them.

   They faced the dilemma that many pet owners confront. Should they spend
thousands for diagnostic testing and treatment that might -- or might not --
extend his life a little, but could also make him miserable? Eric Baker is out
of work and their debts are piling up.

   "Should I let my dog die because I didn't have the money," Anna Baker said.
It might be different if Batman was near the end of his life, but he was still
lively. "I could no more do that to him than I could for a person," she said.

   Then they got a call from Dr. Elizabeth Pluhar, a veterinary neurological
surgeon at the university. She had a proposal. If he had a tumor, Batman could
be the first of 50 dogs they hope to enroll as part of a federally funded
research trial to test a combination of gene therapy and vaccine.

   Both are experimental treatments for human types of cancer, but so far
neither has proven to work especially well.

   Just across town, Dr. John Trusheim is experimenting with a cancer vaccine in
people with brain tumors. By coincidence, the first Minnesota patient got his
first injection just last week, said Trusheim, a brain cancer specialist at
Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis.

   While vaccines have had limited success on other types of cancer, scientists
are eager to try it with brain cancer, Trusheim said.

   "We're up against a tumor that has just a miserable prognosis," Trusheim
said. Such tumors kill 13,000 people a year and are the leading cause of cancer
deaths in children.

   Early studies of the human vaccine, called DCVax, showed it slowed tumor
progression by several months, he said. But the results of this study, which
will involve hundreds of patients nationwide, won't be known for at least two
years.

   Gene therapy at work

   John Ohlfest, head of the neurosurgery gene therapy program at the
university's Masonic Cancer Center, is combining a vaccine with what is known as
gene therapy. After surgically removing the tumor, the remaining cancer cells
are triggered into producing a protein that makes them visible to the body's
immune system. A vaccine made from dead brain tumor cells directs the body's
immune system to attack and destroy new tumor cells.

   Both he and Trusheim say it's the first time a combination therapy has been
tried beyond mice, where it has cured them three-fourths of the time, which
Ohlfest said is remarkable success.

   It would take a decade or more to win approval from the Food and Drug
Administration to try the combination therapy in people, Ohlfest said. But dogs
are twice as likely as humans to develop such tumors and there's no good
effective treatment for them either.

   "We will figure out how to treat these animals and tell the FDA we can do it
in people," he said.

   On Tuesday morning Batman lay on an operating table at the university's
hospital for small animals. Anna Baker watched the room packed with animal and
human doctors from a window.

   "The only thing that stops me from being nervous is that they have so much at
stake in keeping him alive," she said.

   Josephine Marcotty - 612 673 7394

   Staff writer Maura Lerner contributed to this report.

CORRECTION-DATE: August 7, 2008

CORRECTION:

   This story incorrectly reported the name of one of the owners of Batman, a
dog receiving an experimental brain tumor treatment. Her name is Anna
Brailovsky.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2008


                              325 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             August 3, 2008 Sunday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Inq Sports; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 1297 words

HEADLINE: On guard for drugs in Beijing

BYLINE: By Mike Jensen; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   In September 2006, H. Lee Sweeney, chairman of the physiology department at
the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, flew to Beijing to give a
speech about his muscular-dystrophy research involving the injection of
synthetic genes. One of his Beijing hosts asked whether Sweeney also would speak
to the Chinese scientists charged with drug testing for the 2008 Olympics.

   It was a natural fit. For many years, Sweeney had warned of potential
performance-enhancing applications of his work for human athletes.

   Before the speech, Sweeney figured he knew the motivation of the invitation,
that maybe the Chinese scientists were interested in learning about his research
to use it on their own athletes.

   "While in my mind they were a threat to do this - in their minds, it was only
the Americans that were a threat to do it," Sweeney said in a recent interview
at his office.

   Explaining to the Chinese testers that his research couldn't be transferred
to humans for this year's Olympics, Sweeney had to smile at the competing
suspicions.

   "They were concerned that maybe science in the States had progressed to the
point where the athletes would have access to technologies that they weren't
looking for, so they wanted an honest appraisal of how possible that was,"
Sweeney said.

   To his surprise, Sweeney left Beijing believing local authorities working
with the World Anti-Doping Agency were committed to preventing doping, even
though Chinese athletes have been under as much suspicion as athletes from other
top performing countries.

   "Their government had instructed them that there were going to be no Chinese
athletes doping at the Beijing Olympics," Sweeney said. "They wanted the Chinese
athletes to be scrupulously clean. They didn't want an embarrassment on the
world stage. Their major concern was the Americans, which was why they were
talking to me."

   Sweeney once feared that his work easily would cross over into athletics.
Synthetic genes created by researchers in Penn's physiology department have made
mice and dogs markedly stronger. However, Sweeney said, the technical hurdles of
making gene transfer work in humans "have proven to be a lot more difficult, so
I don't think anybody has done any successful gene doping in athletes yet."

   The kind of immune suppression needed for an organ transplant calls for a
regimen of drugs and a risk of infection, he said.

   "This is not a trivial thing that some athlete can inject themselves in a
garage," Sweeney said, referring to the relative simplicity of taking steroids
with a syringe at home. "It may in the end keep it out of people. During the
period you would be [undergoing] immune suppression, you wouldn't be in
training. You would be a hospital patient."

   Late in July, a German television station aired an undercover report on the
availability of gene doping in China. In the report, a Chinese doctor offered
stem-cell therapy to a reporter posing as an American swimming coach. The doctor
in an unnamed Chinese hospital, showed with his face blurred, offered the
treatment for $24,000.

   Sweeney's take on the report: "Just because someone will sell you stem cells
does not mean that they will do anything other than make money for the person
selling them. It shows how people are willing to make money at the athletes'
expense but is not likely to help anyone's performance."

   Sweeney added, "It does reinforce my belief that when gene-therapy technology
is more mature, someone with the correct expertise will try to market gene
doping to the athletes."

   Already, Sweeney said he thinks his research could transfer to a sport such
as horse racing. An Australian horse breeder contacted him several years ago,
the professor said, though there are probably only a couple of dozen experts in
this country capable of collaborating on his specific form of gene therapy, he
added.

   "Unfortunately, there's always somebody if the money is right," Sweeney said.
"I guess when I watch sports, ever since Mark McGwire and Jose Canseco, I've
watched with a little more of a jaded eye, because it was so obvious watching
those guys and looking at their body profiles, that they were on steroids. I was
so incredulous at the time that baseball was ignoring it.

   "And then knowing the amount of doping that was going on in cycling, from
talking to people I know who are involved in that sport, and it was being
ignored for so long - it does make you jaded.

   "You think, 'Well the authorities don't really care,' and they tolerate these
things until it becomes a PR problem, and then they go after it. And so it does
change your perception of sports, and it reminds you that it's more a business
than a sport these days."

   Swimmer Dara Torres set an American record in the 50-meter freestyle at the
Olympic swim trials - at the age of 41. Sweeney is suspicious.

   "Something's going on that's not normal physiology," Sweeney said. "It
shouldn't happen."

   He is not willing to settle for the explanation that hard work and improved
training techniques can cause great and unexpected feats from swimmers,
sprinters or weightlifters. (Swimmer Jessica Hardy has already tested positive
for a banned substance and left the U.S. team.)

   "You don't believe it, so you just have to wonder how long it is until they
figure out what the person is doing," Sweeney said. "And if they don't figure
out and they win the gold medal at the Olympics, you walk away feeling, 'Well,
that was cheapened.' "

   Sweeney is on a WADA advisory board and said he believes that advances in
testing will make this the cleanest Olympics in at least the last decade, though
he just as quickly acknowledges that testing can't always keep up. Jacques
Rogge, the president of the International Olympic Committee, has said he
believes improved testing will have the opposite effect, predicting an increase
in drug positives from Athens to Beijing. Sweeney doesn't suggest the temptation
is lessening.

   "There's enough money here in athletics that people are willing to help the
athletes, like Balco," Sweeney said, referring to the California laboratory that
manufactured steroids and had relationships with, among others, baseball slugger
Barry Bonds and top sprinter Marion Jones. "If somebody's made an undetectable
steroid like Balco was doing - without a sample of it, without any clue of what
they're doing, [WADA] is not going to be able to test it for this Olympics, and
so the person may get away with cheating."

   Sweeney said Chinese testers weren't looking for growth hormone releasing
hormones, "so I told them they might consider developing a test for that. I
don't know if they did or not."

   While Sweeney believes that the Chinese government's anti-doping mandates are
real, he also understands another government mandate, that China will win every
gold medal possible.

   "The pressure is really on the coaches," Sweeney said. "That's why they have
developed a list of coaches they felt were suspect and would try to dope the
athletes. They were really cracking down on them and testing everyone who was
working with them, in particular. Even though the Chinese government and the
Chinese testing lab want to stop it, they freely admitted to me that there were
Chinese coaches and athletes who would try to dope if they didn't stop them."

   Sweeney said the drug-detection laboratories in Beijing are state-of-the-art,
as fully equipped as any Western lab.

   "Certainly the government has the wherewithal," Sweeney said of the testing
procedures, which indicated to him that no expense was spared. "My major
surprise was that they had the motivation."

   There may be extra motivation in one area.

   "They would probably find some amusement in catching some Americans doping,"
Sweeney said.

   Contact staff writer Mike Jensen

    at 215-854-4489 or mjensen@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2008


                              326 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             August 1, 2008 Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 983 words

HEADLINE: Endurance lift without lifting;
Discovery at Salk Institute makes ordinary mice run like marathoners

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Couch potatoes, take heart: A team of scientists at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla has made a discovery that might just make your dreams come true.

   They have uncovered a possible "exercise pill."

   When ordinary mice were fed two experimental drugs, they turned into marathon
mice, capable of running 44 percent longer on a treadmill than before they were
medicated, according to an article published today in the journal Cell.

   If transferred to humans, the pill may not give them the speed or muscle of
an Olympian, but it might make it less painful to leave behind the television
and hit the treadmill.

   More practical applications may be to help people with muscle diseases or
extreme obesity and help long-term hospital patients maintain a minimum fitness
level, said Salk team leader Ronald Evans.

   "In our society, there is an ever-decreasing amount of time for either
healthy food or exercise," said Evans, a medical investigator with the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute.

   "Compound that with people who had a medical need -- people who have long
hospital stays and surgery and as a result are inactive and disabled. I believe
the availability of drugs that could stimulate the effect of exercise could
reduce muscle wasting or atrophy," Evans said.

   Neither of the experimental drugs used by Evans' team has been approved for
use in humans. Still, he is mindful that his team's findings could be abused by
athletes seeking to boost their competitive edge.

   Those concerns shouldn't halt the research, he said.

   So Evans' team developed a diagnostic test for a blood or urine sample to
detect whether someone had used the compounds to genetically enhance
performance, a practice known as doping.

   The team's test was shared with organizations such as the World Anti-Doping
Agency, which is racing to have a test for humans ready for the Beijing
Olympics, which starts next week.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency would not comment on Evans' work but would
discuss the emerging issue of gene doping, the practice of using genetic
engineering to artificially enhance athletic performance.

   In the past few years, WADA has funded basic research programs into how
athletes might use -- and abuse -- gene transfer, and how to detect it.

   "WADA commits significant resources to anticipate doping trends, including by
closely cooperating with research teams and pharmaceutical companies at very
early stages of the development," said Frédéric Donzé, a WADA spokesman.

   People who are willing to use artificial means to enhance their performance
keep abreast of scientific discoveries that could help them, said Ted Friedmann,
director of the Center for Molecular Genetics at the University of California
San Diego.

   Friedmann is a leading authority on gene therapy -- the evolving medical
technology that inserts healthy or modified genes into the body to treat
diseases such as cystic fibrosis, cancer and immune system deficiencies.

   It is a dangerous process that uses viruses to transmit new genes into the
body, or the injection of genetic material into certain tissue, Friedmann said.
It requires expensive laboratory equipment and specific scientific know-how. And
it permanently alters a person's genetics, Evans said.

   Although there are dozens of promising gene therapies under way, the field
has suffered serious setbacks. In 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a
rare, inherited liver disease, died from a massive immune response to the viral
vector used to deliver genetic material to his cells.

   "The bottom line is that interfering with normal genetic mechanisms in living
organisms are not to be taken lightly and not to be undertaken except for the
treatment of serious disease," Friedmann said.

   With Evans' method of using drugs to enhance endurance, the genetic effect
disappeared when the mice were taken off the drugs. He said he pursued the
possibility of drugs because of the impracticality of using viruses and bits of
genes for genetic engineering.

   Four years ago, his team discovered the gene responsible for increasing
endurance. In that work, Evans showed that by genetically engineering mice to
permanently activate a genetic switch known as PPAR delta, their endurance was
enhanced. The mice were also resistant to weight gain even when fed a high-fat
diet that caused obesity in ordinary mice.

   In addition to giving them a lean physique, the genetically engineered mice
showed improved response to insulin, which lowered their blood-sugar levels.

   Evans' team wondered if a drug could be used to flick the body's endurance
switch.

   Pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline developed a drug to increase the level
of HDL, or good cholesterol, in the blood. Development of that drug, GW1516,
stalled in midstage clinical trials, so it is not commercially available.

   However, its composition is available in scientific journals. Postdoctoral
researcher and Cell article lead author Vihang Narkar began feeding GW1516 to
sedentary laboratory mice over four weeks.

   As a result, the mice had lower levels of fatty acids and blood sugar. But it
did not enhance their performance, Narkar said.

   An exercise regimen, up to 50 minutes on the treadmill, was then added to the
daily routine of the drugged mice.

   Within weeks, the endurance of the mice improved 77 percent compared with
mice on the same exercise regimen that were not fed the pill. The drugged mice
also showed a 38 percent increase in nonfatiguing muscle fibers.

   This indicated that exercise cooperates with the drug to intensify endurance,
Evans said.

   The researchers then gave the mice a combination of GW1516 and the compound
AICAR, which activates the energy sensor in mice and imitates the effects of
exercise.

   Twenty doses of AICAR treatment is like 20 days of exercise for the mice,
turning them into runners.

   "Like true exercise, this chemical exercise is remarkably effective and
hopefully can be shown to work in a similar fashion in people," Narkar said.

GRAPHIC: 3 PICS; PHOTOBY: 1,2,3. Nancee E. Lewis / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2008


                              327 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: According to some reports, gene doping by athletes might be right
around corner

BYLINE: Produced by Bob Young, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   The start of the Olympics in Beijing is just more than a week away, and the
Games may focus attention on what many fear will be the next step cheating
athletes are willing to take.

   It's called gene doping, and if you think it's science fiction then consider
this: A German television reporter recently posed as a swimming coach for a
documentary on the topic, and an unidentified Chinese doctor was caught by
hidden camera offering to provide stem-cell therapy to the make-believe
swimmers.

   Chinese officials told the Associated Press that the doctor was probably
"duping" the reporter/coach because the technology is "not operational."

   Well, if it's not, then it's just a matter of time.

   MSNBC reported that in 2002 that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA)
sponsored a meeting of experts on the topic, and the group agreed gene doping
was far in the future.

   But by 2006, the chairman of the panel, Cal-San Diego researcher Theodore
Friedmann, told MSNBC that he wasn't "so sanguine" about the issue anymore, and
that genetic scientists have told him "they are approached frequently by
athletes, trainers and entourage-type people asking what is available."

   So far, no athlete ever has been caught using gene therapy to cheat, but
there is good reason to fear that therapies aimed at treating people with
muscle-wasting disorders and other diseases might one day be used by athletes to
gain a competitive advantage.

   And the gene altering evidently would not make detectable changes in the
athlete's blood or urine, meaning it's going to be hard to detect.

   The San Diego Union-Tribune reported recently that a University of
Pennsylvania researcher figured out how to use a gene transfer to inactivate a
protein -- myostatin -- that tells muscles when to stop growing.

   He was able to get lab rats to grow twice the normal muscle mass even though
they didn't exercise.

   He probably named the rats Barry, Jose and Big Mac, but we're just
speculating.

   Anyway, MSNBC reports that during the doping trial of a German coach, Thomas
Springstein, evidence submitted suggested that Springstein had shown interest in
an experimental gene-therapy product, Repoxygen, that is designed to treat
anemia.

   Evidently it uses a virus to carry the human EPO gene -- erythropoietin --
along with a "hypoxia control element."

   The idea is that the control element detects low oxygen concentrations and
triggers the EPO gene, which then creates more red-blood cells to carry more
oxygen to muscles.

   Is there any wonder an allegedly dirty coach of endurance athletes was nosing
around about the stuff?

   Ringheads

   Maybe we shouldn't assume you care about the Olympics.

   Research done by Scarborough Sports Marketing indicates that those of us here
in the Valley are only "average" fans of the Summer Games.

   They surveyed fans across the spectrum of age, gender and education and found
that 57 percent here were "very, somewhat or a little" interested in the
Olympics. That's also the national average.

   Denver and Spokane, Wash., tied as cities with the most Olympic fans, 67
percent, which makes sense because Denver is near the U.S. Olympic Training
Center in Colorado Springs and Spokane isn't near a doggone thing, so those
folks would be at least "a little" interested in just about anything.

   We knew them when

   A while back, we told you about a small local company called Synergy Sports
Technology that was started by a former Grand Canyon assistant coach and Suns
video coordinator, Garrick Barr.

   Barr started the company to provide on-demand scouting information to NBA and
college teams, including video clips of every play in every game along with
statistical and trend breakdowns of players.

   It's been a huge success and is now being used in the NBA, WNBA and
Developmental League and is awaiting approval by the NCAA's compliance committee
with a growing number of college programs signed up.

   The NBA is going to make it available to fans through NBA TV and NBA.com.

   But even sweeter, to us anyway, is that EA Sports has incorporated the
technology into the "artificial intelligence" of its NBA Live 09 video game.

   So, not only will the players in the game be based on the actual tendencies,
strengths and weaknesses of the real players, the trends will be tracked daily
and automatically incorporated into the game.

   They call it "Dynamic DNA."

   So if Manu Ginobili falls into a 3-point shooting slump, so will his video
counterpart in NBA Live. If Steve Nash has a sore shoulder and suddenly is
reluctant to go to his left, so will his animation.

   Spooky. But cool.

   |

   Reach The Heat Index at bob.young@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8271.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2008


                              328 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                            July 30, 2008 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 342 words

HEADLINE: Children's gets $6.4M for sickle cell study

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell pofarrell@enquirer.com

BODY:

   pofarrell@enquirer.com

   The federal government is giving Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center $6.4 million to pay for sickle cell anemia research.

   The money from the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute "will make us a
leader in basic and translational research into sickle cell disease," said
Clinton Joiner, director of Cincinnati Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center at the
hospital. "This grant helps us look into the future to develop new ways to treat
and cure sickle cell disease. At the same time, we'll focus on how we can best
deliver to our patients the excellent therapies we already have."

   The money - disbursed over four years - will pay for these projects:

   Punam Malik will lead a project aiming to develop gene therapy to cure sickle
cell. Malik will study the feasibility of using an engineered virus developed at
the Corryville hospital to deliver genetic information to abnormal blood cells.
If successful, the therapy would permanently cure the disorder in patients who
get the therapy, researchers believe.

   Joiner will lead a project looking at ways to prevent the dehydration of
sickle cells by genetically manipulating how the cells use salt. The project
could ultimately improve patients' quality of life and life span.

   Monica Mitchell and Lori Crosby will study why children and teens don't stick
to hydroxyurea therapy. The drug reduces pain episodes and blood transfusions,
but research shows that about half of children and teens don't follow the
treatment. Mitchell and Crosby will try to determine what the barriers are and
how to overcome them.

   {}About sickle cell disease

   Sickle cell disease is a genetic disorder affecting hemoglobin, the protein
that carries oxygen in red blood cells.

   The disease makes blood cells rigid and distorted into sickle, or crescent,
shapes, instead of round.

   The misshapen cells can plug up small blood vessels and decrease blood flow
to different parts of the body, leading to severe pain, organ damage and
strokes.

   The disease affects about 100,000 people in the U.S., mostly of African
descent.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2008


                              329 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; The Way I See It; Pg. A71

LENGTH: 860  words

HEADLINE: Ricky's believe it or not; Environmental issues are real -- and aren't
going away

BYLINE: Rick Telander, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   When I write about global warming or the environment, I usually get a bunch
of e-mail and letters calling me a pinko, nut case, tree-hugger.

   My favorites are from the fellows -- they're always guys -- who say global
warming doesn't exist. They send me documents ''proving'' their case.

   Well, global warming exists, and scientists -- those who have not been
silenced or edited by Bush administration officials, anyway -- have lots of
proof.

   And almost all global-warming experts say we still have time to keep the
planet from becoming super-heated and unrecognizable by the 22nd century, if we
act now.

   It won't be fun, and it won't be business as usual. It will require a new way
of thinking, but it might be enlightening, uplifting and unifying as it occurs.

   Imagine, for instance, that you travel everywhere with your own eating
utensils, water cup and hand towel. Would that be so hard?

   In olden days, people didn't travel with wallets, cell phones, chargers,
credit cards, earbuds, iPods.

   Imagine eating at McDonald's and not creating a pile of trash that will need
a thousand years to decompose. Imagine oil companies using the sun.

   Anyway, here's a form of pollution that easily could be done away with:
crazy, unneeded light.

   Around the globe, the night sky is vanishing so fast that, as the Wall Street
Journal reported Friday, ''a coalition of naturalists, astronomers and medical
researchers consider it one of the fastest-growing forms of pollution, with
consequences for wildlife, people's health -- and the human spirit.''

   People can't see the stars, birds die by the millions, insects are
disoriented. Ever wonder why moths fly endlessly around a street lamp? It's
because they perceive it as the moon -- and it's hazardous to human health.

   Without natural darkness (and there are many places in Chicago, for instance,
where it never gets dark), humans don't produce enough melatonin, which, among
other things, suppresses tumors.

   Colorectal cancer and breast cancer increase in brightly lit nighttime areas
and for those who work night shifts.

   The International Agency for Research on Cancer at the World Health
Organization recently added the night shift to its formal list of probable human
carcinogens.

   We easily could dim and reduce our upward-pointing and unnecessary
illumination and fix a lot of this.

   But why listen to left-wing alarmists?

   - WHEN CLEAN-CUT U.S. Olympic swimmer Jessica Hardy, 21, tested positive for
the banned anabolic steroid clembuterol after the recent Olympic trials, it
reminded us that doping hasn't gone away. You can wrap yourself in the
red-white-and-blue, but cheating is universal.

   - I WAS TALKING with a group of national sportswriters Friday, including Ian
O'Connor of the Bergen (N.J.) Record and Don Banks of SI.com, and we all agreed
that Brett Favre can't think more than five to 10 minutes into the future --
about the length of a good touchdown drive.

   And that is why Favre can't comprehend what it means to retire tearfully,
forever, then come back four months later.

   - WE ALSO AGREED the Tampa Bay Buccaneers would be the best place for Favre
to end up.

   Tampa's warm, Jon Gruden's the coach and the Bucs aren't the dog-breath New
York Jets.

   - I WROTE LAST WEEK about the stupidity of paying more than $3 for a 25-ounce
bottle of water in Los Angeles when the city water is free.

   I didn't mention that L.A. municipal water recently won an award as the
best-tasting water in the nation.

   - WHY DOES ANYONE trust the Tour de France cyclists?

   Three stars already have been kicked out of the event this year for doping --
EPO, of course -- even though riders and team managers know drug testing is
constant, guaranteed and supposedly thorough.

   Well, yes, Floyd Landis preferred steroids. But EPO, which packs oxygen-rich
red blood cells into one's system, is still the drug du jour.

   I can't prove it, but I am certain no undrugged rider, including Lance
Armstrong, has won the Tour in the last quarter-century.

   I don't believe it's possible.

   Drugs work, you know.

   - THE BEIJING OLYMPICS will be as dirty as any, I guarantee you. Drug testing
be damned.

   Cheaters are always ahead of the game. We might not know who did what right
away, but salute champions warily, folks.

   Remember when BALCO's new stuff was undetectable? How about when stanozolol
and nandrolone were cutting-edge? Remember insulin and Minofidil, the narcolepsy
drug?

   You still think deceased Florence Griffith-Joyner wasn't sauced up when she
ran faster than any female ever has?

   At any rate, German journalists working on a report about the availability of
performance-enhancing drugs in China found a doctor who offered
performance-enhancing stem-cell gene therapy for $24,000.

   The on-camera journalist was posing as a U.S. swimming coach -- hmm, wonder
why -- and the doctor, according to the New York Times, said the treatments
would take two weeks to complete.

   ''I recommend four intravenous doses, perhaps twice,'' the doctor is quoted
as saying. ''The more, the better.''

   German gene-therapy expert and World Anti-Doping Agency official Patrick Diel
said: ''Quite frankly, this surpasses my worst fears.''

   Faster, higher, stronger.

   And crazier.

   Comment at suntimes.com.

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Ubhankar Banerjee, AP; Those who doubt global warming exists should ask
this polar bear how thinning ice affects him. ;

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2008


                              330 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; The Way I See It; Pg. A71

LENGTH: 860  words

HEADLINE: Ricky's believe it or not; Environmental issues are real -- and aren't
going away

BYLINE: Rick Telander, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   When I write about global warming or the environment, I usually get a bunch
of e-mail and letters calling me a pinko, nut case, tree-hugger.

   My favorites are from the fellows -- they're always guys -- who say global
warming doesn't exist. They send me documents ''proving'' their case.

   Well, global warming exists, and scientists -- those who have not been
silenced or edited by Bush administration officials, anyway -- have lots of
proof.

   And almost all global-warming experts say we still have time to keep the
planet from becoming super-heated and unrecognizable by the 22nd century, if we
act now.

   It won't be fun, and it won't be business as usual. It will require a new way
of thinking, but it might be enlightening, uplifting and unifying as it occurs.

   Imagine, for instance, that you travel everywhere with your own eating
utensils, water cup and hand towel. Would that be so hard?

   In olden days, people didn't travel with wallets, cell phones, chargers,
credit cards, earbuds, iPods.

   Imagine eating at McDonald's and not creating a pile of trash that will need
a thousand years to decompose. Imagine oil companies using the sun.

   Anyway, here's a form of pollution that easily could be done away with:
crazy, unneeded light.

   Around the globe, the night sky is vanishing so fast that, as the Wall Street
Journal reported Friday, ''a coalition of naturalists, astronomers and medical
researchers consider it one of the fastest-growing forms of pollution, with
consequences for wildlife, people's health -- and the human spirit.''

   People can't see the stars, birds die by the millions, insects are
disoriented. Ever wonder why moths fly endlessly around a street lamp? It's
because they perceive it as the moon -- and it's hazardous to human health.

   Without natural darkness (and there are many places in Chicago, for instance,
where it never gets dark), humans don't produce enough melatonin, which, among
other things, suppresses tumors.

   Colorectal cancer and breast cancer increase in brightly lit nighttime areas
and for those who work night shifts.

   The International Agency for Research on Cancer at the World Health
Organization recently added the night shift to its formal list of probable human
carcinogens.

   We easily could dim and reduce our upward-pointing and unnecessary
illumination and fix a lot of this.

   But why listen to left-wing alarmists?

   - WHEN CLEAN-CUT U.S. Olympic swimmer Jessica Hardy, 21, tested positive for
the banned anabolic steroid clembuterol after the recent Olympic trials, it
reminded us that doping hasn't gone away. You can wrap yourself in the
red-white-and-blue, but cheating is universal.

   - I WAS TALKING with a group of national sportswriters Friday, including Ian
O'Connor of the Bergen (N.J.) Record and Don Banks of SI.com, and we all agreed
that Brett Favre can't think more than five to 10 minutes into the future --
about the length of a good touchdown drive.

   And that is why Favre can't comprehend what it means to retire tearfully,
forever, then come back four months later.

   - WE ALSO AGREED the Tampa Bay Buccaneers would be the best place for Favre
to end up.

   Tampa's warm, Jon Gruden's the coach and the Bucs aren't the dog-breath New
York Jets.

   - I WROTE LAST WEEK about the stupidity of paying more than $3 for a 25-ounce
bottle of water in Los Angeles when the city water is free.

   I didn't mention that L.A. municipal water recently won an award as the
best-tasting water in the nation.

   - WHY DOES ANYONE trust the Tour de France cyclists?

   Three stars already have been kicked out of the event this year for doping --
EPO, of course -- even though riders and team managers know drug testing is
constant, guaranteed and supposedly thorough.

   Well, yes, Floyd Landis preferred steroids. But EPO, which packs oxygen-rich
red blood cells into one's system, is still the drug du jour.

   I can't prove it, but I am certain no undrugged rider, including Lance
Armstrong, has won the Tour in the last quarter-century.

   I don't believe it's possible.

   Drugs work, you know.

   - THE BEIJING OLYMPICS will be as dirty as any, I guarantee you. Drug testing
be damned.

   Cheaters are always ahead of the game. We might not know who did what right
away, but salute champions warily, folks.

   Remember when BALCO's new stuff was undetectable? How about when stanozolol
and nandrolone were cutting-edge? Remember insulin and Minofidil, the narcolepsy
drug?

   You still think deceased Florence Griffith-Joyner wasn't sauced up when she
ran faster than any female ever has?

   At any rate, German journalists working on a report about the availability of
performance-enhancing drugs in China found a doctor who offered
performance-enhancing stem-cell gene therapy for $24,000.

   The on-camera journalist was posing as a U.S. swimming coach -- hmm, wonder
why -- and the doctor, according to the New York Times, said the treatments
would take two weeks to complete.

   ''I recommend four intravenous doses, perhaps twice,'' the doctor is quoted
as saying. ''The more, the better.''

   German gene-therapy expert and World Anti-Doping Agency official Patrick Diel
said: ''Quite frankly, this surpasses my worst fears.''

   Faster, higher, stronger.

   And crazier.

   Comment at suntimes.com.

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Ubhankar Banerjee, AP; Those who doubt global warming exists should ask
this polar bear how thinning ice affects him.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2011


                              331 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1466 words

HEADLINE: The race against gene doping;
Officials expect a new form of sports cheating to appear: gene transfer ... and
they have turned to this UCSD researcher to help detect it.

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Past controversy has not made this year's Tour de France scandal-free.
Cycling's premier event, which ends today, has again been marred by busts for
illegal doping, with at least three riders thrown out and entire teams quitting.
The Summer Olympics begin Aug. 8, and rumors of illicit drug use are likely to
be rampant there, too.

   For the World Anti-Doping Agency, or WADA, eliminating the use of banned
substances to boost performance in sports is a difficult, endless challenge --
and a job likely to get tougher. Agency officials expect a new and more
problematic form of sports cheating to soon appear. It's called gene transfer
or, more commonly, gene doping.

   They have turned to University of California San Diego researchers for help.

   To date, no athlete has been caught gene doping, which involves injecting
genes or genetic material into the body to make it stronger, faster or more
resilient. In fact, there's no solid evidence any athlete has tried it, "though
I wouldn't be surprised to hear somebody had," said Dr. Ted Friedmann, director
of the Center for Molecular Genetics at UCSD. "Drugs in sports isn't going away,
but gene (doping) is the next big thing."

   Friedmann is a leading authority on gene doping and a pioneer in gene therapy
-- the evolving medical technology that inserts healthy or modified genes into
the body to treat serious, often deadly diseases such as cystic fibrosis, cancer
and immune system deficiencies.

   In the fight against sports doping, the metaphor is often a race, with the
cheaters usually one step ahead of the watchdogs. This time, authorities want a
head start. In the last few years, WADA has funded basic research programs into
how athletes might use -- and abuse -- gene transfer, and how to detect it.
Helping lead the effort is Friedmann, who will oversee a new clearinghouse for
data derived from WADA-funded studies and labs around the world.

   "If the idea is to pick needles out of a haystack, WADA wants all the hay in
one place," said Friedmann, who has worked with the organization since 2000. "It
wants a centralized bioinformatics effort that can result in a unified
approach."

   Currently, Friedmann said, there isn't much cross-talk among researchers
investigating gene transfer in sports. "And there's no lab that's equipped to
handle all of the data being produced."

   But with help from scientists at the San Diego Supercomputer Center,
Friedmann said the UCSD-based program will pull together all of the data
generated, organize it, collate it and help disseminate the findings.

   It's an unprecedented effort. Previous and current sports drug-testing
programs have tended to be reactive, responding to revelations about the abuse
of new drugs (or versions of old ones) with new, targeted tests.

   In recent years, the focus has been on anabolic steroids, human growth
hormone, known as HGH, and such banned drugs as erythropoietin, or EPO, which
boosts blood-oxygen content. Rigorous blood and urine testing appears to have
reduced steroid use. There is no widely available, effective test for HGH, but
experts say one is imminent.

   On June 8, highly ranked cyclist Riccardo Ricco was thrown out of the Tour de
France after testing positive for Cera, a third-generation version of EPO.
Authorities said Ricco may have thought his variant of Cera was undetectable,
but WADA investigators had developed a test for it in collaboration with the
Swiss maker.

   Gene doping presents different and greater challenges for sports sentinels.
Broadly speaking, it involves introducing genetic material into an athlete's
cells or tissues to help them work differently or better. Usually this means
making muscles grow stronger, regenerate faster or break down more slowly.

   The introduced material is indistinguishable from its natural counterpart and
found only in affected tissues. There is nothing to detect in blood or urine.

   Friedmann said the UCSD research effort is aimed, in part, at developing a
knowledge base of how gene doping affects the athlete's whole body. "We won't
look necessarily for the suspect agent, but for its broader effects," he said.
"Are there specific changes in the way targeted genes are expressed or how
proteins work that can be conclusively linked to gene doping?"

   In medicine, the goal of gene therapy is to find an effective treatment. In
sports, the goal is to generate a competitive edge.

   But at what cost? The history of gene therapy has been marked by serious
setbacks, including patient deaths. In 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old
with a rare, inherited liver disease, died from a massive immune response to the
viral vector used to deliver genetic material to his cells. In 2002 in France,
doctors used gene therapy to treat 12 boys with X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency, or "bubble-boy disease." The technique effectively treated
SCID, but at least three boys developed leukemia and one died.

   Despite the setbacks, progress in gene therapy is being made. Dozens of
clinical trials are under way, with researchers reporting varying degrees of
success in treating cancers and heritable diseases.

   "Gene therapy works. The proof of principle is there, but it will take
decades more to refine it," said Friedmann, who helped originate the idea in the
1970s. "Throwing genes around in a human is highly experimental. There are
surprises around every corner. It's full of dangers. It should be limited only
to very serious diseases."

   More to the point, no one really knows what the short- and long-term health
effects of gene transfer are in a healthy human. Animal models have produced
some eye-popping results. In the late 1990s, H. Lee Sweeney, a physiology
professor at the University of Pennsylvania, discovered how to inactivate a
protein called myostatin, which tells muscles when to stop growing. Sweeney
subsequently was able to create lab mice with twice the normal muscle mass even
though the rodents didn't exercise much.

   Bad things happen, too. In 1997 and 1998, researchers injected synthetic EPO
into monkeys and baboons. The idea was to see if boosting the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the animals' blood would result in greater physical stamina and
endurance.

   Initially, things looked good. In both species, red blood cell counts nearly
doubled within 10 weeks. Then, wrote Sweeney in a 2004 Scientific American
account, the animals' blood became "so thick it had to be regularly diluted to
keep their hearts from failing."

   With the right tools and know-how, Friedmann said gene doping isn't hard to
do.

   "The basic biology is easy. On this campus, there are probably 1,000 people
who could do it. What is hard is doing (gene transfer) well and safely, and
knowing what the outcome will be."

   It may be impossible to stop gene doping. "Sports is the camel's nose under
the tent," Friedmann said. "Genetic enhancement will likely touch many aspects
of future life, but one of the first will probably be sports."

   Thomas H. Murray, president of The Hastings Center, an independent bioethics
research center based in New York, predicted gene-doping probably wouldn't be a
significant issue at the Beijing Olympics, aside from the whispers and rumors.
But after that, he said, it's a different story.

   As it now stands, Murray said, gene doping violates WADA rules and the
general sense of what constitutes fair play. "It's ethically wrong, no different
from illegal drug use," he said.

   Some observers have argued that gene transfer is OK, that it simply levels
the playing field, potentially providing every athlete with roughly the same
biological equipment.

   Murray argues otherwise. Even if gene transfer were to become widely
available and commonly used, he said the technology would have no place in
sports. Who would decide which inherited, physical characteristics could be
genetically altered, he asked. And where would the line be drawn?

   More troubling, Murray said, "doping distorts the meaning of sports, which
has nothing to do with the size of molecules or whether to use a pill or an
injection. What matters here is what athletes and the people who watch athletes
believe sports to be about, what they believe the whole enterprise is trying to
do. Sports isn't about genetic modifications.

   "If people lose heart and give in to doping," Murray said, "sports will be
changed, and not for the better."

   [][][]

   OVERVIEW

   Background: Doping, the use of illegal performance-enhancing drugs such as
steroids and human growth hormone, has undermined the integrity of many sports.
The next problem: gene transfer to make the body stronger and extend endurance.

   What's changing: Sports authorities want to get ahead of the curve and have
turned to UCSD scientists for help in determining how athletes might use -- and
abuse -- genes, and how to detect it.

   The future: Doping tests that examine an athlete's whole body and genome.

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1 ILLUSTRATION; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Dr. Ted Friedmann, a
pioneer in gene therapy and director of the Center for Molecular Genetics at
UCSD, has been enlisted by the World Anti-Doping Agency to help create a
database on gene doping to promote detection. 3. OVERVIEW 4,5,6. Doping has
shadowed numerous sports careers. Above, Floyd Landis was the first Tour de
France winner to be stripped of the title for drug use. Riccardo Ricco, at top,
was kicked of this year's Tour after testing positive for EPO. Runner Marion
Jones, at right, lost her 2000 Olympic medals after admitting to doping.;
PHOTOBY: 1. Sean M. Haffey / Union-Tribune 2. Union-Tribune / BigStockPhoto
illustration 4. Associated Press, 2008 5. Sean M. Haffey / Union-Tribune, 2000
6. AFP/ Getty Images, 2006

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2008


                              332 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Sports Desk; RINGS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 736 words

HEADLINE: Documentary Shows Gene Doping for Sale

BODY:

   In China for the Olympics and looking for some gene doping? Seems you can get
everything you need for it, despite the country's well-publicized efforts to
stamp out illicit performance-enhancing drugs.

     That was the experience of journalists in a report shown on the German TV
network ARD on Monday. One of the journalists, posing as an American swimming
coach, was offered performance-enhancing stem-cell therapy by a Chinese-speaking
doctor  for $24,000.

     In the encounter, which took place in a Chinese hospital and was filmed by
a hidden camera, the doctor told the journalist, who was pretending to represent
an American swimmer, that it would take two weeks to complete the treatment. ''I
recommend four intravenous doses: 40 million stem cells, perhaps twice, the more
the better,'' said the doctor, whose face was blurred in the video.

     The hospital encounter was part of a documentary made by the German
production company Dokfilm. A one-minute English-language promotional clip of
the documentary is available on the Dokfilm Web site.

     Patrick Diel, a gene therapy expert at the Deutsche Sporthochschule in
Cologne, Germany, and a World Anti-Doping Agency official, expressed
astonishment that such performance enhancements were so readily available.

     ''I find this shocking,'' Diel said. ''It carries enormous health risks.
Quite frankly, this surpasses my worst fears.''POWELL BEATS BOLT IN 100Asafa
Powell led from start to finish in winning the 100 meters at the DN Galan meet
Tuesday in Stockholm, capitalizing on a weak start by Usain Bolt, the
world-record holder. Powell, the former world-record holder, won their highly
anticipated rematch in 9.88 seconds. Third place went to the Norwegian Jaysuma
Saidy Ndure in 10.06. (AP)

     TRIPLE JUMP CHAMPION IS OUT The Swedish Olympic triple jump champion
Christian Olsson has pulled out of the Beijing Games because of a hamstring
injury he sustained Tuesday night. A disappointed Olsson told Swedish radio
''there is no chance'' of him competing in the Olympics. ''I will have to sit
down and think about whether it's even worth continuing my career,'' he said.
Olsson, 28,  has been plagued by injuries since winning the gold medal in Athens
four years ago. (AP)

     OTTEY'S RECORD BID FAILS The Jamaican-born sprinter Merlene Ottey failed
Tuesday to become the first athlete to compete in eight Olympic Games. The
48-year-old Ottey, who competed in six Olympics for Jamaica before running for
Slovenia in 2004, failed to hit the qualifying time in the 100 meters by
28-hundredths of a second at a meet in Maribor, Slovenia -- her final attempt to
make that country's Olympic team. Ottey has won three silver and five bronze
medals. In 1999, she tested positive for steroids and was suspended. In 2000,
she was cleared. (NYT) SOCCER TUG OF WARSome of the world's big soccer clubs are
proving unwilling to let their players go to the Olympics. The Times's Jack Bell
explains:

     Argentina wants Lionel Messi for the Olympics. Brazil wants Diego and
Robinho for the Olympics.

     Barcelona does not want to release Messi. Werder Bremen does not want to
release Diego. Real Madrid tried to dissuade Robinho from making the trip, and
incurred the wrath of the Brazilian federation, which called the club's action
''disrespectful to Brazilian fans.''

     With the start of the Olympic men's soccer tournament on Aug. 7, the tug of
war between some of the top clubs in Europe and players who want to play for a
gold medal has intensified and could spill into court. According to FIFA rules,
the Olympic tournament is its de facto under-23 world championship, which means
clubs around the world are required to release players 23 and younger if asked.
That seems clear -- and it is -- except that even those rules are being
challenged.

     The real problem arises with over-age players. Each of the 16 nations in
the  tournament is allowed three overage players. Barcelona balked at allowing
Ronaldinho to join Brazil's team as an overage player, but Ronaldinho's new
club, A.C. Milan, has agreed to release him.

     Messi has every intention of joining the Argentine team, which will be
defending its gold medal. Real Madrid said on Monday that Robinho had developed
a groin injury; he was dropped by Brazil's team later that day.

     Werder Bremen said it was ready to go to a German sports tribunal  to bar
Diego, who has scored 26 goals in 63 matches, from going to China.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                              333 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              July 18, 2008 Friday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; P-com News; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: Penn's sleepless fruit fly may hold clues on sleep

BYLINE: By Faye Flam; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   In a lab at the University of Pennsylvania, a group of mutant fruit flies is
pulling off a feat that many a college student would envy - getting by with
little or no sleep.

   Researchers at Penn created these fly insomniacs by altering a gene they have
dubbed "Sleepless." They are investigating whether humans carry the same genes.

   The goal, said Penn neurobiologist Amita Sehgal, was not necessarily to
circumvent our persistent need to sleep away a third of our lives, but to figure
out what happens in the brain during sleep and understand the series of
mysterious molecular switches that extinguish the inner lights.

   The researchers announced their discovery in today's issue of the journal
Science.

   Of course there was a downside for these flies who grew sleepless in West
Philly: They lived only half as long as their slumbering counterparts, Sehgal
said.

   Sehgal said that a few years ago, researchers weren't sure whether fruit
flies really slept or were merely in repose. "Now we know it is sleep," she
said, in part by measuring whether it takes a much louder noise or a harder
jostle to make them stir.

   The finding follows a similar discovery in 2005 by researchers at the
University of Wisconsin. They created flies that slept one to two hours a night
by altering a gene called "Shaker."

   Chiara Cirelli, of the University of Wisconsin team, said as recently as
2000, sleep researchers were skeptical they could learn anything useful from
fruit flies. But that year her colleague Guilio Tononi dispelled those doubts by
implanting tiny electrodes in fruit flies' heads, proving that their brain-wave
patterns resembled those of sleeping humans and other mammals.

   The study of sleep in fruit flies and other animals could help doctors better
understand how much sleep people really need, and how to treat sleep disorders.

   "The central issue in sleep research is what sleep is for," said UCLA
neurobiologist Jerome Siegel. "It seems ridiculous that we can't answer this
question. But we can't," at least not yet.

   The Penn team created its night-owl fruit flies by making a whole variety of
mutants, exposing them to what are called transposable elements - stretches of
DNA that can move into the flies' genomelike viruses and alter the existing
genes.

   The researchers then look through these mutant flies for ones with unusual
sleep patterns.

   What they found were a few that slept just a fraction of their usual 12 hours
- many getting by with just one to two hours.

   That pattern was similar to what the Wisconsin researchers saw with their
gene, but there were some differences.

   Some Penn mutants appeared never to sleep at all, Sehgal said, though she
conceded that their tests of fly sleep aren't perfect, so the flies could be
sneaking in some snooze time.

   By examining the DNA of these flies, Sehgal found all had damage to one
particular gene - the one the researchers dubbed Sleepless.

   To bolster the evidence that they had isolated a crucial sleep gene, they
gave some mutant flies the equivalent of gene therapy, adding back copies of the
sleep gene. Those flies stopped pulling all-nighters and started napping
normally.

   Sehgal said they did not know yet whether humans shared this gene with the
fruit fly. But it wouldn't be surprising since both species share a number of
other genes, including two called "Per" and "Clock," which regulate our
circadian rhythms.

   More genes have been found in mice that affect sleep - reducing it by 20 or
even 50 percent, said Wisconsin's Cirelli, but only Shaker and Sleepless have
shown a greater effect on sleep.

   She said the Shaker gene was associated with something called a potassium
channel - a conduit for charged particles that allows signals to travel through
the brain. Sleepless appears to determine whether these channels are open or
closed.

   The genes seem to work in concert, contributing to a mechanism for
periodically shutting down connections between brain cells.

   "Sleep is not just this passive stage, at least at the molecular level," said
Allan Pack, a sleep researcher at Penn who was not associated with this latest
study. "It's a very active stage. But why do we need to do so much of it?"

   One theory, he said, is that sleep is a time when your brain creates new
proteins and repairs damage. Others have proposed that it helps replenish
energy.

   Some scientists also argue that sleep is required for the building and
rerouting of connections among brain cells that form and consolidate memories.

   Whatever sleep does, it's not unique to human beings, said UCLA sleep
researcher Siegel. It was long thought sleep was related to human intelligence
and creativity - especially the phase known as REM sleep, when we do most of our
dreaming.

   In Freudian psychology, he said, dreams carry important symbolism. "Because
of the connection to dreaming, it's natural to think REM sleep has some higher
cognitive function," he said.

   But as many dog owners know, canines indulge in plenty of REM sleep, in which
they can seem to be chasing squirrels or other creatures in their dreams.

   Siegel believes scientists may be reading too much into sleep. Natural
selection will favor any trait that helps animals survive and reproduce, and
most animals are simply safer sleeping some of the time - especially if they are
only able to see well in the daytime or at night.

   Most people with kids would consider them safer at night if they're asleep in
their beds rather than roaming around the streets, he said. Our relentless daily
need for sleep could have evolved because it kept many of our animal and human
ancestors out of trouble.

   In which case, sometimes a dream is just a dream.

   Contact staff writer Faye Flam

   at 215-854-4977 or fflam@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2008


                              334 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 263 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   ** Former Transkaryotic Therapies CEO Richard Selden will pay $1.2 million in
a settlement reached with the Securities and Exchange Commission. He was accused
of withholding negative information about drug studies while selling stock to
benefit himself.

   ** With a median rate of $460 a month, Boston ranks behind only New York City
in the latest Colliers International survey of the most expensive parking
places.

   ** Mappetite, a New York firm that produces food-centric city guides, is
eyeing production of a Boston guide for late next year.

   ** Konami Corp., the Japanese creator of the ``Dance Dance Revolution'' video
game, sued Viacom Inc.'s Harmonix studio in Cambridge, claiming its ``Rock
Band'' game violates patents.

   ** Crane & Co., which makes the paper for printing U.S. currency, sold a
minority ownership stake to a private equity firm - the first time in the Dalton
firm's 238-year history that the Crane family has given up sole ownership.

   ** Because of its ``critical mass of research universities that spur
innovation,'' Boston ranks No. 2 among Forbes.com's ``Best Cities for Young
Professionals.'' San Francisco topped the list of 40 spots, displacing previous
No. 1, New York, which fell to fourth.

   ** Dow Chemical Co. agreed to buy rival Rohm and Haas Co. for more than $15
billion in cash.

   ** Toyota Motor Corp. will start producing the hybrid Prius in the U.S. for
the first time as the Japanese automaker adjusts operations.

   - STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

   Inside: Long-obscure FHA mortgages are making a splash in today's stricter
home-loan market. Real Estate, Page 28.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008


                              335 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: Ex-biotech CEO to pay SEC more than $1.1m Agency says he misled
investors about drug

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   A former Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. executive agreed to pay more than $1.1
million to settle claims that he misled investors about problems facing the
Cambridge biotech company's flagship drug, the government said yesterday.

   The Securities and Exchange Commission accused former Transkaryotic chief
executive Richard F. Selden, 49, of inflating the company's stock by making
optimistic statements about the drug Replagal, which was intended to treat a
rare disorder called Fabry's disease, while hiding the fact it failed a key
clinical trial and that he knew federal regulators were likely to reject the
company's application to market the drug. The SEC said the Food and Drug
Administration told the company on several occasions that it needed further
trials to win approval, something the company didn't tell investors before
Selden sold 90,000 shares of company stock.

   "We believe this case shows the SEC's continuing commitment to strong action
against company executives who mislead investors," said SEC spokesman David
Bergers.

   Ultimately, Transkaryotic's drug stumbled in the United States, and Selden
was fired in February of 2003. British drug maker Shire PLC bought the company,
known as TKT, for $1.6 billion in 2005, renaming it Shire Human Genetic
Therapies. But the SEC investigation continued.

   The SEC sued Selden three years ago, accusing him of pocketing $1.6 million
in illicit profits from selling the stock before telling investors the company's
experimental drug was in trouble.

   To settle the suit, Selden agreed to pay a penalty of $125,000 and give up
$714,800 in profits from selling 90,000 shares of stock, plus $326,617 in
interest. Bergers said the profit figure was lower in yesterday's settlement
because after further analysis the SEC came up with a more accurate estimate of
how much Selden earned.

   A judge will determine whether to bar Selden from serving as an officer or
director for other public companies.

   Selden's lawyer couldn't be reached for comment yesterday. But at the time
the SEC filed its complaint, Selden's lawyer said his client followed advice
from the company's lawyers about what to disclose publicly.

   Many companies struggle with how much detail to divulge about their
negotiations with the FDA while undertaking the lengthy process of trying to get
a drug approved. The agency rarely comments on a pending drug application,
leaving investors at least partially in the dark.

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2008


                              336 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2008 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B-07

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: National Jewish changing its name The hospital will be known as
National Jewish Health, a move to better reflect its broader current emphasis.

BYLINE: Alex McCarthy The Denver Post

BODY:

   National Jewish Medical and Research Center announced Thursday it is changing
its name to reflect its expansion beyond its mainstay services.

   Now National Jewish Health, the 109-year-old hospital at East Colfax Avenue
and Colorado Boulevard in Denver is known for its programs in respiratory and
immunologic diseases, including asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and allergies. It is adding lung-cancer treatment and cardiology to its list of
principal services.

   Dr. Michael Salem, chief executive and president of National Jewish, said the
"Medical and Research Center" descriptor was limiting in light of what National
Jewish does with care, education of the next generation of doctors and
scientists, and the inclusion of programs to stop smoking and manage weight. The
hospital also has a school for critically ill kindergartners through
eighth-graders who are receiving treatment.

   "If you look at all those things, we clearly have moved toward much more of a
health organization," Salem said.

   The name change is part of a 10-year strategic plan enacted 18 months ago to
expand National Jewish's goals.

   "This era of medicine is changing from being reactive - where you go to the
doctor in response to something - to being much more preventative care and
personalized medicine," Salem said.

   National Jewish's personalized medicine will bring together research and
clinical care, using genetic and other information to target more tailored and
individualized treatments, Salem said.

   The board of directors is investing $40 million over several years for the
plan's new infrastructure, including investment in advanced diagnostics,
extended capabilities in genetics and therapeutics, and recruitment of new
faculty, as well as investment in current faculty and staff, Salem added.

   "These are not unique ideas; for us, this is just an evolution," Salem said.

   Alex McCarthy: 303-954-1381 or amccarthy@denverpost.com

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008


                              337 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 27, 2008 Friday
                               MIDDLESEX EDITION

SECTION: MIDDLESEX; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: ACHIEVEMENTS

BODY:

   Edison teen competes in national pageant The 51st America's Junior Miss
National Finals is right around the corner, and a resident from Edison will
represent the Garden State.

   Amy Kao, a recent graduate from John P. Stevens High School in Edison, went
to Mobile, Ala., last week to prepare for the finals, which take place this
weekend.

   Kao is also participating in community service activities, special events and
long rehearsals during her two-week stay on the Gulf Coast.

   Student designs logo

   for town library

   The building at Old Bridge Plaza is more than the township's library. It's a
place for people and service, something library administrators had hoped to
express. To do this, they realized they needed to replace their old logo, which
was of a building, with something new.

   Recent Old Bridge High School graduate Zaigham Mir had the solution. The
library held an art competition to find its next logo that began back in March,
and Mir's work was selected by a committee from a pool of 84 entries.

   Mir was announced as the winner June 12, when he received a $150 prize and a
plaque with his framed artwork. The library used his logo to represent people,
books, community and service.

   Lattime is named

   institute deputy director

   The Cancer Institute of New Jersey gave a familiar face a new role.
Plainsboro resident Edmund C. Lattime, professor of surgery at UMDNJ-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School, has been named to serve as the new deputy director at
the Cancer Institute of New Jersey

   Lattime joined the institute in 1998 following faculty appointments first at
Memorial Sloan Kettering and then at the Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas
Jefferson University in Philadelphia. His laboratory and clinical studies focus
on tumor immunology, gene therapy and the development of vaccines for cancer
treatment.

   As deputy director, he will be responsible for continuing the development of
the research programs.

   While research is a main component of his work, Lattime also serves as the
associate director for education and training at the Cancer Institute of New
Jersey and is responsible for coordinating numerous seminar series and
continuing medical education opportunities, including the Governor's Conference
on Effective Partnering in Cancer Research, which was started in 2003 with the
goal of raising the visibility of cancer research in New Jersey.

   He also co-chairs the Annual Retreat on Cancer Research in New Jersey, which
encourages leading experts in the basic science and clinical aspects of cancer
to join together to share their work with each other and the public. Lattime
currently chairs the National Cancer Institute's Cancer Immunopathology and
Immunotherapy grant review panel. He has authored more than 100 scientific
publications and is the editor of "Gene Therapy of Cancer," a book currently in
its second edition.

   Chamber recognizes

   woman for service

   The Middlesex Chamber of Commerce has honored Maria Romano, vice president
and regional manager at the Provident Bank, as a Community Leader of
Distinction. The award is reserved for individuals who have made outstanding
contributions to their communities and the chamber.

   Romano has been an active member of her community and several civic
organizations. Through her involvement with the East Brunswick Education
Foundation, she has worked with students who are interested in business to teach
them entrepreneurial skills, and offered workshops on the importance of saving
and the basics of banking.

   Romano also belongs to service organizations such as the Rotary Club and
Raritan Valley YMCA.

   Her other experiences include working with women business owners to share her
financial expertise on how to run a successful business. She presents advice at
seminars at The Provident Bank and through her memberships with the New Jersey
Association of Women Business Owners, Business Network International and the
Middlesex and Western Monmouth Chambers of Commerce.

   Saint Peter's nurse

   earns recognition

   Susan J. D'Angelo, a charge nurse in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit at the
Children's Hospital at Saint Peter's University Hospital, has been awarded the
2008 Governor's Nursing Merit Award for Registered Professional Nurses in Acute
Care.

   The award is presented each year by the New Jersey Department of Health and
Senior Services to recognize nurses for their contributions to nursing service
excellence. D'Angelo, a Bridgewater resident, is one of 13 nurses chosen from
among 114 nominees statewide to receive this year's award.

   After graduating from Fairleigh Dickinson University in 1984 and earning an
associate's degree in nursing at Muhlenberg School of Nursing in 1993, D'Angelo
worked as a staff nurse in the newborn nursery at Saint Peter's University
Hospital. In 1995, she transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and was
promoted to charge nurse six months later.

   As a day charge nurse on the 54-bassinet unit, D'Angelo is part of the
interdisciplinary intensive care team and coordinates the medical and surgical
management of critically ill newborns admitted to the NICU. She also maintains
the efficient operation of the unit, mentors newly hired nurses and educates
families in the complex care of their fragile infants.

   Photo Credit: 1. PHOTO BY KIMBERLY SCHIMMEL

   0C9C34A6DA7BD980

GRAPHIC: 1. Family Camp Out: Cub Scout Pack 3 of Monroe Township had a great
weekend at its annual Family Camp Out, held at Quail Hill Scout Reservation in
Manalapan from June 13-15. Almost 100 people - scouts and their families -
attended. The weekend included fishing, archery, volleyball and other games. The
scouts also learned first-aid techniques, map and compass reading, fire
building, knots, shelter construction and how to shoot water balloons from a
giant catapult. 2. Good days for the Knights: After being out of the league for
a few years, the St. Augustine Lady Knights softball team was back and ready to
play this spring in the New Brunswick League. They finished tied for second in
the regular season with an 8-3 record, and finished third in the playoffs. The
team, based in the Kendall Park section of South Brunswick, is coached by Ms.
Halsey, Mrs. Baumley and Mrs. Hernandez.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2008


                              338 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Cincinnati Enquirer (Ohio)

                             June 26, 2008 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: Regional health center a research powerhouse

BYLINE: Peggy O'Farrell pofarrell@enquirer.com

BODY:

   Children's Hospital   An engine for economic growth

   pofarrell@enquirer.com

   {}CORRYVILLE &ndash; A newly expanded lab at Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center is supplying specially engineered viruses to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and other research sites to help develop new treatments for
cancers, sickle cell anemia and other disorders.

   Work in the aseptic processing laboratories, in the hospital's new research
tower, eventually will lead to the development of new drugs and healthier kids,
hospital officials said.

   In the lab, scientists tweak viruses until they don't carry viruses. They
then sell those viruses to other institutions that implant them with medication
or genes to treat disease.

   The researchers' work also will lead to new jobs and a healthier local
economy, hospital officials said Wednesday as they released a new
economic-impact statement.

   In the past decade, the hospital has added an average of more than 700
employees a year, said Dee Ellingwood, senior vice president of planning and
business development for the hospital. Average salary for those jobs is about
$55,000, he said.

   "These are not entry-level positions we're talking about," he said. "These
are physicians, scientists, research assistants, nurses." In one research lab
focusing on cardiovascular biology, more than 20 research jobs will be added in
the next two years or so.

   This year, the hospital has more than 10,000 employees. In 1996, about 3,540
people worked there.

   In fiscal year 2007, the Corryville hospital's economic impact totaled $2.7
billion &ndash; a 78 percent increase since 2002, when the hospital commissioned
its last impact study, Ellingwood said.

   The economic impact study was conducted by UC's Economics Center for
Education & Research.

   Doug Moorman, vice president of economic development for the Cincinnati USA
Regional Chamber, estimated that the hospital is second only to
Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky International Airport in terms of generating jobs
and revenue in the region.

   In 2003, the airport's economic impact was calculated at $4.5 billion. Cuts
in service and jobs have probably reduced that, Moorman said.

   It's often a shock for the public to realize how much economic muscle
hospitals and other health-care providers flex, he said. Cincinnati Children's
annual budget is about $1.5 billion. The University of Cincinnati this week
approved a budget of $1 billion.

   Research and the products discovered through it, including vaccines, are
making up a growing chunk of the hospital's business. Cincinnati Children's
ranks second nationally among pediatric hospitals for winning grants from the
National Institutes of Health, with $80 million a year. Boston Children's
Hospital ranks first.

   In the virus lab, researchers have produced more than 2,200 engineered
viruses for 15 research institutions around the world, said Johannes Vanderloo,
who oversees the lab.

   In the last few years, the lab has brought in outside contracts of more than
$1 million.

   But as gene-therapy possibilities grow, demand for the engineered viruses
that the lab produces will increase, he said.

   "There's a great need for these types of manufacturing facilities," he said.

   Discoveries made by researchers at Cincinnati Children's will generate almost
$18 million in revenue in fiscal year 2008, said David Glass, assistant director
of the hospital's research foundation. The bulk of that revenue will come from
sales of a vaccine that protects babies against rotavirus, he said, but other
discoveries are also producing revenue.

   In August, Cincinnati Children's will open its new Liberty Township campus.
The center will feature a 24-hour emergency room, along with lab and diagnostic
services and specialty care. Doors open to patients Aug. 11.

   Moorman called the hospital "a tremendous jobs engine" for the region. The
full report is available online at www.cincinnatichildrens.org/cincy-impact.

   About Children's

   The Corryville hospital was established in 1883. It has 475 registered
inpatient beds, plus another 36 residential psychiatric beds. Fiscal year 2007
highlights:

   26,804 Admissions

   93,416 Emergency room visits

   14,388 Home care visits

   28,961 Surgical procedures (inpatient and outpatient)

   10,281 Total employees

   $1,159,511,000 Total operating revenues

   $1,136,012,000 Total operating expenses

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2008


                              339 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 26, 2008 Thursday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 2363 words

HEADLINE: Small targets;
Mitochondrial disease strikes at the cellular level, hitting children hardest

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   At 8 months old, Mikey Tighe suffered an unexplained seizure but recovered.
Over the next two years, the Spring Valley boy "got every kind of test
imaginable," said his mother, Grace. "Everything came back negative."

   Then, just before his third birthday in 2005, Mikey went into severe
respiratory distress, unable to breathe. Again, he recovered, but no cause was
found.

   Less than a year later, he had a second mysterious respiratory attack -- only
worse. Doctors were flummoxed. His symptoms fit no obvious disease or diagnosis.

   This time, Mikey didn't recover quickly. He slipped into a coma that lasted 2
1/2 months. "When he woke up, he said `Mom,' " recalled Grace. "It was the last
thing he said."

   Now almost 5, Mikey uses a wheelchair, with limited control of his body. His
head lolls. His left arm flails, while his right arm moves hardly at all. He
attends school -- a special-education preschool program at Lindbergh Schweitzer
Elementary -- but spends most nights at Rady Children's Hospital in Kearny Mesa.

   Mikey was eventually diagnosed with Leigh's syndrome, one of a diverse group
of disorders that fall under the broad classification of mitochondrial disease
(MD). It's an inherited condition, the result of a defect or mutation in Mikey's
mitochondria -- the tiny organelles found in every nucleated cell in the human
body.

   Mitochondria are best known as cellular power plants, responsible for
converting sugars into usable energy. As such, they are critical not only to the
basic functioning of each cell, but also to the body's overall metabolism.

   Mikey's condition is relatively rare. One estimate puts the incidence rate
for Leigh's syndrome at 1 in every 77,000 births. Mitochondrial disease in
general is more common. It's estimated that the minimal risk of a U.S. child
developing a form of mitochondrial disease before age 10 is 1 in 4,000.

   But mitochondrial disease may be far more widespread than that. For one
thing, it is not strictly a childhood disease. Half of all cases first appear in
adulthood. Indeed, experts suspect dysfunctional mitochondria may be linked to a
wide range of well-known diseases, from diabetes, heart disease, stroke and
multiple sclerosis to Alzheimer's disease, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.

   "You might even say that aging is the ultimate mitochondrial disease," said
Dr. Robert Naviaux, an associate professor of medicine and pediatrics at the
University of California San Diego.

   No one, of course, has figured out how to cure aging. No one has figured out
mitochondrial disease, either. Doctors can effectively treat some symptoms of
some conditions some of the time, but the broader, underlying affliction remains
incurable. It is progressive, degenerative and frequently fatal.

   That particularly describes Leigh's syndrome, according to the National
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). Leigh's has a mortality
rate of 50 percent per year after diagnosis. It often strikes hardest at the
youngest. The worst cases die within a few years of diagnosis. "Those with
partial deficiencies have a better prognosis and may live to be 6 or 7 years of
age," NINDS reports. "Some have survived to their mid-teenage years."

   Grace Tighe, who wants to become a nurse, has heard these numbers. But she's
Mikey's mother and so remains full of hope and optimism. "To tell you the truth,
I'm still in denial," she said. "The fact is, Mikey's still here. I'm going to
do this one day at a time and just hope to see Mikey the next morning."

   Outside in

   If a cure for mitochondrial disease is eventually to be found, it will be up
to doctors and researchers like Naviaux and Dr. Richard Haas, co-directors of
the UCSD Mitochondrial and Metabolic Disease Center, one of only 30 or so such
specialized centers in the world.

   Haas, who is a professor of neuroscience and pediatrics at UCSD, is Mikey's
doctor. Years ago, he became interested in mitochondrial disease after examining
a patient with Leigh's syndrome. Haas had never seen anything quite like it,
though he had seen every symptom before.

   "There must be 50 different ways that mitochondrial disease can present
itself," Haas said, "That's one of the biggest problems, because it can look
like so many things."

   An official diagnosis of mitochondrial disease requires that three or more
organ systems are deemed to be failing or that a recognizable disease is present
but displays atypical symptoms. Making a diagnosis almost invariably involves
extensive testing, including a brain MRI and muscle biopsy.

   One reason mitochondrial disease may be so hard to define is that
mitochondria are so fundamentally involved in life and living. Scientists
believe mitochondria originated eons ago as free-living bacteria that were
absorbed and incorporated into eukaryotes (cells with nuclei) as complex life
developed on Earth.

   The relationship is endosymbiotic. The cell provides refuge and sustenance;
the mitochondria provide the means to convert food into a form of energy (called
adenosine triphosphate) that the cell can use. But mitochondria, says Naviaux,
have evolved into much more than mere fuel factories. The human body consists of
more than 250 kinds of nucleated cells. Each cell type contains mitochondria
tailored to its particular needs.

   "Mitochondria in a neuron (a brain cell) are different from mitochondria in
an astroglial cell that's right next to it," Naviaux said.

   High-energy cells have lots of mitochondria. Photoreceptor cells in the eye,
for example, have thousands. Mitochondria make up 80 percent of the cell's
volume. Heart muscle cells are 40 percent mitochondria by volume.

   On the other hand, a platelet or white blood cell contains only two to six
mitochondria. And a red blood cell, which has no nucleus, has no mitochondria,
though mitochondria are critical to its construction.

   Packed inside the nucleus of every human cell is roughly 6 et of DNA -- a
full set of inherited genetic blueprints for that individual. Mitochondria
contain DNA too, the only other cellular structure that can make that claim.
Because of its distinct origins, mitochondrial DNA (known as mtDNA) is different
from nuclear DNA. It is transmitted only through the female.

   Remarkably, very few of the genes in mtDNA encode for its signature
energy-making function. Most genes -- a whopping 95 percent -- appear to be
involved in other, less well-defined duties. They tell the cell how to build,
use, break down and recycle proteins -- the workhorses of life.

   It is this broad, jack-of-all-trades talent that makes mitochondria so
intrinsically valuable to life and health. When mitochondria do their job, our
bodies work well. When they don't, thanks to a harmful mutation or a
gene-copying error, bad things happen.

   Julia's story

   In 1999, at the age of 4, Julia Haith of Chula Vista was diagnosed with
diabetes. But that was just the beginning of her problems. When she was in the
second grade, her eyes began to droop. She lost energy and strength. She fell a
lot.

   "There were times when Julia would go into a kind of semi-coma sleep," said
her mother, Carmella. "She would sleep for three to five days. It was like her
brain wasn't being fed and would just shut down for a while."

   Every time Julia awoke from one of these semi-coma sleeps, her condition
would be worse. When she was 11, she went to sleep one day and woke up unable to
walk anymore. As in Mikey's case, doctors struggled to figure out what was going
on.

   "It was very frustrating," said Carmella. "I didn't know what to expect next,
and the doctors couldn't tell me."

   Julia, too, was eventually diagnosed with a form of mitochondrial disease.
Two years ago, she had a pacemaker implanted in her weakening heart. Carmella
says her daughter is now doing reasonably well, attending sixth grade at the
local public school for two hours a day and doing many of the things that
13-year-old girls do: homework, reading, watching TV, talking on the phone.

   "I also like to crack my knuckles," Julia said.

   Treatment is strictly therapeutic. It consists of five insulin shots each day
for her diabetes, six kinds of oral medication and a daily intravenous infusion
of magnesium. Carmella said there are plans to begin physical therapy to
strengthen Julia's muscles.

   Nutrient therapy is a common form of treatment for MD, the idea being that
high doses of key vitamins, antioxidants and coenzymes may encourage improved
mitochondrial function. It generally works, said Haas, but rarely produces
dramatic improvement.

   More promising but also more distant and still unproven are approaches like
somatic gene therapy, said Dr. Salvatore DiMauro, a mitochondrial specialist at
The Neurological Institute of New York and Columbia University.

   "There are glimmers of hope."

   Specifically, DiMauro said, researchers are investigating the possibility of
correcting and "recoding" a mutant mtDNA gene, "essentially converting it into a
normal nuclear gene." The work, however, remains at the in vitro, or test tube,
stage.

   Meanwhile, DiMauro said English scientists have developed reagents --
substances used to create a chemical reaction -- that may reduce the percentages
of mutant mitochondria in an mtDNA genome.

   But profound hurdles remain. The track record for gene therapy is mixed; most
efforts thus far have fallen short of expectations or failed altogether.
Similarly, any effort to convert a large enough percentage of mutant
mitochondria to elicit a recognizable therapeutic effect is likely to be
extremely difficult. And there's no telling yet if the therapy will also cause
harm.

   Small wonders

   Mitochondria are incredibly tiny, ranging from 0.5 micrometer to 1 micrometer
in size. (A micrometer is one-millionth of a meter. A hair is typically 25 to
100 micrometers wide.) Yet they represent one of medicine's bigger mysteries.
They were discovered in the 1800s, but it was not until 1963 that scientists
learned they contained DNA. Most doctors, said Naviaux, possess only a basic
knowledge of mitochondria, stuff they learned in college and medical school.

   One result: In 1996, a patient would see 12 doctors on average before being
referred to a mitochondrial disease expert.

   That has improved, said Naviaux. The average number of doctors seen now is
less than half that. But funding for mitochondrial disease research remains
minuscule. According to the United Mitochondrial Disease Foundation, the
National Institutes of Health spends roughly $12 million each year on
mitochondrial disease research out of an annual budget of $29 billion. Last
year, only 2 percent of NIH grants even included the word "mitochondria."

   That's appalling, say Naviaux, Haas and other researchers, who argue that a
better, fuller understanding of mitochondrial function and dysfunction would
likely help explain myriad ills, including some of humanity's most confounding
conditions.

   A case in point: In 2000, at the age of 19 months, a seemingly healthy girl
named Hannah Poling received her standard vaccinations against childhood
diseases like measles, mumps and chicken pox. In the months that followed,
Hannah suffered from fevers, diarrhea and appetite loss, and began screaming. By
February 2001, she reportedly had lost some speech ability, no longer made eye
contact and didn't sleep through the night. She was diagnosed with autism.

   Her father and mother -- a practicing neurologist and a registered nurse --
blamed the vaccination shots for causing the autism -- a widespread and
persistent claim but one unsubstantiated by research. Indeed, in the same year
that Hannah was diagnosed with autism, an independent review by the Institute of
Medicine found no association between vaccines and autism. The American Academy
of Pediatrics and the Centers for Disease Control say there is no
cause-and-effect link.

   Nonetheless, Hannah's parents sued, filing a case in a federal court that
handles vaccine claims. Late last year, in an unprecedented act, attorneys for
the U.S. government conceded that Hannah's vaccines were probably linked to her
autistic condition.

   But the ruling was not quite the legal and medical victory that anti-vaccine
forces immediately claimed. Government lawyers and a jury concluded that Hannah
had an underlying undiagnosed mitochondrial disease. The shots had simply
worsened the disease. Fever -- a common but usually mild side effect in some
vaccinated children -- had resulted in brain disease that appeared as symptoms
of autism. Hannah also suffers from muscle weakness, motor-skills problems and
gastrointestinal difficulties -- all documented symptoms of mitochondrial
disease.

   Naviaux said if more was known about MD, cases like Hannah's might not
happen. "As a general policy, everybody should be immunized because the overall
health benefits are simply too compelling and indisputable," he said. "But in
children with known histories of adverse immune reactions, the kind of thing you
see in mitochondrial disease, decisions could and should be made on a
case-by-case basis."

   Children are the primary interest of MD researchers because it's generally
easier to identify genetic influences because they have had less exposure to
environmental factors, such as pollutants, than adults have. But adults, too,
would benefit from answers.

   Fifteen years ago, when she was 43, Rachel Hernandez of Chula Vista began
having trouble swallowing. Her voice became hoarse. She started to feel weak.
Worst of all, her eyelids began to droop. It was hard to see.

   Her doctors didn't know what was wrong and could provide no remedy, except to
suggest eyelid surgery. She underwent that procedure. Twice. But the problems
either didn't go away or eventually returned. After several years, Hernandez was
finally diagnosed with a form of mitochondrial disease and prescribed a vitamin
therapy, which has helped.

   But her eyes continue to cause trouble. She needs a third surgery.

   "Unless I pull my eyelids up, everything is blurry. Mostly, I see a lot of
eyelashes," she said. "I don't really understand my disease. All I know is that
it affects different parts of the body, that there's basically no cure right
now, just ways to control it."

   Hernandez says she would like to control her disease long enough to see a
cure, eyelids notwithstanding.

CORRECTION-DATE: July 3, 2008

CORRECTION:

   In a story about mitochondrial disease in last week's Quest section, letters
were left out of the word "feet" in the sentence beginning, "Packed inside the
nucleus of every human cell is roughly 6 feet of DNA ... "

GRAPHIC: 4 PICS; 1 DIAGRAM; CAPTIONS: 1. Four-year-old Mikey Tighe of Spring
Valley, who suffers from mitochondrial disease, slipped into a coma when he was
3. "When he woke up, he said `Mom,' " recalled his mother, Grace. "It was the
last thing he said." 2. In spite of mitochondrial disease, Julia Haith (right)
of Chula Vista engages in many normal activities for a 13-year-old: homework,
reading, talking on the phone, said her mother, Carmella. 3. Might machines --
Mitochondrion 4. Mikey Tighe looked at a book with his mother, Grace, and
father, Michael, at Rady Children's Hospital, where the boy spends most nights.
5. Carmella Haith said there are plans for her daughter Julia to begin physical
therapy to strengthen her muscles.; PHOTOBY: 1,2,4,5. Earnie Grafton /
Union-Tribune photos 3. SOURCES: Human Body Factfinder; The Human Body; The
Human Body Explainer | DANIEL WIEGAND / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2008


                              340 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 25, 2008 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 969 words

HEADLINE: Repairing damage to brain may be nearer;
Study gets stem cells to function in mice

BYLINE: Terri Somers, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO -- A team of San Diego scientists has moved embryonic stem cell
research a step closer to helping repair the brains of stroke victims and people
with diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's.

   The team, led by the Burnham Institute's Stuart Lipton, figured out how to
coax the embryonic stem cells of mice to become nerve cells that, when
transplanted into a mouse brain damaged by stroke, link themselves to the
existing network of neurons.

   The mice showed therapeutic improvement, and none of them developed tumors,
which has been a problem associated with the implantation of stem cells,
according to the article published today in The Journal of Neuroscience.

   Lipton said that since submitting the article several months ago, his team
has been able to achieve the same result with human embryonic stem cells
implanted in mice.

   Conditions such as stroke, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's disease
destroy brain cells, causing speech and memory loss and other debilitating
consequences. In theory, transplanting neuronal brain cells could restore at
least some brain function, just as heart transplants restore blood flow.

   "This is a step in the right direction for producing specific nerve cells for
cell replacement therapy," said Arnold Kriegstein, head of the stem cell program
at the University of California San Francisco.

   Embryonic stem cells, present just days after fertilization, ultimately
evolve into the more than 200 different cell types in the body. It is this
morphing power of the cells that many people hope may one day be harnessed to
create cures for some of society's worst diseases.

   "To move forward with stem cell-based therapies, we need to have a reliable
source of nerve cells that can be easily grown, differentiate in the way that we
want them to and remain viable after transplantation," Lipton said.

   But one of the daunting challenges currently faced by scientists is figuring
out exactly what biological signals and processes cause embryonic stem cells to
evolve into specific cell types.

   Lipton, who is a researcher and clinical neurologist who treats patients with
diseases in the brain, has been working for more than 15 years to figure out how
neuronal brain cells are created.

   His research found that a key ingredient in the process is a protein in the
body called MEFC2. This so-called transcription factor links to the genes in the
stem cell and signals them to turn the cell into a neuronal cell only, Lipton
said.

   Previous research trying to produce neurons from embryonic stem cells has
resulted in the creation of glial cells, a type of brain cell that provides
support to neurons, said Steven Goldman, a neurologist who is chief of the
division of Cell and Gene Therapy at the University of Rochester Medical Center
in New York.

   Goldman said Lipton's team has created a very general group of neurons. The
study does not break down the kinds of specific neuronal cells that were
created, although that work must be done at some point for this research to move
closer to therapeutic applications, Goldman said.

   Also unknown from this study is exactly how much control scientists will have
in directing the stem cells to become one of several different neuron cell types
in the brain, Goldman said. And it remains to be seen if all the research in
mice applies to humans, he said.

   However, it is significant that the neurons survived, had an electrical
charge and showed signs of being connected to the brain's network, Goldman said.

   Nerve cells of many different types exist in the brain and perform different
functions in different brain circuits. The study didn't uncover just how these
grafted cells may influence brain activity, Kriegstein said.

   In fact, changes in inflammation of the damaged area or growth factors
connected with the implanted cells could be responsible for part or all of the
behavioral improvement documented in the transplant recipients, he said.

   "The brain is a very complicated and sophisticated organ, and it is likely
that promoting true repair will require a solid understanding of exactly what
cell grafts such as these are contributing to the injured brain," Kriegstein
said.

   Goldman said that at this stage of research, it's unlikely that Lipton's work
would be used for human clinical therapies because the long-term effects of the
genetic modification of the cells is unknown.

   "However, this is an extraordinarily important tool from a research
standpoint, and Stuart's work brings significant new insights into how neurons
are generated," Goldman said.

   Members of Lipton's team listed as authors of the article include other
scientists at the Burnham Institute for Medical Research, as well as researchers
from the Scripps Research Institute and Lipton's teenage son, Jeffrey, who was
taught by lab members how to record and keep track of the cells.

   Researchers from the Salk Institute and University of California San Diego
also contributed to the project, which was funded by the National Institutes of
Health.

   The work Lipton's team has done more recently, which involves human embryonic
stem cells, was funded by the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine
through a four-year grant. That funding is part of the state's $3 billion
investment in stem cell research.

   OVERVIEW

   Background: Conditions such as stroke and Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and
Huntington's disease destroy brain cells, causing speech and memory loss and
other debilitating symptoms.

   What's changing: A team of San Diego scientists has coaxed the stem cells of
mice to become nerve cells in the brain, linking themselves to the existing
network of neurons.

   The future: The finding lays the groundwork for further research into how
stem cells could be used in human therapies. In theory, transplanting neuronal
brain cells could restore at least some brain function.

GRAPHIC: 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: OVERVIEW

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2008


                              341 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              June 22, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1389 words

HEADLINE: A rare disease, a dad's steady love Single father in Hunterdon is
dedicating his life to son and daughter who have deadly Batten disease

BYLINE: JOHN HOLL, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Ricky Bennett stood over the hospital bed slowly stroking his daughter's
hair, whispering words of encouragement.

   For the first time in weeks, Lucie Bennett was lying still from a cocktail of
drugs that finally stopped the seizures and dulled her pain.

   "I want to value every minute, even like this, because soon it's just gone,"
Bennett said.

   Lucie has been unable to see or talk since coming to the pediatric intensive
care unit at Saint Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick earlier this
month and now is in an induced coma. The 14-year-old suffers from Batten
disease, an inherited neurological disorder that causes blindness, seizures,
mental impairment and death.

   In the case of the Bennett family, Lucie isn't the only child struggling with
the ravages of Batten. Her 16-year-old brother, Conor, also has the disease.
Like his sister, he is blind and prone to seizures. But Conor is still able to
speak.

   Bennett, 48 and a single father, managed to keep Lucie healthy much longer
than many Batten patients. And even though he knew that one day his children's
conditions would worsen and they would need hospital care, he still wasn't
prepared for it to happen so soon.

   Bennett said he's not a particularly religious person, but he still believes
there must be a reason why this happened to Lucie and Conor. He also has two
other children who do not have the disease, Ritchie, 18, and Jake, 12.

   Just weeks before Lucie's hospitalization, Bennett sat in the kitchen of his
Raritan home looking exhausted, searching for words to explain his commitment to
making life as normal as possible for Lucie and Conor.

   "If you want everything, you have to give up everything," he said. "I know
what my purpose is right now."

   BEFORE BATTEN

   The Bennett family moved to Hunterdon County in 1995 after Ricky Bennett grew
tired of the long flights from their native United Kingdom to his company's
headquarters in Flemington.

   He, his then-wife, Jane, and their kids settled in a modest two-story house
in a development just off Routes 202/31. Things were good, the family was happy
and the kids were healthy.

   Just two years later the Bennetts noticed Conor sitting closer than usual to
the television. He complained of poor eyesight and was taken to an optometrist,
who prescribed glasses. When that didn't work, Conor, then 6, underwent one test
after another. It wasn't until eight months later, at Johns Hopkins University
Hospital in Baltimore, that Batten disease was diagnosed.

   But the bad news didn't stop there. Doctors also told them it was likely at
least one of their other three children also had the disease, even if symptoms
were not yet present.

   Doctors drew blood samples and Ricky Bennett said they anxiously waited for
the phone call. The results showed it was Lucie, then just 4 years old.

   As the two children began showing more serious signs of the disease, their
mother, Jane Bennett, began to withdraw from the family, and eventually filed
for divorce in January 2005.

   Remarried, with a newborn baby and a new last name, Embley, Jane lives in
nearby Stockton and continues to share custody of the children she had with
Bennett, but rarely sees them. She said it simply grew too difficult for her to
watch the disease harm her children.

   "I have this guilt," she said. "It's part of my DNA that did this, and it's
devastating.

   "These kids could not have a better father than the one they've got," she
said, choking back tears. "I wish I could have been a better mother."

   There are 11 known varieties of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis or NCL. Batten
is the name given to the juvenile form, which typically shows its signs between
ages 2 and 5.

   The disease poses unique challenges for parents and caregivers, especially
when the children are no longer able to communicate.

   Research is being conducted around the world, but progress is slow. Many of
the NCL genes have been identified, but effective treatments have been elusive.

   Some researchers believe that inserting stem cells into the brain could begin
producing the missing enzyme that causes Batten and other NCLs. A clinical trial
is under way in Oregon.

   For families dealing with the effects of the illness, each day brings another
challenge.

   "It constantly changes," said Bennett.

   "Sometimes it's easy to figure out what's bothering her," he said of Lucie.
"Other times we just don't know" because she can no longer talk.

   Bennett, who has a Ph.D. in engineering management, worked for several years
with DEK, a screen printing technologies company in Hunterdon County. He
resigned in October to spend more time with his kids. He supports himself with a
personal training business (he was certified earlier this year), support from
his ex-wife and by running a busing company with just two clients, Lucie and
Conor.

   Bennett was determined to have Lucie attend the Lake View School in Edison, a
special needs facility that could give her one-on-one attention. When he was
told the school could not provide transportation, he simply started his own
busing company, had it incorporated and bid on the contract to drive his
daughter.

   It's called Robyn's Nest, named after his now live-in girlfriend, Robyn
Astarita, who was at one time Lucie's teacher at Educational Services Center in
Raritan.

   Just last month, they added Conor's route - from home to nearby Hunterdon
Central High School where he is a junior - to the business.

   "He's a guy who put his career on hold and dedicated all his life to all of
his children so they can have the best of what's out there," said Joe Foster, a
neighbor. "Some people with one kid couldn't do this, and he does it with four."

   The house is as normal and chaotic as any with four kids, but the whole day
can be thrown for a loop when either Lucie or Conor has a seizure.

   Video cameras and monitors are positioned throughout the house, ensuring that
Bennett or Astarita are always aware of what is happening.

   Before her constant seizures sent her to Saint Peter's Hospital, Bennett and
Astarita were able to console Lucie, wrap their arms around her and do their
best to soothe her until a seizure passed.

   When Conor, all 5-foot-11 and 267 pounds of him - has a seizure, it's a
little different.

   "We leave him where he is," Bennett said with a wry smile. "We just can't
pick him up."

   When the boy comes around, he typically picks up life where it left off, even
in the middle of a conversation.

   Batten and other NCLs affect two to four births out of every 100,000 in the
United States, and researchers around the world are searching for a cure.

   There are several drug and surgical trials under way in the U.S. and abroad,
said Lance Johnston, executive director of the Batten Disease Support and
Research Association, a nonprofit group.

   Along with university researchers, the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke also are working on treatments.

   Peter Lobel, a resident member at Rutgers University's Center for Advanced
Biotechnology and Medicine, said clinical trials in laboratory mice are
promising.

   Lobel, who was part of a team that in 1997 discovered the gene and protein
responsible for most cases of late infantile Batten, said that by using gene
therapy they were able to stop the progression of late infantile Batten in mice.
Their life span in some cases was extended by a year.

   As technology progresses, Lobel said, it might be possible to try the therapy
on humans and even reverse some of the affects. There is, however, no realistic
timetable.

   "For the children who are just being born now and have not been diagnosed,
maybe there is a chance," said Lobel during an interview at his office. "For the
other children, we do our work in their memory."

   Multimedia: Watch a multimedia presentation about the Bennett family's fight
against Batten disease at nj.com and tvjersey.com.

   http://tvjersey.com/videos/737/

   A rare disease, a loving father

   Lucie and her brother Conor have Batten Disease, a neurological disorder
that, as protein deposits build up on the brain, causes blindness,
uncontrollable seizures and a reversal of the mental state. For their parent,
Ricky Bennett, a single father, love and encouragement is sometimes the only
things he can give them. (Video by Frank H. Conlon)

   Photo Credit: PHOTOS BY FRANK H. CONLON/THE STAR-LEDGER

   Infobox: "I know what my purpose is right now." --RICKY BENNETT, WHO HAS TWO
CHILDREN WITH BATTEN DISEASE

GRAPHIC: 1. Ricky Bennett comforts his daughter Lucie, 14, at Saint Peter's
University Hospital in New Brunswick earlier this month.  2. Robyn Astarita
(above) comforts Lucie Bennett at the family's home in Raritan Township in
February. Astarita is the girlfriend of Lucie's father Ricky and helps care for
the girl. Below, Bennett watches a video of Lucie when she was younger. 3. Even
though Conor Bennett, 16, is blind, he still plays video games. Conor was 6 when
he started showing signs of Batten disease. 4. Bennett and Astarita try to
comfort Lucie just after a seizure on her 14th birthday, March 29. Lucie is now
in the hospital.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2008


                              342 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             June 19, 2008 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: WEST; Pg. Reg1

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Biotech law holds local aid Promises to boost infrastructure, jobs

BYLINE: Lisa Kocian Globe Staff

BODY:

   GLOBE WEST / REGION

   Framingham and Worcester are big local winners - and Shrewsbury businesses
may also get a boost - now that Governor Deval Patrick has signed into law a new
bill to spend $1 billion to grow biotechnology companies in the state.

   The Massachusetts Life Sciences Law, which Patrick signed on Monday, includes
$500 million for capital improvements, $250 million in corporate tax incentives,
and $250 million in grants. The initiative is expected to mean hundreds of jobs
for the region.

   The University of Massachusetts campus in Worcester, just over the Lake
Quinsigamond bridge from Shrewsbury's stretch of retail businesses along Route
9, will receive $90 million to create a new research center. Framingham will
receive $12.9 million for water and sewer expansion, largely for the benefit of
the Genzyme Corp., which is adding a 250,000-square-foot manufacturing building
to its complex near the Massachusetts Turnpike and Route 9 interchange on the
western edge of town. The new building, the 15th on the Genzyme campus, is
already under construction, as the life-sciences company received assurances
from state officials that the funding for water and sewer expansion would be
approved, said Bo Piela, a Genzyme spokesman. Now that it's official, the
company is cheering for more than just the infrastructure boost.

   "The significance for Genzyme is much larger than this project," said Piela.
"The passage of this bill sends the signal that Massachusetts is supportive of
the life-sciences industry."

   Competition with other states and countries is intense, but Massachusetts has
"one of the greatest life-sciences clusters in the world," allowing companies
like Genzyme to readily collaborate with nearby business partners and academic
institutions, said Piela.

   Genzyme, its nearly $4 billion in revenue last year making it the biggest
biotech company in the state, has more than 10,000 employees in about 40
countries, but is based in Massachusetts, with other locations in Waltham and
Westborough as well as Allston and Cambridge.

   Genzyme does most of its scientific research in Framingham, and has about
2,000 employees in town, said Piela. The newest Framingham building, where the
company will manufacture protein-based drugs primarily used to treat rare,
inherited diseases, will add about 300 jobs, he said.

   State Senator Karen Spilka, who supported the bill and lobbied for the
Framingham money, said it will pay for itself by generating commercial tax
revenue and new jobs in the fast-growing economic sector.

   "We know this sector will continue to grow," said Spilka, an Ashland Democrat
whose district includes Framingham. "It does some wonderful things for the state
to put us at a competitive advantage, I believe."

   The water and sewer expansion adds capacity for other potential commercial
growth in the area, which is also home to sound-equipment maker Bose Corp.

   The law's $90 million earmark for the UMass Medical School in Worcester will
help fund a $440 million "advanced therapeutics cluster," which will house
research on gene therapy and stem cell biology, according to Mark Shelton, a
spokesman for the university.

   The 500,000-square-foot facility will accommodate about 80 new faculty
researchers and 700 scientific and support staff members, all working toward
disease cures, he said.

   "What I hope will come from this are cures for diseases like type 1 diabetes,
which afflicts my daughter," said Nobel Prize laureate Craig C. Mello, a
professor of molecular medicine and cell biology at UMass, in a statement from
the university. "Right now, people are suffering with diseases that could be
treated, at least in principle, by the advanced therapeutics we're
contemplating. So I feel that we have to do this - it's like a moral obligation
to intervene when you see something wrong and you have an opportunity to help."

   Mello, a Shrewsbury resident, helped conceptualize and launch the advanced
therapeutics cluster. As a separate item, the new state law also creates the Dr.
Craig C. Mello Small Business Equity Investment Fund.

   UMass-Worcester is the economic engine for the area, according to Dan
Morgado, Shrewsbury's town manager.

   "Obviously anything that happens with the UMass Medical School or the
hospital or associated spinoffs ... is great for the town of Shrewsbury," he
said. "So many of our residents are employed by the UMass system and associated
entities. ... It's good for the region, good for the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and good for Shrewsbury."

   Even with those benefits, Morgado said, he would like to see the state share
a host fee with the communities that supply municipal services for such
nonprofits.

   Other funding in the new law includes $95 million for a life-sciences
research center at UMass-Amherst, $10 million for a biomanufacturing facility at
UMass-Lowell, $9 million for a life-sciences center in Taunton, and $6.5 million
to support new businesses in Pittsfield.

   Patrick signed the law just before leading a delegation to San Diego for a
major international biotechnology convention, which is seen as an opportunity to
attract new companies to Massachusetts.

   Lisa Kocian can be reached at 508-820-4231 or lkocian@ globe.com.

GRAPHIC: Governor Deval Patrick made a pitch for his administration's
biotechnology program at a State House hearing in October.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2008


                              343 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section LI; Column 0; Long Island Weekly Desk; PARENTING; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1101 words

HEADLINE: A Father Is Stricken, And a Family Is Hurting

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP.

   E-mail: parenting@nytimes.com

DATELINE: PORT WASHINGTON, N.Y.

BODY:

     THE first time the family had to move was in 2000, when the twins were 10.
''If we didn't sell, we would have lost our house,'' said Claire Hamilton, the
mother. Her husband, Nathan Klein, who owned a television production company,
had Parkinson's disease and was having trouble working.

     Until then, they'd lived in an upper-middle-class neighborhood here. They
were athletic and busy: tennis, biking,  weekend trips to museums in the city,
family vacations at Disney World and  Club Med in Mexico.

     Moving was hard; the kids' best friends lived on that street. The first
rental they moved to was a house, brand new, but a mistake, said Ms. Hamilton,
who works as a publicist for the Sid Jacobson Jewish Community Center in Roslyn,
N.Y. ''It made us feel better,'' she said. ''But we couldn't afford it.''

     They were more hopeful back then, about the disease and Mr. Klein's ability
to work. In 2003, he was featured in news media around the world -- including
the front page of The New York Times --  when he became the first human to
receive gene therapy for Parkinson's. His handsome portrait, taken during a
nine-hour photo shoot,  was displayed in full-page ads extolling
NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital's cutting-edge medical care.

     But the therapy did not stop the Parkinson's. Mr. Klein, now 60, is  still
not able to work. He has deteriorated mentally. ''I don't remember a lot,'' he
said. And physically. ''I freeze in the middle of things.''

     And that has left Ms. Hamilton, 57, to hold the family together. ''I feel
like Atlas,'' she said. Twice more they were nearly evicted and had to move,
most recently two months ago, to the second floor of a two-family home. While
she worries about her husband of 25 years, she worries as much about what his
illness is doing to their 19-year-old twins.

     Outwardly, both are coping. Jackie is finishing her sophomore year at John
Jay College, has three part-time jobs and volunteers as an emergency medical
technician with the  community ambulance service. Eric is completing his second
year at Nassau Community College and works 30 hours a week at a supermarket.

     But the mother worries that Jackie spends so much time caring for her
father, she has no personal life. They have just one car, and with all that's
gone on, Jackie has not learned to drive. Just getting to the station to take
the train into the city for college is an hour's walk. ''I feel guilty always
asking people to drive,'' she said. ''I can't go on dates and do things. It
becomes a hassle. They have to come and get me.''

     And Eric, the mother worries, is so upset about his father's illness, he's
rarely around, and when he is, the two mostly fight. ''I get very critical and
mean,'' Eric said. ''Why lie about it. I don't curse him out or anything. I try
and keep pushing him, like 'Come on, walk, walk,' but it doesn't happen. I guess
I'm angry because I wish he could remember. I tell myself he can't help it, but
it makes me mad when he can't. I'll go on a giant rant and charge into my room
to listen to music and calm down.''

     Partly the problem is Parkinson's fickleness. Sometimes, Mr. Klein is
focused and witty. ''Some days,'' Eric said, ''I tell him once and he gets it.
Some days it's four or five times.''

     ''He'll forget he has an appointment,'' said Jackie, ''forget he keeps
asking the same question.''

     ''People say like, 'Parkinson's, oh that's not so bad,' '' Eric said.

     Mr. Klein, who was silently sitting at the kitchen table with the family,
was asked how he felt about his son's anger.

     ''Well, I hate it,'' he said. ''It's difficult to cope with someone who's
angry, and he's angry with me. And then Jackie starts to get angry with me. And
the whole family is angry with me.''

     ''I was angry today,'' said Jackie. Before leaving for school that morning,
she asked her father to get the house clean for the reporter's visit that
evening. ''I come home,'' Jackie said, ''he's sitting on the couch eating ice
cream. The house, the kitchen was a disaster. I don't like it. I'm cleaning in
the morning and cleaning after Mom goes to sleep.''

     Having little money makes everything worse. Eric was stopped recently for
driving without insurance. His license, his mother's and father's were all
suspended. Mr. Klein was supposed to have renewed the insurance, they all said,
but did not. ''I don't know if he forgot,'' Ms. Hamilton said, ''or thought we
could get along without it to save money.''

     Asked whether this was related to his Parkinson's, Mr. Klein said:
''Somewhat related. I don't follow up as much. I used to be a gung-ho TV
producer that could get things done quickly.''

     ''I depended on Nathan to take care of this  -- I didn't know I couldn't,''
Ms. Hamilton said. ''Now I understand this is something else I need to be
responsible for.''

     The children say the Parkinson's has forced them to grow up faster. ''I got
myself a job because I had to,'' Eric said. ''I had to fight for myself. I make
money now so I don't have to ask for money.''

     Jackie is more outgoing and better able to verbalize her frustrations.
''Having to move so often did make me blue,'' she said. ''It didn't hit me until
the third place we lived. I walked into that house and just started crying.''

     As for Eric, ''It didn't really bother me,'' he said. ''Just another
change.''

     ''Jackie's more compassionate,'' the mother said. ''She'll always help her
father. She'll carry things for him so he doesn't have to spill. If something's
wrong she asks, 'How can I help?' ''

     ''Eric treats me wonderfully,'' she said. ''I tell him he needs to treat
his father with the same compassion. He says, 'I can't, I don't have the
patience.' He's very angry that his father is broken.''

     Ms. Hamilton has had to learn to ask for help. ''We got a lot of support
from our synagogue and community to help us back on our feet,'' she said. ''A
social agency brought us food once or twice.'' And a social worker visits to
help the family talk out these things.

     Eric has spent little time with the social worker. ''He's never around when
she comes,'' Ms. Hamilton said.

     ''I've got school and work,'' Eric responded.

     This fall, Eric plans to go away to college, and Ms. Hamilton thinks this
will help. ''I want him to feel he has his own life,'' she said. ''He's a sweet
boy, I think he'll grow up to be a terrific person. I just hope he can come back
a little more compassionate.''

     ''I'm compassionate,'' Eric said.

     For now, she said, ''I just worry we'll make it through the summer.''

     Asked if he was worried, Mr. Klein said, ''I feel like Alfred E. Neuman --
what, me worry?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: TOGETHER: Nathan Klein, who has Parkinson's disease, in a
NewYork- Presbyterian poster, and with his family recently at their apartment.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY PHIL MARINO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2008


                              344 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2008 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                              June 1, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 1993 words

HEADLINE: FOREVER MAN... on a trip by drip From IV therapy to a demanding diet,
Dr. Terry Grossman claims he has the means to no end. Care to join him?

BYLINE: Michael Booth The Denver Post

BODY:

   Call him Dr. Forever.

   Terry Grossman's Colorado medical practice and national bookselling fame are
based on the controversial notion that with radical diet changes, massive
supplement intake and other treatments, death becomes an avoidable mistake.

   People who are 60 now could live to a healthy 120 - at which point, emerging
technologies such as gene therapy, cloned organs and "nanobots" will converge in
the body, not only fixing the problems caused by aging but reversing aging
itself.

   Grossman is often asked: Who wants to live to be 120? His reply: Ask anybody
who is 119.

   Patients and faithful readers rave about Grossman and co-author Ray
Kurzweil's lifestyle recommendations (e.g., sugar is "the white Satan," and
Satan is everywhere). Their book, to be revised for a fall rerelease, is
"Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough to Live Forever."

   Grossman, a youngish 61, travels the globe giving his perpetuity PowerPoint
to everyone from financial advisers (living forever is expensive) to deodorant
companies (do the immortal still break a sweat?).

   "I believe if it wasn't for this treatment, I wouldn't be alive today," said
Mucussa Khan of Denver, who has taken chelation treatments with Grossman since
2000, after other doctors recommended heart surgery for his severe angina.
Grossman himself was so worried about Khan that he recommended surgery first.
But Khan declined in favor of regular chelation IV drips, in which chemicals
bind with toxins and sweep them from the body.

   From a time when merely walking from his car to the waiting room left him in
racking pain, Khan, 62, says he is now "80 percent" recovered without surgery.

   "My other doctors don't believe it was chelation; they believe it was my
changes in lifestyle," said Khan, who has studied up on the treatment and knows
how controversial it is. "I'm not saying it's going to work for everybody,
because my mental state had something to do with it. I believe in this
treatment."

   Praise and ridicule

   Many patients and loyal readers speak as fervently of Grossman's approach to
their health. They discover him at lectures, in online health forums, in
Kurzweil's blogging and through normal medical referrals. He gives alternative
therapies to autistic preschoolers and eye remedies to ailing seniors.

   But such popularity doesn't inoculate Grossman's methods from criticism.

   Some ridicule the egoism of boomers such as Grossman who feel they deserve to
live indefinitely, sucking down the world's dwindling resources every step of
the way.

   Grossman's office features two hallway maps, one of the 50 states and another
of the world, each carpeted by thumbtacks representing his far-flung patients.

   The mainstream medical community, meanwhile, is deeply skeptical of both
Grossman's treatment recommendations and the fact that he sells many of the
supplements he promotes.

   "One of the hallmarks of anti-aging quackery is the provision of testimonials
and anecdotes," said Dr. Thomas Perls, founder of the New England Centenarian
Study and a professor at Boston University Medical School.

   "It's the sale of these bottles of pills" that drives the anti-aging
industry, Perls said, emphasizing he was not talking about Grossman in
particular but about any doctor who sells products directly to patients. "One
has to be very concerned about the conflict of interest and the influence a
physician can have over their patients."

   Grossman dismisses such concerns, saying, "When you see a dermatologist and
they sell you skin cream for your face, no one seems to find that
objectionable."

   The treatments themselves are equally controversial in the mainstream medical
field. Grossman's Frontier Medical Institute in Lakewood has a 15-seat room full
of easy chairs and IV stands, where patients can relax while taking in
supplements or chelation therapy.

   Chelation, first developed to detoxify people suffering from lead poisoning,
takes heavy metals out of the body. Detoxification from heavy-

   metal poisoning remains the only FDA-endorsed use for the treatment.

   Grossman and many other holistic doctors, however, recommend chelation as
part of a general health regimen, along with high doses of antioxidants and
other supplements that can cost patients hundreds, if not thousands, of dollars
a year.

   No credible studies have proved any general health benefits from chelation,
research doctors argue.

   "I completely disagree with any capabilities we might have right now to
significantly extend life span. Chelation therapy is just nonsense, almost from
the get-go," said Tom Johnson, professor of behavioral genetics and a researcher
on aging at the University of Colorado at Boulder. "There is zero data
suggesting it can extend the life span" of humans.

   Others say improperly administered chelation is harmful and have called on
the Food and Drug Administration to cancel its chelation trial.

   Grossman responds that his empirical observations show patients such as Khan
getting great benefits for conditions like angina. He said he eagerly awaits
trial results and will adapt accordingly.

   Supplements also come under regular attack, including an April rebuke of
antioxidants that roiled the industry. The Cochrane Collaboration combed through
67 trials involving 230,000 patients using the alleged anti-aging compounds and
found that not only do antioxidant vitamins fail to increase life span, but in
some cases they increase risk of death.

   "There are a lot of people taking a lot of pills that are unproven. For all
we know, they could actually make things worse," said Dr. Eric Topol, chief
academic officer of Scripps Health hospital network in San Diego and a director
of the "Wellderly" gene study of people who reach 80 in good health. "The
individual patient doesn't understand these supplements may have a downside
because they have been understudied or not studied in any meaningful way."

   Grossman and Kurzweil say they are reviewing every regimen in their book and
throwing out those that science has disproved since the first edition, in 2004.
One example, Grossman said, is the book's prescription of eight to 10 daily
glasses of water, which recent studies have shown irrelevant to overall health.

   "People do argue that supplements just give you expensive urine," Grossman
said. "Medicine is always evolving." Kurzweil still lectures frequently, though,
about his 250-pills-a-day diet.

   Grossman's radical change

   Grossman's own practice has changed radically over time, from a mountain
doctor delivering babies and setting bones in Granby to a New Age prophet
advocating acupuncture and self-cloning. His approach to medicine was fairly
standard, he said, until his knee refused to recover from a ski injury. Grossman
writes that his "angel" appeared in the form of an alternative medicine advocate
- a course of pine-bark capsules tuned up his knee and loosened up his mind.

   Amid years of gradually incorporating holistic diet and alternative therapies
into his "functional" medicine, Grossman grew interested in the concepts of
extreme longevity. Scientists identified specific genes for everything from
birth defects to aging, thus raising the possibility those genes could be
altered or "turned off."

   Grossman's studies led him to correspond with Kurzweil, a famed computing
entrepreneur who had won prizes for his voice-recognition software and who has
grown accustomed to serving as a futurist guru.

   Kurzweil, too, was intrigued by the severe diet regimens Grossman explored.
The basic idea is that overly processed foods feed Westerners too much fat, too
much sugar, and too many calories and toxins overall, taxing the body and
prematurely aging our key systems. Tough caloric restrictions - down to 1,800 or
even 1,200 calories a day - combined with wholesale food-pyramid overhauls that
place a heavier emphasis on plants and fish could extend current human life
spans as a first "bridge" to future longevity technology.

   Far from a humorless food scold, Grossman loves expounding to his patients on
diet and technology while they're strapped to an IV drip in his room full of
reclining chairs: "Talk about a captive audience!"

   He realizes the avoiding-Satan routine in "Fantastic Voyage" might be
daunting. So his book revision will focus on a simpler phrase that also happens
to be a great marketing tool: One perfect day. Live and eat one day a week
according to the plan, and pretty soon that good feeling and good behavior will
spill over into other days.

   $6,000 for two-day work-up

   Kurzweil and Grossman exchanged more than 10,000 detailed e-mails, providing
the foundation for their heavily footnoted book. Kurzweil eventually signed up
as a long-

   distance patient with Grossman, who charges $6,000 for a full two-day work-up
that establishes the patient's "biological age" and then provides a lifestyle
regimen to improve it.

   The second "bridge" to the future, in Grossman and Kurzweil's rendering, is
the coming age of biotechnology advances. Drug companies are creating
treatments, for example, that stop the unraveling of "end caps" on life-span
genes. Gene therapies will "delete" cancerous cells like a cursor cleaning up a
misspelled document.

   The "third bridge" involves computer-programmed nanobots - billionths of a
meter in size - coursing through our veins and rebuilding muscle, bone, even
whole organs on a molecular level. Artificial intelligence, meanwhile, may learn
to capture our souls for digital death defiance.

   Grossman is adamant that the same technology allowing humans to extend life
will also help solve the resource shortages that overpopulation may create.

   Nanotechnology, for example, can create smarter and more efficient

   solar-energy panels. Pharmaceutical and gene research also leads to
agriculture advances.

   "People say, 'God doesn't want us to do this,"' acknowledged Grossman, who is
familiar with negative Amazon

   .com reviews of "Fantastic Voyage." "I disagree. God does want us to do this.
The 969 years of Methuselah is all I'm shooting for."

   Many researchers agree the science of life extension is at an exhilarating
crossroads. Johnson conducts experiments in Boulder that have multiplied the
life span of worms, for example, from 20 days to more than 200. Translating the
dotage of worms and fruit flies to humans, however, is a tale that still fits
better in science fiction than in medical manuals.

   "I think it will be another couple of decades before there is a widely
accepted magic bullet," Johnson said. "We're a long way from showing these
treatments do anything."

   Exactly, responds a not-at-all-insulted Grossman. To see if science gets us
there, he argues, we need to be around to hear the results.

   He is walking the talk of his own punitive advice, existing on brown rice and
green tea, one soda a month and his beloved fried chicken only semiannually.

   "Rule No. 1 of living forever," Grossman smiled, "is not to die."

   Michael Booth: 303-954-1686

   or mbooth@denverpost.com ---------------------- This short list may
contribute to a long life

   Researchers on aging, from San Diego to Boulder to Boston and around the
world, have agreed on a few factors that will give you a longer life:

   1) PICK THE RIGHT PARENTS. Hard to do, of course - but

   the single-most reliable indicator of longevity is

   having ancestors who lived a long time.

   2) BE SHORT.

   In most species studied, shorter organisms, as a rule, live longer than the
tallest organisms. The "Wellderly" study

   of healthy people 80 and older has found the same phenomenon.

   3) EAT LESS. Though they haven't had enough years yet to gauge the full

   effect on humans, scientists know that restricted-

   calorie diets do work to extend

   the average age of creatures with a shorter life cycle.

   4) MOVE TO OKINAWA.

   This Asian culture has long boasted the highest average ages, based on a
longtime diet of vegetables and fish, relatively

   fewer calories and more exercise.

   5) START SAVING MONEY.

   Gene therapies that stop or

   reverse aging

   may be available in the next

   decade, but they will begin at

   prices like $30,000 a treatment

   before going mainstream.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2008


                              345 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                              May 27, 2008 Tuesday
                                 REGION EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 258 words

HEADLINE: THE INSIDE LOOK;
WHAT'S NEXT!;
GAME 3 * 8:08 P.M. TOMORROW * MELLON ARENA * TV: WPXI * RED WINGS LEAD, 2-0

BODY:

   INSIDE

   A Q&A withthe Pirates' top brass

   Baseball writer Dejan Kovacevic sits down with Frank Coonelly and Neal
Huntington to find out how they will approach next week's draft.

   Q&A, Page D-7

   STANLEY CUP FINAL EDITION

   DAY 2:FRENCH OPEN

   Mistakes nearly send Venus Williams home early, but she rallies to beat the
93rd-ranked player in the world. Also: Roger Federeradvances, Page D-8.

   ANOTHER CHIP

   Scott Dixon's win in the Indianapolis 500 puts car owner Chip Ganassi into
some elitecompany at the Brickyard, Page D-9.

   MORE SPORTS INSIDE

   ONLINE

   * A different look at the series in Empty Netters.

   * Gene Therapy -- Gene Collier's unique observations.

   * Video from the locker room after Game 2.

   * Trash Talkin' for your comments about Detroit ... but also for Red Wings
fans comments about Pittsburgh.

   For these and more, visit

   www.post-gazette.com

   COVERAGE

   Unhappy 'fan': Georges Laraque disappointed at being scratched for Game 2.

   Gene Collier: Penguins' good name taking a hit.

   More coverage,Pages D-2, D-3 & D-4

   Things you

   need to know

   Hero: Xxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxxx
xxxx.

   XXXXXX: Xxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxx
xxxx xxxx.

   XXXXXX: Xxxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxx
xxxx xxxx.

   Next game: Penguins at Red Wings, 8 p.m. tomorrow, Joe Louis Arena. TV:
Versus.

   THINGS

   TO KNOW

   7

   Consecutive goals to start the series for Detroit -- a Stanley Cuprecord.

   3-5

   Penguins' playoff series record when losing the first two games.

   135:57

   Time since the Penguins' mostrecent playoffgoal.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2008


                              346 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              May 26, 2008 Monday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Inq Gallery Repository; Pg. D04

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: On the Boards

BODY:

   Recent announcements about changes to the boards of directors of area
organizations or involving local executives.


   Unisys Corp., a Blue Bell computer-technology-services company, elected Clay
B. Lifflander and Charles B. McQuade to its board. Lifflander is president of
MMI Investments L.P., New York, which owns about 9.1 percent of the company's
shares. McQuade is the retired chairman and chief executive officer of
Securities Industry Automation Corp., New York. The election expands the
company's board from 11 to 13 members.



   IndiPharm, a Radnor global clinical research organization, named James A.
Bannon executive chairman. He is former group president, late-stage development
services at Covance Inc., Princeton.


   William R. Sasso was appointed vice chair of the Pennsylvania Board of Law
Examiners, a professional oversight organization. He is chairman of Stradley
Ronon, Philadelphia.

   The American Association for Cancer Research, Philadelphia, has named the
following members to its board:

   Tyler E. Jacks, director of the David H. Koch Institute for Integrative
Cancer Research at MIT, the David H. Koch Professor of Biology at MIT, and an
investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, is president-elect. He
succeeds Raymond N. DuBois.

   Raymond N. DuBois, provost and executive vice president for academic affairs
at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, is president.

   William N. Hait, senior vice president and worldwide head for Ortho Biotech
Oncology Research and Development, who was president for the 2007-2008 term,
will become past president.

   The following were elected to the board for the 2008-2011 term:

   Lisa M. Coussens is professor, Department of Pathology and Cancer Research
Institute, University of California, San Francisco.

   Kenneth W. Kinzler is director, Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics &
Therapeutics, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, professor of oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.

   Bruce A.J. Ponder is director, cancer research, U.K. Cambridge Research
Institute; codirector, Hutchison/Medical Research Council Research Centre,
University of Cambridge; codirector, Strangeways Research Laboratories for
Genetic Epidemiology, and holds other related positions.

   Eddie Reed is the Abraham Mitchell Distinguished Investigator at the
University of South Alabama.

   Margaret W. Shipp is professor of medicine, Harvard Medical School and
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute; associate physician, Brigham & Women's Hospital;
director, lymphoma program, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Dana-Farber/Harvard
Comprehensive Cancer Center; attending physician, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
and Bone Marrow Transplant Service, Dana-Farber/Brigham & Women's Hospital.

   Kenya Mann, a partner at Ballard Spahr Andrews & Ingersoll L.L.P,
Philadelphia, was appointed to the board of the Special Olympics, Philadelphia.

   The Metropolitan Career Center, Philadelphia, a nonprofit organization, named
Priscilla Chandler to its board. She is a manager at PJM Interconnections,
Norristown.

   Claudia Springer and Richard Macha were elected to the board of the National
Adoption Center, Philadelphia, a nonprofit human-services organization. Springer
is managing partner at Reed Smith L.L.P., Philadelphia. Macha is a vice
president at Independence Blue Cross, Philadelphia.

   Virginia Essandoh, a senior consultant at Altman Weil, Newtown Square, was
named to the board of the Country Day School of the Sacred Heart, Bryn Mawr.

   The Community Learning Center, a Philadelphia nonprofit educational
organization, named Anita Scott to its board. She is vice president of human
resources at Radian, Philadelphia.

   Matt McKeever, a director at SCA, Philadelphia, was named to the board of
Camp Hill Special Schools, Glenmoore.

   The Southern Chester County YMCA, West Grove, a nonprofit organization, named
JoEllen Burns Muntz to its board. She is vice president of performance
improvement at Exelon Nuclear, Philadelphia.

   The People's Emergency Center, a Philadelphia nonprofit social services
agency for homeless women with children, named Reed Raymond to its board.
Raymond is a vice president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

   Dennis Johnson was named to the board of the Philadelphia Children's Alliance
, a nonprofit social services organization. He is vice president, finance, at
MEDecision, Wayne.

   Ronald Mintz was appointed to the board of trustees of the Easttown Township
Library, Berwyn. He is a principal at the Vanguard Group, Malvern.

   Samaritan Hospice, a Marlton provider of hospice and palliative care, grief
support, counseling, education and advocacy, named the following officer and
members to its board:

   Michael Enright, vice president, finance-U.S. Soup, for Campbell Soup Co.,
Camden, is secretary.

   Michael Bozek is senior accounting manager for Oki Data Americas Inc., Mount
Laurel.

   Liz Thomas is cofounder and chief executive officer of Thomas/Boyd
Communications, Moorestown and Princeton.

   Shirley Richardson is the owner of Lexus of Cherry Hill.

   James Wujcik is regional president for Sovereign Bank, Reading.

   The Greater Philadelphia Chapter of the Pennsylvania Institute of Certified
Public Accountants, a professional organization, named the following officers to
it board for fiscal 2008-2009.

   Matthew D. Melinson, a director of tax services at SMART, Devon, and an
adjunct professor at Philadelphia University, is president.

   Karen C. Facer-Mee, president of Facer, Mee & Associates P.C., Ivyland, is
president-elect.

   Edwin Rosenthol, a certified public accountant in private practice in
Philadelphia, is secretary.

   Christopher A. Welde, owner and director of Forensic Insights Inc., King of
Prussia, is treasurer.

    - Mike Zebe

GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2008


                              347 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                              May 25, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 170 words

HEADLINE: Injection tested on Parkinson's;
Genetic treatment placed in brain

BYLINE: By Dave Parks, Newhouse News Service

BODY:

   A potentially powerful treatment for Parkinson's disease is the focus of a
study at nine major medical centers where 37 patients have had an experimental
drug injected into their brains.

   At year's end, scientists will determine whether this potion has improved the
patients' symptoms. It's an important study not only for Parkinson's, but for a
host of other common ailments of aging, including Alzheimer's disease.

   "If this indeed works, this absolutely is a big deal," said Jeffrey Ostrove,
president and CEO of Ceregene Inc., a biotechnical company in San Diego and
maker of CERE-120, the experimental drug being tested.

   CERE-120 contains genetic instructions for making the natural protein
neurturin, which promotes growth. These instructions have been placed within a
virus. This gene therapy has been precisely injected into areas where brains
have been damaged by Parkinson's disease.

   Ostrove describes the result as "a little factory pumping out neurturin." The
neurturin bathes, protects and rejuvenates damaged cells.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2008


                              348 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             May 22, 2008 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: b$1 lab complex planned for Cambridge Project would give life sciences
industry needed space to grow

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   A California real estate company wants to build a $1 billion laboratory
complex in Cambridge over the next decade to accommodate growing life sciences
companies starved for space.

   The complex, planned between Kendall Square and the CambridgeSide Galleria
mall, would eventually include six buildings and 1.5 million square feet on 16
acres. That would make it the largest lab development in the Northeast,
according to Richards Barry Joyce & Partners, a Boston firm that tracks the lab
real estate market.

   The project is a bold bet that the region's life sciences industry will
continue to flourish for years, creating thousands of jobs and continuing to
gobble up scarce lab and office space. Massachusetts is currently close to
passing a $1 billion life sciences initiative to encourage growth in the sector,
underscoring the belief that biotech and medical devices are becoming a
cornerstone of the state economy.

   "We're bullish on the innovation economy in Cambridge," said Tom Andrews,
regional market director for the developer, Alexandria Real Estate Equities Inc.

   Alexandria has not secured any tenants, but the Pasadena, Calif., company is
betting the added lab space will benefit from its proximity to the existing
biotech cluster in Kendall Square, which includes companies such as Genzyme
Corp. and Biogen Idec. The area also boasts an army of tech companies, such as
Akamai Technologies and Pegasystems, as well as nonprofit research centers and
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

   Cambridge biotech companies have increasingly been squeezed for space as they
have grown, with some opting to move part of their operations to the suburbs. In
recent months, Shire Human Genetic Therapies, Altus Pharmaceuticals, ImmunoGen,
WMR BioMedical, Magen Biosciences, and Microbia PE have all said they will move
from Cambridge to nearby communities, where space is less expensive and easier
to find. As they run out of room to expand, some say they are also considering
leaving the city, including Vertex Pharmaceuticals and Amag Pharmaceuticals.

   Bob Richards, president of Richards Barry Joyce & Partners, called the
proposal "a much needed pressure valve for the market."

   Real estate brokers say lab space rents in Cambridge have doubled and vacancy
rates have shrunk 67 percent in the past four years because of growing demand
from life sciences companies. Recently, as some companies moved to the suburbs
and smaller spaces have been developed, vacancy rates have edged up slightly.
But Richards said there aren't many big blocks of space available, making it
hard for larger companies to stay in the city and continue to grow. Because the
Alexandria project is to be developed over the next 10 years, it should allow
the market time to gradually absorb the additional space without depressing
rents and sending vacancy rates soaring, he said.

   Alexandria is no stranger to the market, owning 40 properties in
Massachusetts totaling 4 million square feet, half in Cambridge, including the
Technology Square complex, which it bought from MIT for $600 million in 2005.

   The new project would be built on land the developer already owns, which is
mainly parking lots and one-story industrial buildings.

   Andrews, the Alexandria executive, said the company does not yet have
detailed designs for the new buildings. But he said the complex will include
more than 4 acres of open space, underground parking, and a small amount of
space for restaurants.

   As with most new lab projects, Andrews said the buildings will include
environmentally friendly features. The property is also a short walk from two
MBTA stations, Kendall Square and Lechmere.

   Both the city and Andrews predicted it will take about a year to go through
the process of modifying existing zoning and obtaining permits for construction.
After that, Andrews said, it would take a couple more years to complete the
first two buildings. Tenants would probably not be able to move in before 2011.

   Andrews said he expects all six buildings to be primarily lab space and
supporting offices for life sciences firms. But he cautioned there is a chance
the makeup of the project could change if life sciences companies request more
administrative office space or if Alexandria winds up leasing more space to
software companies and other firms that don't need as much room for labs.

   Beth Rubenstein, Cambridge's assistant city manager for community
development, said the city is open to working with Alexandria on the permitting
and zoning changes. Current zoning, enacted in 2001, includes restrictions on
building height and density that would have to be changed for Alexandria's
project to go forward as planned. But since that zoning was put in place seven
years ago, Rubenstein said, it is reasonable to consider modifying it now.

   "It's a very reasonable place to be looking at lab space - in the heart of
the biotech cluster," Rubenstein said.

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2008


                              349 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                              May 20, 2008 Tuesday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Metro; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1200 words

HEADLINE: A LONG ROAD TO HOPE;
OAKLAND;
Beating early death: Enzyme replacement therapy at Children's Hospital conquers
a genetic disorder that often kills many young sufferers before they reach 20

BYLINE: Erin Allday, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   Isabel Bueso has a rare disease that kills many kids before they hit their
20s. She traveled 2,500 miles from her native Guatemala to Oakland for an
experimental new treatment to save her life. But she never considered herself
particularly heroic.

   That changed when she met the babies with her disease. Isabel's treatment may
mean that they and thousands of other children never have to endure the worst
symptoms of mucopolysaccharidoses, a genetic disease that often causes young
sufferers to stop growing and can lead to a variety of disabling side effects,
including blindness and nerve damage from extra pressure in their skull or
spinal column.

   "At first I felt like this was a big adventure," said 12-year-old Isabel of
her trip to Oakland. "Now I have little kids like Amro and Jeffrey to look out
for. I'm not really doing anything, getting this treatment. But I still feel
proud of myself."

   Oakland Children's Hospital has become a hub of research and community for
kids like Isabel and the babies Amro and Jeffrey, who all suffer a form of
mucopolysaccharidoses.

   MPS, as it's called, is a family of diseases caused by enzyme deficiencies.
Only a few thousand people in the world have MPS, and many sufferers can go
their whole lives without ever meeting another person with the disease.

   So it's remarkable that Oakland has become a bit of an enclave for MPS
patients, say the children and their parents, almost all of whom uprooted from
countries outside the United States, giving up jobs and school, friends and
extended families for a life-saving treatment.

Isabel among the first

   Oakland Children's Hospital is one of only three or four places in the world
where a new enzyme replacement therapy is available. Isabel was among the first
to get the therapy five years ago - she not only had to leave her home and her
extended family, but brave an experimental treatment with unknown side effects.

   The initial treatments went so well that the enzyme therapy won U.S. approval
in 2005, and now researchers are testing it in babies.

   The enzyme replacement therapy started in late 2000, when researchers from
BioMarin, a Novato-based pharmaceutical company, approached Dr. Paul Harmatz at
Oakland Children's Hospital about setting up a clinical trial for a form of MPS.
Harmatz, who leads the hospital's research division, agreed to help and started
recruiting patients from around the world.

   Three clinical trials have been conducted at Children's Hospital since then -
the most recent one, involving children under a year old, started last year and
will continue at least another year. Because MPS is so rare, only five or six
patients are involved in each study. The first drug studied, called Naglazyme,
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2005.

   Almost all of the patients involved in the first clinical trial are still
being treated in Oakland, coming to Children's Hospital every Friday for IV
therapy.

   "It's not really a cure, not like gene therapy might be someday. They have to
come in every week because the enzyme is metabo- lized over a week's time,"
Harmatz said.

   That means the families are stuck in the Bay Area, at least until the therapy
becomes more widely available. For now, the nurses, doctors and other patients
at Children's Hospital are the closest many children and their parents have to
an extended family.

   "We are forced to stay here. We gave up so much. But it was a clear decision
to make for our daughter's life," said Isabel's mother, Karla Bueso. "I'm doing
what any parent would do."

   Isabel's doctors say the enzyme therapy has already improved her health and
stalled some of the worst effects of the disease.

How MPS develops

   In MPS, the body lacks an enzyme that prevents cells from breaking down
chains of sugar called mucopolysaccharidoses. These sugar chains build up in all
of the body's cells, which not only disrupt cell performance, but can lead to
dangerous stashes of extra sugar in bones and cartilage.

   There are at least seven different kinds of MPS, and not all of them respond
well to enzyme replacement therapy. In particular, children who suffer brain
damage from the missing enzyme are difficult to treat because the enzyme
replacement drug has a hard time breaching the blood-to-brain barrier.

   But for children like Isabel, the results have been dramatic. Isabel is still
very small for her age, and the enzyme replacement isn't likely to reverse the
damage already done to her bones. But she rarely suffers from the pain or
respiratory infections related to MPS. Her tracheostomy tube - inserted three
years ago to help with breathing when her trachea became constricted - was
removed last year.

   Her vision has improved, and she has more energy. She is able to ride her
bike again.

   "I can run faster and I can jump," Isabel said. "I couldn't really walk much
before, because I'd get tired. Now I can walk all I want."

   Other children have seen similar results, said Harmatz. Patricia Espinal, 16,
grew 4 or 5 inches after receiving the therapy. Her brother, Harold, started
walking again.

   Now the therapy is being tested on the youngest MPS patients, the babies
Isabel is watching: Amro, whose family lives in the West Bank, and Jeffrey,
whose mother already lost one child to MPS.

   Amro and Jeffrey have not yet shown serious, irreversible symptoms of MPS.
Doctors are hoping they can keep them healthy for the rest of their long lives.

   "It's hard to tell how they'd be doing if we weren't treating them," Harmatz
said. "Someone like Amro, he probably would stop growing at 3 or 4 years old. If
he keeps growing, we'll know it's working."

Online resources

     ·    Information about MPS can be found at:
     ·    links.sfgate.com/ZDKU
     ·    links.sfgate.com/ZDKS
     ·    links.sfgate.com/ZDKT



Online resources

Frequently asked questions about MPS

   Q: What is MPS?

   A: MPS, or mucopolysaccharidoses, is a family of genetic diseases marked by
the body's inability to produce certain enzymes. These enzymes are used to break
down chains of sugar, and without the enzyme, the sugars build up in cells,
causing a variety of disabling symptoms.

   Q: What are the symptoms?

   A: Symptoms typically appear by the time a child is 2 or 3. Children have
bone deformities, such as clubbed feet or curvature of the spine. They stop
growing when they are very young. They also may experience pain in the bones and
joints, and may be unable to walk. MPS can also cause blindness and brain damage
in some forms.

   Q: What is the long-term prognosis for MPS?

   A: It depends on the form. Children with a type of MPS called Hurler syndrome
often die before age 10. Patients with Scheie or Hunter syndrome can live into
their 50s. Most children will die before their 20s.

   Q: What treatments are available?

   A: So far, enzyme replacement therapy, which is being clinically tested at
Oakland Children's Hospital, has shown the most promise for many forms of MPS.
Bone marrow transplants have been successful in some patients, but it is often
difficult to find an acceptable match. Researchers are hoping gene therapy will
offer a cure for MPS someday.

   "At first I felt like this was a big adventure. Now I have little kids like
Amro and Jeffrey to look out for."

   Isabel Bueso, who is being treated for mucopolysaccharidoses

GRAPHIC: Patient Isabel Bueso, 12, of Guatemala stands on a chair to visit with
4-month-old Jeffrey Figueroa at Oakland Children's Hospital. Photos by Noah
Berger / Special to The Chronicle
Jeffrey Figueroa right and Amro Housheya, 2, wait for their enzyme infusions at
Oakland Children's Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2008


                              350 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              May 18, 2008 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BOOK REVIEW; Features Desk; Part R; Part R; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Oops!!!

BYLINE: Sara Lippincott

BODY:

   SIMON LEVAY's "When Science Goes Wrong" (Plume: 298 pp., $15 paper), despite
its provocative title, will not give particular comfort to proponents of
intelligent design. It's no anti-secular screed. LeVay is a scientist himself --
a neurobiologist who has taught at Harvard Medical School and the Salk Institute
for Biological Studies -- as well as a longtime science journalist and author,
best known for his 1993 book, "The Sexual Brain." In this latest effort --
written perhaps as a gentle warning to those on the other end of the spectrum
who regard science and its practitioners with almost religious awe -- he has
collected a dozen examples of well-meant but disastrous scientific bungling.

   If you are at all into schadenfreude, you will thrill to these spine-tingling
and occasionally gruesome accounts of unsuccessful neurosurgery (resulting in
hair growth inside the patient's brain), nuclear-reactor meltdown (radioactive
corpses, one of them impaled), lethal and insufficiently monitored gene therapy
and the adventures of a gung-ho field geologist who "led a party of scientists
to their deaths in the crater of an active volcano." Not even weathermen are
spared: In October 1987, British meteorologists failed to predict the advent of
a storm whose winds reached 121 mph, killing 16 inhabitants of southern England
and uprooting 15 million trees.

   Some of these contretemps resulted from outsized ambition and some from
mind-boggling carelessness (notably the loss of a very expensive spacecraft,
meant to study the climate of Mars, because no one noticed that English units
had not been converted to metric ones), but some represent the perils that
attend any work on the frontier. "Many risk-taking scientists never make great
discoveries, certainly," LeVay concludes, "but few scientists make great
discoveries without taking great risks."

   -- Sara Lippincott

   --

   sara.lippincott@latimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2008


                              351 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2008 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                             May 15, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C-01

LENGTH: 669 words

HEADLINE: Guys need some gene therapy

BYLINE: Mark Kiszla Denver Post Staff Columnist

BODY:

   No guy on the face of the earth would retire from sports, take his ball and
go home to change diapers.

   Annika Sorenstam, the greatest female golfer who has ever lived, voluntarily
wants to trade her pitching wedge for Pampers.

   Is Sorenstam enlightened for seeing there's more to life than her next tee
time?

   Or is the woman stark raving mad?

   "This is obviously a very difficult decision to make, because I love this
game so much. But I know it's the right one. I have other priorities in my
life," Sorenstam declared this week. When the 37-year-old superstar walks off
the 18th green at the end of this season, she fully intends to throw her putter
in the bag and not look back.

   With 72 LPGA tournaments and 10 major championships to her name, Ms. 59 is
quitting, because the biological clock on the wall is telling Sorenstam it's
time to go.

   Say what?

   When Sorenstam explained she wants to chase her dreams instead of the little
white ball, then fondly cited teaching, designing clothes and starting a family
as high on her bucket list, a classy female athlete spoke from the heart with a
clear, confident vision of her future.

   Sorenstam also spoke a language guys don't understand any more than what's so
very wrong about belching after a big steak dinner.

   After all he has achieved, would Tom Brady give up playing quarterback at the
top of his game to spend more time with his baby? Of course not.

   At the height of her powers, when Sorenstam finished in the top three in
nearly 70 percent of the events entered from 2001-05, maybe she would have
needed two strokes a side to hang with Tiger Woods. But here's betting Sorenstam
would still be even money to whip Davis Love III or any number of male pros in
an arm-wrestling match at the clubhouse bar.

   Only a few days ago we spied Sorenstam so far atop the leaderboard at an LPGA
event that the nearest competitor could not reach her with a driver and 4-iron.

   The last pro athlete who decided to hang 'em up with so much left in the tank
was NFL running back Barry Sanders, who gave up pursuit of league records at age
31, faxed a retirement notice to his hometown newspaper and disappeared.

   Nearly a decade after he quit on the Detroit Lions, there are dudes who have
not moved from the couch, wondering what the heck Sanders was thinking.

   A man's ego is chained to his job. Ask pitcher Roger Clemens or boxer Sugar
Ray Leonard or any rich and famous male athlete who has failed repeatedly at
retirement.

   While announcing her plans to leave behind the grind of competitive golf, a
happy, fulfilled and focused Sorenstam did not cry.

   Everybody who loves the sport did.

   Is there something contagious about women retiring before somebody must drag
them away kicking and screaming? Justine Henin, the current No. 1 player in
women's pro tennis, is retiring at the tender age of 25, effective immediately.

   Proof again: Women really must be from Venus ... or somewhere far beyond the
comprehension of the male brain, whose gray matter is made up of 30 percent
testosterone and 70 percent beer.

   In career victories, Sorenstam ranks only behind Kathy Whitworth (88) and
Mickey Wright (82). Another five years of waking at dawn to hit the driving
range, and Sorenstam could have owned the record.

   But that wasn't her dream.

   "You start thinking what else is important in life," said Sorenstam, engaged
to be married in January.

   Women completely understand.

   Guys don't get it. Like Peter Pan, we hate to grow up. Since childhood, maybe
there really was something in our genes that has prevented us from putting down
the stupid ball and coming home for dinner.

   Please explain it to us guys, Annika and Justine.

   Can there really be such a thing as enough money? The sun doesn't really
revolve around sports? You mean to tell me there's more to life than climbing
the mountain and chiseling your name in athletic history?

   Of course, after more than 20 years of marriage, I'm still trying to figure
out what's all the fuss about leaving the toilet seat up.

   Mark Kiszla: 303-954-1053 or mkiszla@denverpost.com

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2008


                              352 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 13, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Engineering By Scientists On Embryo Stirs Criticism

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Researchers in New York have created what is believed to be the first
genetically engineered human embryo, which critics immediately branded as a step
toward ''designer babies.''

     But the researchers, at Cornell University, say they used an abnormal
embryo that could never have turned into a baby.

     ''This particular piece of work was done on an embryo that was never going
to be viable,'' said Dr. Zev Rosenwaks, director of the Center for Reproductive
Medicine and Infertility at NewYork-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell hospital. He said
the purpose of the work was stem cell research.

     That did not stop some from criticizing the work, saying that the
techniques being developed could be used by others to create babies with genes
modified to make them smarter, taller, more athletic or better looking. They
also said there should have been more public discussion.

     ''It's an important ethical boundary that scientists have been observing,''
said Marcy Darnovsky, associate director of the Center for Genetics and Society,
a watchdog group in Oakland, Calif. ''These scientists, on their own, decided to
step over that boundary with no public discussion.''

     The Cornell scientists put a gene for a fluorescent protein into the
single-celled human embryo. The embryo had three sets of chromosomes instead of
two.

     After the embryo divided for three days, all the cells in the embryo
glowed, Dr. Rosenwaks said. He said the goal of the work was to see if the
fluorescent marker would carry into the daughter cells, allowing genetic changes
to be traced as cells divided.

     The research was presented last fall at a meeting of the American Society
for Reproductive Medicine. But it received virtually no attention until last
weekend, when The Sunday Times of London published an article after the work was
mentioned in a British government review of related technology.

     Dr. Rosenwaks said the research had been  approved by a review board at his
medical center and been privately financed, so it did not violate federal
restrictions on research involving human embryos.

     Doctors already put foreign genes into people as part of gene therapy to
treat diseases. But those genetic changes generally cannot be passed on to
future generations because they are made to only certain types of cells in the
body, like blood cells or muscle cells. Genetic changes made to an embryo would
theoretically be heritable if the embryo became a baby.

     A spokesman for the National Institutes of Health said the Cornell work
would not be classified as gene therapy in need of federal review, because a
test-tube embryo is not considered a person under the regulations.

     Dr. Mark A. Kay, a gene therapy expert at Stanford University, said the
Cornell work did not represent a huge technological advance because the
scientists used a modified virus, a common gene therapy technique, to ferry the
gene into the embryo.

     Dr. Kay said genetic modification of embryos could be useful
scientifically, as long as it was not used to make designer babies. ''I
personally don't see anything wrong with using these embryos and gene transfer
techniques to study important aspects of human development,'' he said.

     Scientists in Oregon reported in 2001 that they had produced a baby monkey
containing a fluorescence gene from a jellyfish. They did it by genetically
modifying a female's egg before it was fertilized, rather than modifying an
already fertilized embryo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2008


                              353 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section LI; Column 0; Long Island Weekly Desk; PARENTING; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2040 words

HEADLINE: Taking a Chance on a Second Child

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

DATELINE: HARRISON

BODY:

     PEOPLE kept saying the best thing she could do would be to have a second
child as soon as possible, but for many years, Jordana Holovach could not bear
the thought of it. Her first, Jacob, had been born severely handicapped in 1996.
And as much as she loves that boy and as hard as she's worked to make him whole
-- she has raised $4 million to fight his genetic disease and was able to get
him ground-breaking gene-therapy treatment -- she felt snakebit.

     At age 12, Jacob is confined to a wheelchair, cannot speak or do a thing
for himself: he eats through a feeding tube,  is given more than 20 syringes of
medicine a day, has to have his head repositioned constantly to control his
drool and to avoid choking and  must  be turned several times during the night
so he doesn't develop skin sores.

     Her first marriage ended in divorce under the strain. She felt blessed that
her second husband loved Jacob and helped care for him, but he wasn't pushing
for children.

     ''You have a healthy child, you think, 'Oh my God, God's given you a gift,'
'' says Ms. Holovach. ''But on the other side, you think maybe He or She doesn't
like me. Maybe I shouldn't do it a second time. You think about all these things
that can go wrong. You have trouble envisioning a healthy kid.''

     For 10 years, she felt that having a second would be a selfish distraction,
a betrayal of Jacob.

     But she changed her mind.

     And so, this isn't a story of someone who left well enough alone; it's a
story of a woman who decided to find out what was behind Door  No. 2.

     When we first met, in May 1997, she was married to Richard Sontag, and
Jacob was 14 months old, battling Canavan disease, a rare genetic disorder most
prevalent among Ashkenazi Jews like the Sontags. For the next 18 months, James
Estrin, a photographer, and I followed them for a cover  article  in The New
York Times Magazine. Often we'd spend several days in a row with them, as they
battled to get Jacob cutting-edge treatment, which they hoped might be a cure.

     Typically, Canavan leads to paralysis, blindness, retardation. Doctors
predicted a life expectancy of 5 to 10 years for Jacob. Other parents of Canavan
children were not encouraging. The young couple -- she was 25 when Jacob was
born, her husband, 32 -- met families who had institutionalized their Canavan
child, and others who confided that rather than rush to the hospital during a
medical crisis, they let the child die quietly at home.

     JACOB'S parents were determined to do better. They were successful people
-- he had already built a thriving business, she had been in corporate public
relations. In many ways, they embodied the optimism of that decade, when the
country was in the midst of a record boom, and so much, even medical miracles,
seemed doable.

     After much battling with a medical establishment worried that the new
therapy might be unsafe for humans, the couple prevailed. On Jan. 22, 1998, for
the first time in the United States, doctors at Yale-New Haven Hospital treated
a genetic disease by shooting a syringe full of healthy genes directly into the
brain -- Jacob Sontag's brain.

     Whether it made any difference is hard to say. Jacob remains severely
disabled.  His mother thinks the treatment helped, pointing out that Jacob has
rarely been ill in the years since.

     Or perhaps he's benefited most from the extraordinary love, medical care
and physical therapy he's received from his mother, father, stepparents and the
type of highly skilled professionals that aggressive families find. Whatever the
reason, at age 12, Jacob has outlived his life expectancy, he laughs at funny
things, and his eyes light up when he sees a loved one or hears a familiar song
on his  iPod.

     As I wrote at the time, I undertook the magazine  article because I thought
it would embody both the curse and the blessing of modern medicine. The curse:
that a newly developed treatment -- in this case gene therapy -- offered hope
that it could not yet deliver. The blessing: that the new genetic screening
tests that were rapidly being developed in the course of researching these
diseases would make it possible for this couple to have a healthy second child.

     I envisioned a magazine piece with a happy ending: baby  No. 2.

     Instead, shortly after publication in December 1998, the couple began
divorce proceedings.

     Ms. Holovach  says Jacob was a big reason. ''We were so immersed in the
devastation, trying to save him, trying to deal with the unknowns of the
disease, so immersed in Jacob, our marriage suffered.

     ''The differences between us would have come out over time, but a child
like Jacob just brings everything to the surface quicker.''

     ''I became a fighter,'' she says, ''I became a loudmouth. There was a
method to my madness, but Richard thought it was just madness.'' She turned
herself into a very public advocate, threatening, demanding, screaming at people
in the name of getting Jacob the best treatment.

     Her husband fought, too. During the writing of the magazine article,
however, he made it clear to me that at times  he was going along to hold the
marriage together, even though he was more resigned to Jacob's condition and
medicine's limitations and  less comfortable being so public.

     When I called recently, we had a nice talk, but  Mr. Sontag  declined to be
interviewed, preferring privacy.

     Since the divorce, the two share custody equally, taking Jacob on
alternating weeks and frequently discussing his care.

     SIX years ago,  she  married Gareth Holovach, a federal law enforcement
agent she had known since eighth grade.

     He was great with Jacob, but she says he wasn't the type looking for a
house full of children. He'd met people who'd felt burdened and cheated by
having to care for a disabled sibling. He says his life was full with a new wife
and new stepson. ''It's not that I didn't want children; I was letting it be
Jordana's decision,'' he says.

     Parents of a disabled child spend lots of time with other disabled children
and this colored Ms. Holovach's thinking. ''You're surrounded by families
affected by injuries and birth problems and disease,'' she says. ''I've met
children who one day were perfectly fine and then had a bike accident or
drowning, children with severe cerebral palsy, brain-damaged children from a
mother in labor too long, people dealing with their own nightmares --  and you
start to wonder, is this the norm, to have sick children?

     ''I was so compulsive about Jacob's care and happiness. One time I thought
I was pregnant, I was sick to my stomach with guilt. When it turned out I
wasn't, I was so relieved.''

     Three years ago Jacob was mainstreamed into a regular classroom at Purchase
Elementary here.  Ms. Holovach was now surrounded by parents of healthy
children. The first graders seemed to like Jacob. They took turns wheeling his
chair and reading to him; he smiled for them.

     Mr. Holovach's sister had two children, now 2 and 5, and when that niece
and nephew came to stay for a weekend, Ms. Holovach found she had no problem
handling the two, plus Jacob.

     She stopped worrying so much about Jacob. ''When you first get your
diagnosis, you want him to be the child you were expecting when you're
pregnant,'' she says. ''You don't know where you're heading or what the
possibilities are and you feel you have to try everything for him.''

     It took her longer than everyone else, but she finally made peace with
Jacob as he is.

     She liked the idea of a sibling looking out for him when she was no longer
around.

     She was in her mid-30s. She heard the tick-tick. ''I didn't want to look
back and resent we didn't try,'' she says.

     IN 1995, when she was 25 and pregnant with Jacob, Ms. Holovach  asked her
doctor for all applicable screening tests, and was given one that had been
developed in the 1970s for Tay-Sachs, a disease similar to Canavan that also
primarily affects Ashkenazi Jews.

     The year Jacob was born, 1996, the Canavan screening was just coming into
use, according to Dr. Robert  J. Desnick, professor and chairman of the
Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences at Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

     In the 12 years since, Dr. Desnick says there has been enormous progress in
DNA testing to identify harmful gene mutations. From a single blood sample Mount
Sinai can now identify 111 mutations that cause 16 genetic diseases that
primarily affect Ashkenazi  Jews, including Canavan, Tay-Sachs, familial
dysautonomia, Bloom syndrome. One in four Ashkenazi  Jews will be a carrier for
one of the 16. If both parents are carriers for the same disease, odds are one
in four they'll have an affected baby.

     That was Jacob.

     There have been such advances in both the science and public education that
today, according to Dr. Desnick, the number of Tay-Sachs babies born to Jews in
North America has dropped to fewer than three a year on average from 45 to 60 in
the 1970s.  Today non-Jews in North America actually have more Tay-Sachs babies,
about 10 a year.

     The Holovachs had the test  for the 16 genetic diseases and several other
tests, which indicated that Mr. Holovach, who is Roman Catholic, wasn't a
carrier for any of the conditions. They celebrated. As Mr. Holovach recalls,
''She said to me, 'I'm having a baby.' ''

     On June 7, 2007, they conceived.

     Next were the fetal tests. At about four months, five syringes of amniotic
fluid were taken from Ms. Holovach. She was tested for Down syndrome and other
chromosomal disorders. She was also given  a new screening known as  the
prenatal microdeletion  panel, which identifies rare DNA alterations that can
cause up to 100 congenital defects.

     ''Gareth said, 'What if it's Down syndrome?' '' she recalls. ''I said, 'I'd
abort.' He said, 'Why would you do that?' He'd seen Down syndrome children who'd
functioned well. I said there are no guarantees. I'd seen DS kids who spent
their lives in and out of hospitals.''

     Mr. Holovach didn't push it, but said if they had found Down syndrome, he
would have opposed an abortion.

     It didn't come to that. All the tests came back normal.

     A sign of how much has changed since Jacob's birth: Because of the DNA
tests, they already knew that the 4-month-old fetus was a carrier for Canavan.

     Ms. Holovach scheduled a  Caesarean section for mid-February. ''Lower risk
of problems than natural birth,'' she says.

     REMI LAINE HOLOVACH, a 7-pound baby girl, was born Feb. 17, 2008, at 8:28
p.m. ''You just want to hear her cry,''  Ms. Holovach says. ''You want that
first cry, that you know she is crying. And then you hear that cry.''

     She didn't remember Jacob crying; he was born five weeks premature and
rushed to intensive care.

     ''The doctors said she's fine, she's perfect, she's great.'' Jacob had been
slow to take her breast and never suckled normally. ''Remi latched on in the
first hour. I was like, 'Oh my God, my child's advanced.' It was the first
indication everything was going to be O.K., at least for now.''

     She wishes she could worry less, but she's seen a lot. ''You can't help see
things that are there, that may not necessarily be there,'' she says. She's read
all the baby books, and studies Remi closely to make sure she's hitting every
developmental benchmark.

     When they were still in the hospital she noticed a U-shaped bruise on
Remi's forehead. ''I didn't want to freak out Gareth,'' she says. ''Was I seeing
things?''  She asked to talk to the pediatrician on duty. When the woman
arrived, Ms. Holovach pointed out the mark.

     ''She said it's nothing,'' recalls Ms. Holovach. ''She said sometimes it
goes away and sometimes it doesn't.'' And then the doctor pulled back her bangs,
and there was the same U-shaped mark.

     The mother could not stop thanking her.

     Having a daughter with a U-shaped mark on her forehead who grows up to be a
doctor sounded like a fairy tale to Ms. Holovach.

     She wants another baby, soon. ''I want Remi to have a sibling close in
age,'' she says. ''I want her to have the camaraderie. If Jacob becomes a
burden, that's not a burden Remi should be alone for. Hopefully, they won't see
it that way. Hopefully, Jacob's the gift that will unite everybody.''

     Asked about this, Mr. Holovach says, ''We haven't discussed it, but if
Jordana wants it, I'll be happy to have another.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: CARING AND SHARING: Jordana Holovach with her daughter, Remi
Laine Holovach. Right, Gareth Holovach gets Jacob ready in the morning. Ms.
Holovach and an occupational therapist raise Jacob with the help of a mechanical
lift
 QUALITY TIME: Jordana Holovach with her son, Jacob, who was born with Canavan
disease, a rare genetic disorder. Left, Ms. Holovach in her home office with
Jacob. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. LI1)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2008


                              354 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                               May 5, 2008 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Cubs in Brief; Pg. 75

LENGTH: 517  words

HEADLINE: Breakthrough good news for Lee's kid

BYLINE: Gordon Wittenmyer, The Chicago Sun-Times

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS

BODY:

   A recent breakthrough in gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania is
doing more to fire up Cubs first baseman Derrek Lee than a hanging curveball.

   For the first time doctors have been able to use the process to restore
limited vision in patients with the rare degenerative disease that afflicts
Lee's young daughter: Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA).

   ''It's exciting. It's huge,'' said Lee, who has raised awareness and hundreds
of thousands of dollars for research through his ''Project 3000'' since his
daughter was diagnosed late in 2006.

   Lee, who knows one of the patients involved in the gene-therapy studies, said
11 different genes have been linked to causing LCA, and that the recent
breakthrough -- which followed 15 years of major setbacks in the effort --
involves only one of those genes.

   ''But if it works out, then they can replicate it for the other genes,'' he
said, ''so it's pretty exciting news.''

   A-RAM UPDATE

   Cleanup hitter Aramis Ramirez, who hasn't played since taking a pitch off his
left wrist Friday night, might be out at least another day or so.

   He said before the game it still hurt to rotate the wrist and he still had
trouble with his grip strength. He swung a bat for the first time since being
hit, off a tee in the batting cage -- calling the results ''so-so.''

   BIG NEWS IN JAPAN

   The fact Kosuke Fukudome has moved up from the No. 5 spot to cleanup in
Ramirez's absence is making major news in Japan. That's because the No. 4 spot
is the Japanese equivalent of the No. 3 spot here -- the marquee place in the
order reserved for the team's best hitter.

   Japanese reporters covering the Cubs say they're explaining the difference in
their reports but that it doesn't seem to diminish the significance of the story
there.

   As for Fukudome, he says it's no big deal to him and he doesn't care where he
hits.

   NOTES

   Pinch-hit specialist Daryle Ward is having a tight hamstring treated with ice
but is still available to hit. ''Running isn't his forte anyway,'' manager Lou
Piniella said.

   - General manager Jim Hendry said rehabbing left-hander Scott Eyre (elbow)
looked good in back-to-back appearances for Class AA Tennessee and is expected
to pitch another two games before returning from the disabled list, possibly by
the end of the week.

   Comment at suntimes.com.

   ON DECK:

   CUBS AT REDS

   Tonight: 6:10, Ch. 26, 720-AM. Ryan Dempster (4-0, 3.16 ERA) vs. Johnny Cueto
(1-3, 5.40).

   Tuesday: 6:10 p.m., CSN, 720-AM. Carlos Zambrano (4-1, 2.11) vs. Aaron Harang
(1-4, 2.98).

   Wednesday: 11:35 a.m., CSN, 720-AM. Jon Lieber (2-1, 1.86) vs. Edinson
Volquez (4-1, 1.27).

   The story line: Since starting 6-4, Dusty Baker's Reds have lost 16 of 22,
including two of three at Wrigley three weeks ago and eight of 11 since GM Wayne
Krivsky was fired and replaced by Walt Jocketty. The Cubs see both of the Reds'
touted young starters in this series, having lost to Volquez at home. Tonight
they get their first look at rookie Cueto, who has a 7.48 ERA in four starts
since pitching well in his first two. He failed to get out of the second inning
at St. Louis in his last start.

   Source: Gordon Wittenmyer

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Tom Gannam, AP; Adam Kennedy can't prevent Mike Fontenot from completing
a double play in the second inning. ;

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2008


                              355 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                               May 4, 2008 Sunday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 2227 words

HEADLINE: WEEKLY REVIEW

BYLINE: Compiled by Dan Kincaid from reports by Republic writers Sarah McLellan
and Erin Kozak and the wire services.

BODY:

   Here's a recap of recent health, science and environmental news.

   WILDLIFE OASIS OPENS: On Monday, second-graders from Palo Verde Elementary
School hiked along a nature trail outlining the Mesquite Power Wildlife Oasis
next to the Mesquite Power plant in Arlington, about 40 miles west of Phoenix,
as part of the dedication ceremony for the 40-acre interactive trail system.

   Mesquite Power has partnered with the Wildlife for Tomorrow Foundation, a
Goodyear-based non-profit that promotes wildlife preservation and education, to
offer tours for students and the community.

   "It's a really natural fit for us," said John Sowers, Mesquite Power plant
manager.

   The idea for the oasis began about eight years ago, Sowers said, and after
efforts to return the area to its natural habitat and finalize design plans, the
site is ready to host field trips for the next school year.

   For now, the private site is available for classroom groups only by
appointment, but Sowers said Mesquite Power would like to open the habitat to
other private groups.

   More than 50 species of birds, plants and animals already have been
identified in the area, which includes two ponds and a butterfly area.

   MEASLES ALERT: Arizona health officials are urging people to make sure their
measles vaccinations are current after an outbreak in Pima County.

   Seventeen cases have been confirmed in the southern Arizona county and more
than 64 have been confirmed across the United States.

   "The big trend is that they weren't vaccinated," said Michael Murphy, a
spokesman for the Arizona Department of Health Services.

   Officials said the outbreak in Pima County was started by an infected
traveler from Switzerland.

   "All it takes is one airplane ride to set off a chain reaction," said Dr.
Karen Lewis, a medical director at the state health department.

   Most of the cases have involved children younger than 1 and adults between
the ages of 30 and 50 who had received only one measles, mumps and rubella
immunization or none, Lewis said. Children under 1 are too young to get
vaccinated against measles.

   "We are worried about any spread of measles because it can cause serious
complications," Lewis said. "Even healthy people die from measles."

   Some parents have been reluctant to get vaccinations for their children.

   GENES AID VISION: For the first time, researchers have used gene therapy to
increase light sensitivity and improve vision in patients who were virtually
blind, a finding that offers new hope to hundreds of thousands of patients with
inherited forms of vision impairment.

   Although the patients studied have an extremely rare form of blindness called
Leber's congenital amaurosis, researchers believe the approach ultimately could
be used for a broader spectrum of disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa and
macular degeneration.

   The treatment, so far meant only to prove the safety of the technique,
produced "real clinical benefit" and "made a real difference in patients'
lives," said geneticist Robin R. Ali of University College London, the senior
author of one of two reports presented last Sunday at a Fort Lauderdale, Fla.,
meeting of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology. The reports
were published online last Sunday by the New England Journal of Medicine.

   BONE DRUG PROBLEM: The osteoporosis drug Fosamax appears to double a woman's
odds of developing atrial fibrillation, a chronic irregular heartbeat, a study
released Monday says.

   The study raises fresh concerns about a popular drug taken by millions of
postmenopausal women, putting patients and their doctors in a bind: Fosamax is
the only drug known to build bone in women prone to osteoporosis.

   Even lead author Susan Heckbert of the University of Washington cautioned
women not to stop taking Fosamax without talking to a doctor.

   JEEPERS, CREEPERS! Marine scientists studying the carcass of a rare colossal
squid said Wednesday they had measured its eye at about 11 inches across --
bigger than a dinner plate -- making it the largest animal eye on Earth.

   One of the squid's two eyes, with a lens as big as an orange, was found
intact as the scientists examined the creature while it was slowly defrosted at
New Zealand's national museum, Te Papa Tongarewa. It has been preserved there
since being caught in the Ross Sea off Antarctica's northern coast last year.

   "This is the only intact eye (of a colossal squid) that's ever been found.
It's spectacular," said Auckland University of Technology squid specialist Kat
Bolstad, one of a team of international scientists brought in to examine the
creature. "It's the largest known eye in the animal kingdom."

   The squid is the biggest specimen ever caught of the rare and mysterious
deep-water species Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni, or colossal squid. When caught,
it measured 26 feet long and weighed about 1,000 pounds, but scientists believe
the species may grow as long as 46 feet.

   SQUID INVASION: They aren't your normal calamari. The jumbo squid lurking off
the Pacific Northwest could signal yet another change in the oceans brought on
by global warming.

   No one knows why the squid, which can reach 7 feet long and weigh up to 110
pounds, started appearing in increasing numbers off Washington state and Oregon
or how many of them there are, but scientists and commercial fishermen have
found them in their nets every year since 2004.

   One ship trawling for Pacific hake captured an estimated 50 tons of the squid
in one net haul.

   BREAST-FEEDING RISE: More than 3 out of 4 new moms now breast-feed their
infants, the highest rate in the U.S. in at least 20 years, according to a
government report released Wednesday.

   About 77 percent of new mothers breast-feed, at least briefly, up from 60
percent in 1993-1994, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said.

   "It looks like it is an all-time high" based on CDC surveys since the
mid-1980s, said Jeff Lancashire, a CDC spokesman.

   Experts attributed the rise to education campaigns that emphasize that breast
milk is better than formula at protecting babies against disease and childhood
obesity. A changing culture that accommodates nursing mothers may also be a
factor.

   CIRCUIT ADVANCE: Hewlett-Packard Co. said that its researchers proved the
existence of a circuit that could let computers process information and store
memory in a similar manner to the human brain.

   Hewlett-Packard spent the past year and a half searching for proof of the
concept -- called a memory resistor, or memristor -- which was first theorized
37 years ago. HP Labs researchers published their findings in Thursday's Nature,
Palo Alto, Calif.-based Hewlett-Packard said.

   The discovery could lead to the development of memory chips that are smaller,
consume less power and are less costly to make than the flash memory and dynamic
random access memory chips used today, said R. Stanley Williams, who directs
quantum-science research at HP Labs. Such products may take five years to
arrive.

   POLAR-BEAR DEADLINE: A federal judge in Oakland has ordered the Interior
Department to decide by May 15 if the polar bear should be protected as an
endangered species because of melting sea ice due to global warming.

   U.S. District Judge Claudia Wilken decided, in a ruling released Tuesday,
that the government failed to meet the deadline of Jan. 9, a legal requirement
under the Endangered Species Act. She dismissed the Bush administration's plea
to give it until June 30, saying officials offered "no specific facts that would
justify the existing delay, much less further delay."

   Wilken's decision is a victory for three conservation groups that petitioned
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, an agency of the Interior Department, to
protect the polar bear as a species threatened with extinction because of
receding sea ice.

   WARMING BREAK? Global warming is taking a break that could last for another
10 years or so.

   That's the latest word from a team of climate researchers in Germany. Global
average temperatures should remain above normal, the team suggests. But
additional warming -- already on hold over the first seven years of this decade
-- is likely to remain that way for another decade. The reason? The team says it
expects natural shifts in ocean circulation to affect temperatures in ways that
temporarily out-wrestle the effects of rising greenhouse-gas emissions.

   The forecast is "very bold," cautions Tom Delworth, a scientist at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory at Princeton University. But, he adds, it represents the cutting edge
of climate modeling. The German effort is one of the first widely published
attempts to offer climate forecasts on time scales of a decade or so, rather
than a century or more. The findings appeared in Thursday's Nature.

   BLOOD UPDATE: Efforts to create an artificial blood substitute to prolong
life for wounded soldiers or bleeding car-crash victims were set back Monday by
a study saying the products have led to a 30 percent increase in the risk of
death and nearly threefold chance of having a heart attack.

   The findings in the Journal of the American Medical Association come with
sharp criticism of the way the fake blood was studied. Researchers want all such
trials halted and for blood-substitute studies to move back to animal labs. They
particularly object to studies in which trauma patients have been given the fake
blood without consent.

   Five human studies of blood substitutes are under way in eight foreign
countries, the researchers say, and at least one more human trial is being
planned for the USA.

   FAST-FOOD IMPACT: In communities with an abundance of fast-food outlets and
convenience stores, researchers have found, obesity and diabetes rates are much
higher than in areas where fresh fruit and vegetable markets and full-service
grocery stores are easily accessible.

   "The implications are really dramatic," said Harold Goldstein, a study author
and executive director of the California Center for Public Health Advocacy,
based in Davis. "We are living in a junk-food jungle, and not surprisingly, we
are seeing rising rates of obesity and diabetes."

   The new study builds on research released a year ago that found California
has four times as many fast-food restaurants and convenience stores as grocery
stores and produce vendors.

   For the new project, Goldstein teamed with UCLA's Center for Public Health
Policy Research and PolicyLink to explore possible links between the kinds of
food Californians can easily access and the prevalence of obesity and diabetes
in their communities.

   The outcome: "We found a very strong link," Goldstein said. "It was true for
people living in both high-income and low-income communities, regardless of
race, ethnicity, age, gender or level of physical activity."

   'FATHER OF LSD' DIES: Albert Hofmann, the father of the mind-altering drug
LSD whose medical discovery grew into a notorious "problem child," died Tuesday.
He was 102.

   Hofmann died of a heart attack at his home in Basel, Switzerland, according
to Rick Doblin, president of the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic
Studies, in a statement posted on the association's Web site.

   The Swiss chemist discovered lysergic acid diethylamide-25 in 1938 while
studying the medicinal uses of a fungus found on wheat and other grains at the
Sandoz pharmaceuticals firm in Basel. He became the first human guinea pig of
the drug when a tiny amount of the substance seeped onto his finger during a
repeat of the laboratory experiment on April 16, 1943.

   FAT NOT SO FIT: New research challenges the notion that you can be fat and
fit, finding that being active can lower but not eliminate heart risks faced by
heavy women.

   Previous research has gone back and forth on whether exercise or weight has a
greater influence on heart-disease risks. The new study involving nearly 39,000
women helps sort out the combined effects of physical activity and body mass on
women's chances of developing heart disease, said Gulati, who wasn't involved in
the research. Compared with normal-weight active women, the risk for developing
heart disease was 54 percent higher in overweight active women and 87 percent
higher in obese active women. By contrast, it was 88 percent higher in
overweight inactive women; and 2 1/2 times greater in obese inactive women.

   The study appeared in Monday's Archives of Internal Medicine.

   BPA POLICY: Despite more than 100 published studies by government scientists
and university laboratories that have raised health concerns about a chemical
compound that is central to the multibillion-dollar plastics industry, the Food
and Drug Administration has deemed it safe largely because of two studies, both
funded by a trade group, the Washington Post reported last weekend.

   The agency says it has relied on research backed by the American Plastics
Council because it had input on its design, monitored its progress and reviewed
the raw data.

   The compound, bisphenol A, or BPA, has been linked to breast and prostate
cancer, behavioral disorders and reproductive-health problems in lab animals.

   As evidence mounts about the risks of using BPA in baby bottles and other
products, some experts and industry critics contend that chemical manufacturers
have exerted influence over U.S. regulators to keep a possibly unsafe product on
the market. Congressional Democrats have begun investigating any industry
influence in regulating BPA.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2008


                              356 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              May 1, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; CITY / COUNTY DIGEST; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: CITY / COUNTY DIGEST

BODY:

   Maryland : Environment

   Tougher standards for ozone alerts

   Stricter ozone standards likely will mean twice as many code red and orange
"alert days" in Maryland this summer, even if the air isn't any more polluted,
state officials said yesterday.

   "We want people to understand that the air quality has improved, but now we
will be calling alert days at a lower level," said Tad Aburn, director of the
air division at the Maryland Department of the Environment.

   The new standard is an average of 75 parts per billion over an eight-hour
period. The old standard was 85 parts per billion.

   Last year, Maryland issued 25 red and orange health alerts across the state
for high ozone levels. On red and orange alert days, the government advises
children, the elderly and people with asthma to limit activity.

   Tom Pelton

   Anne Arundel

   : Naval Academy

   Klein promoted to rear admiral

   Capt. Margaret D. Klein, who in 2006 became the first female commandant of
midshipmen at the U.S. Naval Academy, has been promoted to the rank of rear
admiral, according to a Department of Defense announcement.

   She has been assigned as operations officer of the Navy's network warfare
command, based in Norfolk, Va.

   Klein graduated in 1981, part of the second class of women to have been
admitted to the academy. Vice Admiral Rodney P. Rempt, the previous academy
superintendent, tapped Klein as academy officials sought to address a culture
described by a Pentagon task force as hostile to female students. The academy
has also been criticized for its response to allegations of sexual misconduct.

   Mullen to speak at graduation

   Adm. Michael Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will address the
Naval Academy's graduation May 23, the academy said yesterday.

   Mullen has served as Joint Chiefs chairman since Oct. 1. A 1968 academy
graduate, he most recently served as the 28th Chief of Naval Operations. His
last operational assignment was as commander of the NATO Joint Force Command
Naples and U.S. Naval Forces Europe.

   Baltimore

   : Hopkins Hospital

   Surgeon files sex harassment suit

   A former Johns Hopkins Hospital pediatric surgeon is suing the institution
for harassment in U.S. District Court in Baltimore.

   In a complaint filed Monday, Dr. Anne C. Fischer alleges that she went
through eight years of sexual harassment and gender discrimination.

   Fischer, an expert on gene therapy, came to Johns Hopkins nine years ago. She
says she experienced "a longstanding pattern of gender discrimination and
sex-based bullying, and harassment" from colleagues, including her supervisor,
Dr. Paul Colombani, chief of the pediatric surgery division.

   In a statement released yesterday, Johns Hopkins' press office wrote: "The
Johns Hopkins defendants, including the two individual faculty members, deny the
claims and intend vigorously to defend the case. We believe the complaint has no
merit."

   Fischer is also suing Dr. Julie Freischlag, chairwoman of the department of
surgery.

   City Hall

   New public works head is sworn in

   David E. Scott, a former deputy mayor and longtime public works employee, was
sworn in as the director of Baltimore's Department of Public Works yesterday by
Mayor Sheila Dixon.

   Scott, who most recently served as commissioner for Atlanta's Department of
Public Works, began his career in Baltimore as a civil engineer in 1985. He has
also served as a deputy city engineer for Highland Park, Illinois.

   Scott replaces George L. Winfield, who died late last year. Scott earned
bachelor's and master's degrees in engineering at the University of Maryland,
College Park.

   Legislation expected to win approval in the City Council would set Scott's
salary at $155,000.

   John Fritze

   Mount Vernon

   Road closures for Flower Mart

   Baltimore's 91st annual Flower Mart begins tomorrow in Mount Vernon with
vendors and artists selling a variety of plants, paintings and photographs. The
event runs from 11 a.m. to 8 p.m. on both days, but traffic restrictions in the
neighborhood and around the Washington Monument start earlier.

   Starting 3 p.m. today and lasting until 10 p.m. Saturday, the following
streets will be closed: Charles Street from Centre to Read streets; Madison
Street from St. Paul to Cathedral streets; and Mount Vernon Place from Cathedral
to St. Paul streets. Parking will be prohibited on those streets starting at 2
p.m. today .

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2008


                              357 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 241  words

HEADLINE: He can see the light; Near-blind teen can find his way home after dark
with new gene therapy

BYLINE: Stephanie Nano, Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to dramatically improve
sight in people with a rare form of blindness.

   Some vision was restored in four of the six young people who got the
treatment, teams of researchers in the United States and Britain reported
Sunday.

   Two of the volunteers who could only see hand motions were able to read a few
lines of an eye chart within weeks.

   ''It's a phenomenal breakthrough,'' said Stephen Rose, chief research officer
of the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which helped pay for one study done at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   If successful in larger numbers, experts said, the technique has the
potential to reverse blindness from other kinds of inherited eye diseases.

   In the British group, the treatment only worked in 18-year-old Steven
Howarth, whose disease was less advanced than the other two.

   Howarth said he used to rush home from school because he was worried about
getting around in the dark.

   ''Now, my sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely
better. It's a small change -- but it makes a big difference to me,'' said
Howarth, who lives in Bolton, near Manchester.

   After the injection last July, Howarth said his eye felt like sandpaper. It
was better after a week, and his eyesight gradually improved. He was able to
negotiate a dimly lit maze in 14 seconds without bumping into any obstacles;
before it took him 77 seconds with eight errors.

   Comment at suntimes.com.

GRAPHIC:
Photo: AP; Steven Holwarth, 18, at home in England this month, was one of six
people who got a new blindness treatment. Two others who could only see hand
motions now can read an eye chart. ;

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              358 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 22 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE;
A 'landmark' treatment

BYLINE: STAFF

BODY:

   Researchers have uncovered new hope, in the form of gene therapy, for those
with inherited types of vision impairment.

   STORY ON PAGE A3

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              359 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy gives hope to blind;
Vision improved and sensitivity to light increased in new treatment

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, Los Angeles Times

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have used gene therapy to increase light
sensitivity and improve vision in patients who were virtually blind, a finding
that offers new hope to hundreds of thousands of patients with inherited forms
of vision impairment.

   Although the patients studied have an extremely rare form of blindness called
Leber's congenital amaurosis, researchers believe the approach ultimately could
be used for a much broader spectrum of disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa
and macular degeneration.

   The treatment, so far meant only to prove the safety of the technique,
produced "real clinical benefit" and "made a real difference in patients'
lives," said geneticist Robin R. Ali of University College London, the senior
author of one of two reports presented Sunday at a Fort Lauderdale, Fla.,
meeting of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.

   Success after trying times

   The reports were published online Sunday by the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   "The fact that they had patients who could now read lines on an eye chart ...
and one who could run an obstacle course - this is a really great advance," said
geneticist Stephen Rose, chief research officer of the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, who was not involved in the research.

   "This has changed the landscape of hope for patients," he said.

   Added Dr. Morton F. Goldberg, an ophthalmologist at John Hopkins University's
Wilmer Eye Institute, "In the field of retinal dystrophies, this is, I believe,
the most important therapeutic discovery" in four decades. "It's a landmark."

   The results are particularly important because gene therapy, in which a good
gene is substituted for a naturally occurring defective one, has been "a
snake-bitten field," with at least two subjects in other experiments dying and a
handful of others developing cancer, said Dr. Albert M. Maguire of the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, lead author of the second report.

   "We have been working for years, and it has really been rough," Maguire said.
"Here we finally have something in a curable disease that really seems to be
working."

   Leber's congenital amaurosis affects about 3,000 people in the United States
and perhaps one in every 50,000 worldwide. Children with the disorder are born
with severely impaired vision that deteriorates over the course of their lives
until they are totally blind in childhood or adolescence.

   There is no treatment for it.

   Other treatments possible

   What makes Leber's a good candidate for gene therapy is that most of the
visual apparatus, including the retina, is intact - at least at birth.
Typically, the defective gene that produces it is one of several in a
biochemical pathway that produces chemicals necessary for the eye to generate an
electrical signal for transmission to the brain.

   If that gene could be replaced before the visual apparatus deteriorates from
lack of use, then vision could be restored, Maguire said.

   That same basic strategy could be used to treat a variety of congenital
retinal disorders. "With an aging population, one of the most serious problems
that hinders old people is the loss of sight," said Dr. Katherine A. High of
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and a co-author of one of the studies.

   Response to light improved

   Retinitis pigmentosa - the broad family of disorders that includes Leber's -
affects an estimated 100,000 Americans. Macular degeneration affects 1.25
million Americans now, and the number is expected to grow to 3 million by 2020
as the population continues to age.

   Those conditions are caused by other defective genes, but the treatment
principle would be the same.

   The Pennsylvania group treated three patients, one age 19 and two age 26,
recruited by Dr. Alberto Auricchio of the University of Naples Federico II in
Italy.

   Beginning two weeks after treatment, all three patients reported improved
vision, Maguire said.

   By measuring pupillary response to light - the only objective measure of
vision the researchers were able to employ - they found light sensitivity had
improved about threefold. The treatment also reduced nystagmus, an
uncontrollable roaming of the eye often seen in blind people.

   Patients also performed better on more subjective tests. One patient's vision
on an eye chart, for example, improved from 20/640 to 20/290, about 3 1/2 lines
of improvement, according to Dr. Jean Bennett, lead author of the study. The
Food and Drug Administration requires three lines of improvement to consider a
treatment efficacious.

GRAPHIC: Photo: LOOKING INTO IT: Dr. Albert Maguire and Dr. Jean Bennett at the
University of Pennsylvania are part of two teams of scientists studying Leber's
congenital amaurosis, an eye disease that causes blindness.
HANDOUT PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              360 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: THE NATION;
Gene therapy helps several blind people see better

BYLINE: Thomas H. Maugh II, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have used gene therapy to increase light
sensitivity and improve vision in patients who were virtually blind, a finding
that offers new hope to hundreds of thousands of patients with inherited forms
of vision impairment.

   Although the patients had a rare form of blindness called Leber's congenital
amaurosis, researchers believe the approach can ultimately be used for a broad
spectrum of disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa and macular degeneration.

   The experiments, so far meant only to prove the safety of the technique,
produced "real clinical benefit" and "made a real difference in patients'
lives," said geneticist Robin R. Ali of University College London, the senior
author of one of two reports presented Sunday at a Fort Lauderdale, Fla.,
meeting of the Assn. for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.

   The reports were published online Sunday by the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   "The fact that they had patients who could now read lines on an eye chart . .
. and one who could run an obstacle course -- this is a really great advance,"
said geneticist Stephen Rose, chief research officer of the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, who was not involved in the research. "This has changed the landscape
of hope for patients."

   Technique controversial

   Added Dr. Morton F. Goldberg, an ophthalmologist at John Hopkins University's
Wilmer Eye Institute: "In the field of retinal dystrophies, this is, I believe,
the most important therapeutic discovery" in four decades. "It's a landmark."

   The results are particularly important because gene therapy, in which a
defective gene is replaced with a good one, has been "a snakebitten field," with
at least two subjects in other experiments dying and a few others developing
cancer, said Dr. Albert M. Maguire of the University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, lead author of the second report.

   A handful of children with severe combined immunodeficiency disease were
successfully treated, but critics charged that conventional treatments would
have been equally effective -- and safer. In France, three children treated for
the disease developed leukemia because the delivery agent inserted the new gene
in the wrong place.

   Researchers have reported modest benefits for Parkinson's disease, but no
gene therapy results have been as dramatic as the Leber's findings.

   "We have been working for years, and it has really been rough," Maguire said.
"Here we finally have something in a curable disease that really seems to be
working."

   Leber's congenital amaurosis affects about 3,000 people in the United States
and perhaps 130,000 worldwide. Sufferers are born with severely impaired vision
that deteriorates until they are totally blind in childhood or adolescence.
There has been no treatment for it.

   What makes Leber's a good candidate for gene therapy is the fact that most of
the visual apparatus, including the retina, is intact, at least at birth.
Typically, the defective gene that produces Leber's is one of several in a
pathway that produces chemicals for the eye to generate an electrical signal to
the brain.

   If that gene can be replaced before the visual apparatus deteriorates from
lack of use, then vision can be restored, Maguire said.

   Hope beyond Leber's

   That basic strategy could be used to treat a variety of congenital retinal
disorders. "With an aging population, one of the most serious problems that
hinders old people is the loss of sight," said Dr. Katherine A. High of
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and a coauthor of one of the studies.

   Retinitis pigmentosa -- the broad family of disorders that includes Leber's
-- affects an estimated 100,000 Americans. Macular degeneration affects 1.25
million Americans, and the number is expected to grow to 3 million by 2020 as
the population ages.

   Those conditions are caused by other defective genes, but the treatment
principle would be the same. Researchers would have to design a specific
delivery vehicle, or vector, for each disorder bearing the proper gene.

   In the latest experiments, both groups of researchers used a gene called
RPE65 that is defective in many Leber's patients. Both groups also used as a
vector a small adeno-associated virus that infects humans and other primates but
is not known to cause disease. Its safety has been shown in various gene therapy
experiments.

   The Pennsylvania group's vector was developed by High; the British group used
one produced by Targeted Genetics Corp. of Seattle.

   The Pennsylvania group treated two 26-year-olds and a 19-year-old. Between
October and January, Maguire injected a bit of the vector below the retina into
each patient's worse-damaged eye.

   Two weeks after the injections, all three patients reported improved vision
in the injected eyes, Maguire said. By gauging pupillary response to light --
researchers' only objective measure of vision -- they found that light
sensitivity had improved about threefold. The treatment also reduced nystagmus,
an uncontrollable roaming of the eye common in blind people.

   The patients also performed better on more subjective tests. One patient's
vision on an eye chart, for example, improved from 20/640 to 20/290, about 3 1/2
chart lines better, according to Dr. Jean Bennett, lead author of the study. The
Food and Drug Administration requires three lines of improvement to consider a
treatment effective.

   No ill effects found

   The therapy did not produce inflammation in the eye or any other toxic side
effects, the researchers said. One patient did develop a small hole in the
retina that they suspect was a result of the surgery, but it did not interfere
with vision.

   "All three subjects are asking if they can have their other eye injected,"
High said. "That's a pretty good indicator of its effectiveness." The current
research protocol does not allow for that, however.

   The researchers have no idea how long the improvements will persist, but dogs
given the treatment have remained stable for at least eight years, she said.

   The British group also treated three patients, using slightly smaller doses
of the vector. They also found no ill effects. Their patients did not have
improved visual acuity, but one of them, 18-year-old Steven Howarth, had
improved light sensitivity, especially at night.

   "My sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely better," he
said in a statement. "It's a small change -- but it makes a big difference to
me."

   Howarth is "staying out later and more confident at night," Ali said.

   Both groups are now increasing the vector dosage and moving toward younger
children whose visual apparatus is less deteriorated. Ideally, High said, the
treatment would start when the disorder was diagnosed in children.

   --

   thomas.maugh@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: 'IT MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE': Dim light is less of a problem now
for Steven Howarth, 18, "a small change" that matters a lot to him. Researchers
want to try the method in children next.  PHOTOGRAPHER: BBC

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              361 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Inq Health Daily; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 3647 words

HEADLINE: Phila. researchers bring sight to the blind

BYLINE: By Tom Avril; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   The young man on Albert Maguire's operating table had a big red mark stamped
on the right side of his forehead.

   The mark told the surgeon just where to insert his needle: straight into the
patient's right eye.

   Maguire didn't really need the reminder. He and his wife, molecular
geneticist Jean Bennett, had been focusing on this moment for months - in truth,
for decades.

   The patient was blind. Maguire's hair-thin needle traveled through the
"white" of his eye, all the way back to his badly scarred retina, where it would
deliver billions of genetically modified viruses. Each virus carried a single
gene: the recipe to produce a crucial enzyme that his eye was unable to make on
its own.

   Within weeks, beyond what anyone had predicted, the experiment worked. The
young man and two other patients began to regain some vision.

   The results, reported online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine, represent a dramatic advance in the field known as gene therapy, a
field marked by sparkling - yet so far largely unfulfilled - promise.

   The three patients, treated in a joint effort by the University of
Pennsylvania and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, remain legally blind. But
there are indications that the procedure may work even better in children, and
the lessons could one day apply to other forms of inherited blindness.

   "This Philadelphia trial is exceptionally exciting," said Savio Woo, a
gene-therapy specialist at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine who was not
involved with the study. "It's absolutely remarkable."

   The Inquirer followed the trial over eight months under the agreement that it
would not print an account until the research was published in an academic
journal.

   The official goal of the surgery was to make sure such an injection was safe;
no one promised the young man, who had flown from Italy for the experimental
treatment, that he would see any better.

   But luck was on his side.

   Bennett and Maguire set the date of the surgery for Thursday, Dec. 13.

   To them, it was just another day on the calendar. But to the Italian
clinicians assisting in the operation, it was auspicious.

   The 13th is the feast day of Santa Lucia, patron saint of the blind.

   A 'simple problem'

   Jean Bennett and Albert Maguire first talked about the eye idea as they were
finishing up Harvard medical school in the mid-1980s - she exploring the
fledgling field of genetics, he learning to be a surgeon.

   The two had hit it off in neuroanatomy class. They were lab partners on the
day they had to dissect a human brain.

   After they cut the brain in half, Maguire took Bennett's hand and put it on
top of the hypothalamus.

   "I want to show you my favorite organ," he said, reminding her that it is
sometimes called the "pleasure center."

   Not missing a beat, she responded:

   "That's my second-favorite organ."

   They were married two years later.

   It was 1985. Still in school, Maguire was working in a lab that specialized
in retinal degeneration, and he knew that many such diseases were the result of
a single defective gene. With the practical, fix-it approach common to those in
the surgical profession, Maguire wondered if matters could be addressed in the
operating room.

   "I thought: 'Simple problem: Fix gene, fix disease,' " he said.

   Of all the body's organs, the eye is one of the most accessible. So he asked
his wife, who already had a Ph.D. in biology: Was it possible to inject a
corrective gene?

   Sure, she said - in theory. Researchers had been talking for years about the
goal of inserting genes into living tissue.

   Except that no one had identified any of the genes that cause retinal
disease.

   "Had I actually known how difficult and complex the problem really was, I
probably would have dismissed the idea immediately," he says now. "Jean has a
more long-term view and didn't tell me."

   The two did a stint at Yale, where Bennett had grown up, the daughter of a
famous physicist who co-invented the gas laser.

   Later, Maguire interviewed for a fellowship with Robert Machemer, a pioneer
in retinal surgery, and eagerly told him what he and his wife were trying to do.
The response was not good.

   "It'll never work," Machemer said.

   Maguire, a Philadelphia native and Episcopal Academy graduate, didn't get the
fellowship, but the rejection inspired the couple. They came to Penn's
prestigious Scheie Eye Institute in 1992.

   The dogs

   The notion that eye problems could be inherited dates back to Aristotle. But
the first gene for retinal degeneration was not discovered until 1989. Today,
more than 400 eye-disease genes have been identified, aided by the Human Genome
Project.

   At Penn, Bennett studied the genetics of retinitis pigmentosa - a group of
inherited diseases that gradually destroy sight.

   In 1997, scientists at the National Eye Institute found a mutation that
caused a rare subtype that strikes children, called Leber's congenital amaurosis
(LCA). They began to try to induce these mutations in mice in order to figure
out how to fix them.

   Then, in 1998, Cornell University's Gregory Acland and Gustavo Aguirre - now
at Penn - reported that the same mutation occurred naturally in a certain breed
of dog, the Briard.

   In 2000, Bennett and Maguire joined them in a pivotal experiment. They
injected three blind dogs with a virus - one that had been modified to deliver
the recipe for a missing enzyme in their eyes.

   Within weeks, the dogs' vision improved more than anyone had hoped. They
could see so well they could navigate a maze.

   By 2006, Maguire had performed the surgery on 55 blind dogs, restoring vision
in more than 90 percent of them.

   LCA is a rare disease, afflicting perhaps 3,000 people in the United States.
But if Bennett and Maguire could get their gene therapy to work for that
illness, the lessons might apply to other forms of retinitis pigmentosa - which
strikes 100,000 people in the U.S.

   It was time to try it on people.

   In the family

   Giuseppe Ferraro noticed, when his firstborn son was 5 months old, that the
baby didn't seem bothered by bright lights. In fact, he looked straight at them.

   Eventually, Ferraro learned that his son hadLCA.

   His vision had been impaired since birth, and it would become steadily worse.

   There was no cure.

   Four years later, the Ferraros had twins. Sadly, Tommaso and Josalinda were
born with the same mutation.

   Tommaso grew up and got a job as a dispatcher for the forest service, where a
government-appointed guide helps him get around. Josalinda got married and began
to raise two children. Both could see a little bit out of one eye, especially in
bright sunlight. But under normal interior lighting, their vision was just about
zero.

   Through doctors in Naples, they heard that scientists in Philadelphia were
working on an experiment that might help them.

   Tommaso and Josalinda were 26. The trial was limited to those 27 and under;
any older, and the retina would likely be beyond rescue.

   Tommaso was a little hesitant when he heard that a needle would be inserted
into his right eye. And, the doctors warned him, his eye could become inflamed.
The corrective genes, borne by the viruses, might not take hold. And his brain -
starved of visual information for decades - might have trouble making sense of
the new signals coming from his rejuvenated eye.

   Yet the doctors seemed confident not only that the procedure was safe - but
that he might even regain some vision.

   He and his twin sister agreed to try it. They booked flights to Philadelphia.

   Using viruses

   Since scientists began trying gene therapy on humans in 1990, there have been
hundreds of trials on thousands of patients, but scant success. There are some
promising signs in treating hemophilia. In France, 10 children were cured of the
immune disorder known as the "bubble boy disease." But three of them later
developed leukemia.

   And in 1999 at Penn, in the case that haunts the field, Arizona teenager
Jesse Gelsinger had a fatal immune reaction after he was injected with genetic
material to treat a metabolic disorder.

   In that trial, as in most cases, scientists had delivered their corrective
genes by piggybacking them on an agent that is extremely effective at invading
human cells: the virus.

   But the virus has another ability that is not so welcome: It hijacks the
cell's machinery and makes copies of itself. Those copies, in turn, seek out and
invade other cells. These modified cells can attract the attention of the
patient's immune system, which attempts to snuff them out - thus defeating the
whole purpose.

   In Gelsinger's case, the problem was far more severe. Scientists used an
agent called an adenovirus that had been stripped of its ability to replicate,
yet his immune system became lethally overstimulated.

   Bennett, on the other hand, decided to use a very primitive type of virus
that never had the ability to reproduce. Called an adeno-associated virus, these
bugs can copy themselves only by borrowing the machinery of the larger, more
complex adenovirus.

   Even if they were somehow to replicate, it is not a type of virus that causes
disease. Of the roughly 300 human gene-therapy trials currently under way in the
United States, more than 20 are using these adeno-associated viruses.

   On their own, these simple viruses provoke at most a mild response. This is
especially true in the eye, an "immuno-privileged" organ in which the immune
system does not attack a foreign presence in a significant way.

   For her trial, Jean Bennett enlisted the participation of Children's
Hospital, a world leader in the treatment and study of pediatric genetic
disease.

   It is home to the Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics, whose
director, prominent gene-therapy specialist Kathy High, agreed it would sponsor
the trial. A highly specialized lab would purify and tweak the virus so it could
perform its job.

   A flawed gene

   In people with normal vision, a crucial protein is made by the retinal
pigment epithelium, a layer of cells beneath the retina. The protein, an enzyme
called RPE65, is used to metabolize vitamin A. The metabolized vitamin, in turn,
allows the nearby "rod" cells to make a pigment that absorbs light, so it can be
converted into an electrochemical message to the brain.

   People with an RPE65 mutation develop LCA. Their eyes make flawed versions of
the protein, if any at all.

   Not only is their vision impaired to begin with, but over the years, their
cells accumulate toxic levels of a vitamin A derivative that normally is broken
down by RPE65. Their retinas become badly scarred.

   To do gene therapy, Bennett's team took the virus and gutted it. They
replaced its two genes with a single human gene - one with the blueprint for a
healthy version of RPE65. All that remained of the original virus DNA was a pair
of genetic bookends, one on each end of the DNA molecule.

   Fraser Wright, director of the Children's Hospital lab that made the viral
"vector" - the carrier - worked with Jeannette Bennicelli and others to
fine-tune it. They added various bits of customized genetic material, including
a "promoter" to enhance production of the needed enzyme, and another sequence to
make the virus even better at penetrating the patients' eye cells.

   The lab grew and purified billions of the viruses. It cultivated them inside
cells derived from human kidneys, using a growth medium and other materials that
had been subjected to rigorous tests to ensure purity. That process took a whole
year.

   Wright's lab performed dozens of FDA-mandated tests on the virus itself to
ensure it would be safe for people - that there was no contamination by other
viruses or bacteria, for instance.

   The lab made hundreds of vials and stored them in a freezer.

   Nine patients would receive the injection, each time in their worse eye - in
case there were complications. The first three were the twins, Tommaso and
Josalinda, and another Italian woman named Manuela Migliorati. (The disease is
no more common in Italy than anywhere else, but researchers there have made an
effort to identify those with mutations.)

   If all went well, the viruses would latch onto and enter the sub-retinal
cells, then travel all the way to the cells' nuclei. There, each virus would
ordinarily release its own DNA. But in the patients, the lab-modified virus
instead would release its cargo of the new RPE65 gene.

   Because retinal cells do not divide, the impact of the corrective gene would
not be watered down over time. It should be permanent.

   The first three patients were to get 15 billion viruses each. If everything
went OK, the next three would get three times that many. The third group would
get 150 billion - 10 times the first dose.

   Big numbers, but small invaders.

   Compared to the retinal cells that they would be penetrating, each virus was
about the size of a Frisbee on a football field.

   The entire precious payload for each patient would be contained in 150
microliters of saline solution - less than one-thirtieth of a teaspoon.

   The surgery

   Al Maguire decided two days in advance just where he would insert the needle
into Tommaso's right eye.

   In October, with Tommaso's sister Josalinda, he'd injected the virus away
from the center of the retina, in case it somehow impaired what little vision
she had.

   There were no complications with Josalinda, so Tommaso would get his
injection closer to the center.

   Maguire had been thinking intently about the surgery for days.

   He had done hundreds of the operations on baby mice, whose eyes are the size
of a pencil tip, and he'd done dozens of dogs.

   The night before, to relax, he'd watched The Pianist, the tragic movie about
a Jewish musician who lives in Poland during the Holocaust. Maguire found the
context helpful; if others could endure such pain, surely his own challenges
were insignificant.

   The day of the surgery, the hospital thawed out the vial containing the
virus. Research coordinator Kathy Marshall carried it down the hall in a cooler.

   Maguire's surgical team prepped Tommaso, stamping the red mark on his
forehead. He was draped and put under anesthesia.

   Because Tommaso was young, the clear substance inside his eye - called the
vitreous - was still fairly firm and jelly-like. The needle, a flexible
instrument called a cannula, could not be inserted all the way back to the
retina.

   So first, the surgical team removed the jelly and simultaneously replaced it
with a saline solution - a procedure called a vitrectomy.

   The surgeons cut three tiny holes in the surface of the eye: one for a
vitrector, an instrument to snip and gently suck out the jelly; one for an
infusion port to pump in the saline solution; and one for a "light pipe" to
illuminate the back of the eye.

   Maguire watched through a microscope as he and his team did the work. He
operated in stocking feet because he had to control two of his tools, the
vitrector and the microscope, with foot pedals. Each had a series of switches
that he operated with his toes.

   Outside, in the waiting room, Maguire's wife - the scientist - was nervous.

   "It's scary, embarking on unknown territory," Bennett said. "At a certain
point, it's time to say it's safe from every aspect we've looked at in animals.
But humans is a different game."

   It was time for the injection.

   Maguire held the light pipe in his left hand. He carefully inserted the
cannula with his right.

   The flexible needle went through the sclera - the "white" of the eye - then
through the saline fluid, until Maguire felt it come to rest at the back of the
eye, gently, against the retina.

   The needle was connected to a syringe in the hands of Penn ophthalmologist
Eric Pierce, who stood ready to push the button that would release the precious
genetic material.

   "Push, push," Maguire told Pierce.

   Looking through his microscope, Maguire saw a "bleb" - a small spot where the
entering fluid was causing Tommaso's retina to rise. That meant he had gotten
the needle in the right place.

   "Go, go, go!" he urged Pierce, so he would release the rest of the
virus-bearing fluid.

   After years of preparation, the actual injection had taken just a few
moments.

   At 3:45 p.m., Maguire emerged in his hospital scrubs to give the news to the
patient's father; an Italian doctor translated.

   "He's doing very well," Maguire said. "He's waking up from the anesthesia.
The injection went perfectly."

   The surgeon walked out into the hallway. Bennett smothered him in a big hug.

   "She's more relieved than I am," he cracked.

   "Yeah, I am," his wife agreed.

   It could be months before they'd learn if Tommaso's vision would get any
better. It was time to wait.

   An early sign

   Maguire's focus is surgery, but he has the utmost respect for his wife's work
as a scientist and her role outside the lab. She gamely attends black-tie
fund-raisers, patiently explaining her work to potential donors. Ever cheerful,
she acts like a big sister to her three patients.

   She played tour guide while they recovered from surgery, taking each to FAO
Schwarz and Times Square in New York, and to the Franklin Institute in
Philadelphia, where they rode the flight simulator.

   The third patient, Manuela, liked the simulator best. A 19-year-old
university student, she was a bit of a daredevil and a downhill skier, with the
best vision of the three.

   Still, she was legally blind. When Bennett gave her some 8-by-10 photos of
their sight-seeing trip to take back to Italy, Manuela couldn't make out the
details.

   Then, just two weeks after her surgery, she sent Jean Bennett an e-mail.

   Manuela had looked at the photos again. To her delight, she wrote, she
started to make out what was in them: herself, in the giant heart at the
Franklin Institute, walking through Times Square, touching large stuffed animals
at FAO Schwartz.

   Bennett was elated. She grabbed the phone and started to call other members
of the team. "Guess what? Manuela e-mailed me! She can see the photos!"

   Tommaso and Josalinda had also reported some improvement in their vision,
just weeks after their surgeries. They did not notice much difference in broad
daylight. But they could see more indoors and at night. They were better at
distinguishing lights and darks. At work, Tommaso relied less on his
government-appointed guide and more on his cane. He felt confident pushing his
baby son in a stroller.

   Bennett knew there had been a chance that the patients' vision could improve,
but these first three were older, their eyes severely damaged, and they'd
received a weaker dose of the vision virus.

   She wanted to jump up on a table and shout. Still, as a scientist, she was
cautious.

   It was one thing for the patients to think they could see better. But the
team needed hard data.

   In March, Bennett flew her three Italian patients back to Philadelphia for
tests.

   A new vision

   With Bennett at her side, Josalinda peered into the twin eyepieces of the
pupillometer, a device that repeatedly flashed light into her eyes.

   Bennett needed to measure how much her pupils would constrict. Before the
surgery, they barely responded.

   For each round of testing, Josalinda kept her eyes closed until Bennett gave
her the go-ahead, in a mixture of Italian and English.

   "Uno, due, tre . . . Open!" Bennett called out each time.

   Then finally: "Bravo, bravo! You did a wonderful job."

   Bennett would need to scrutinize the data, but the machine seemed to confirm
what Josalinda and the other two patients had told her: Their vision had
improved. Their eyes were apparently making the enzyme they needed for sight.

   Later analysis would show that the injected eyes of all three patients became
roughly three times as sensitive to light.

   Furthermore, all three were better able to read eye charts - though they did
so slowly, haltingly, sitting less than two feet away from letters a couple of
inches tall.

   Before the surgery, Tommaso's right eye could barely perceive someone waving
a hand right in front of him. His eye was so bad it was hard to quantify, but
compared to 20/20 vision, his right eye was at 20 over several thousand. After
treatment, the eye improved to 20 over 710.

   It had been 23 years since Bennett and her husband had first discussed the
idea. Now, it had happened.

   "To go from zero to anything, it's just . . . " She shrugged, unable to
finish her sentence.

   Within weeks, Bennett's team would send the results to the New England
Journal of Medicine. She learned that a British team working on a similar
experiment had submitted results, too. The journal would agree to publish both
papers together.

   Gene therapy remains in the experimental stage, and will be for years. The
improved vision of three blind patients does not change that. It is just one
study, involving an organ in which success may not translate elsewhere in the
body.

   Still, the results are promising for retinal disease.

   After spending hours putting her patients through yet more tests, Bennett was
done.

   It was time to celebrate.

   Eye to eye

   With video screens pulsing a kaleidoscope of colors and waiters maneuvering
platters piled with mega-burgers, Center City's Hard Rock Cafe was a chaotic
environment even for someone with regular vision.

   Walking to the table, Tommaso cradled his 6-month-old son in one arm, and
held on to his wife with the other, her blonde curls splashing down his
shoulder.

   The group of 12 sat around a long table: patients, relatives, hospital staff.
Manuela took a turn holding baby Giuseppe, leading everyone in an old Italian
nursery rhyme: batti, batti le manine, che arriva il tuo papa - clap, clap
little hands, your daddy's coming home. For a moment, they drowned out the
restaurant's music.

   Tommaso joined in the singing and - as Bennett looked down the table at him -
he did something that just three months earlier would've been impossible.

   He gazed across the table at his son.



   Before and after video of a patient navigating a maze - and a story about the
blind venture capitalist who helps fund this research: philly.com

   Contact staff writer Tom Avril at 215-854-2430 or tavril@phillynews.com.


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              362 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: IN A FIRST, SCIENTISTS USE GENE THERAPY TO IMPROVE VISION IN THE
VIRTUALLY BLIND

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have used gene therapy to increase light
sensitivity and improve vision in patients who were virtually blind, a finding
that offers new hope to hundreds of thousands of patients with inherited forms
of vision impairment.

   Although the patients studied have an extremely rare form of blindness called
Leber's congenital amaurosis, researchers believe the approach ultimately could
be used for a much broader spectrum of disorders, including retinitis pigmentosa
and macular degeneration.

   The treatment, so far meant only to prove the safety of the technique,
produced "real clinical benefit" and "made a real difference in patients'
lives," said geneticist Robin R. Ali of University College London, the senior
author of one of two reports presented yesterday at a Fort Lauderdale, Fla.,
meeting of the Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology.

   The reports were published online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine.

   "The fact that they had patients who could now read lines on an eye chart ...
and one who could run an obstacle course -- this is a really great advance,"
said geneticist Stephen Rose, chief research officer of the Foundation Fighting
Blindness, who was not involved in the research.

   "This has changed the landscape of hope for patients," he said.

   Added Dr. Morton F. Goldberg, an ophthalmologist at John Hopkins University's
Wilmer Eye Institute, "In the field of retinal dystrophies, this is, I believe,
the most important therapeutic discovery" in four decades. "It's a landmark."

   The results are particularly important because gene therapy, in which a good
gene is substituted for a naturally occurring defective one, has been "a
snake-bitten field," with at least two subjects in other experiments dying and a
handful of others developing cancer, said Dr. Albert M. Maguire of the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, lead author of the second report.

   Leber's congenital amaurosis affects about 3,000 people in the United States
and perhaps 1 in every 50,000 worldwide. Children with the disorder are born
with severely impaired vision that deteriorates over the course of their lives
until they are totally blind in childhood or adolescence. There is no treatment
for it.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              363 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Gene work helps repair a rare form of blindness

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have used gene therapy to dramatically improve
sight in people with a rare form of blindness, a development that experts called
a major advance for the experimental technique.

   Some vision was restored in four of the six young people who got the
treatment, teams of researchers in the United States and Britain reported
yesterday. Two of the volunteers who could only see hand motions were able to
read a few lines of an eye chart within weeks.

   "It's a phenomenal breakthrough," said Stephen Rose, chief research officer
of the Foundation Fighting Blindness, which helped pay for one study done at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   If successful in larger numbers, experts said, the technique has the
potential to reverse blindness from other kinds of inherited eye diseases.

   "I think this is incredibly exciting," said Jean Bennett, a professor of
ophthalmology at the University of Pennsylvania and a leader of the Philadelphia
study. "It's the beginning of a whole new phase of studies."

   The research was published online yesterday by the New England Journal of
Medicine in conjunction with presentations at a medical meeting in Florida.

   The two teams of scientists, working separately, each tested gene replacement
therapy in three patients with a form of a rare hereditary eye disease called
Leber's congenital amaurosis. There's no treatment for the disease, which
appears early in infancy and causes severe vision loss, especially at night.

   An estimated 2,000 Americans have the form of the disease they targeted,
Bennett said. Gene therapy - replacing faulty genes with normal versions - has
been studied in humans for more than 15 years with limited success. The field
suffered a setback with the 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in an experiment
for a liver disorder at Penn. And some children treated for an immune disorder
called the "bubble boy disease" later developed leukemia.

   The early results of the eye experiments should give the field a boost, some
experts said.

   The research in Philadelphia and London was paid for by a variety of
government agencies and private foundations.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              364 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 466 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy takes a step forward;
Hereditary blindness is helped in small study

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:

   For the first time, doctors have used gene therapy to restore vision in
patients with a rare and usually incurable form of blindness, researchers
announced Sunday.

   Experts say the results are a welcome success in gene therapy, a promising
idea that has had several major setbacks during the past 15 years.

   "It's a breakthrough," says Ronald Crystal, chairman of the department of
genetic medicine at New York's Weill Medical College of Cornell University. "It
really helps to validate that gene therapy can work and is going to be
important."

   None of the six patients treated regained normal vision, but four have much
better eyesight than before, according to two studies published online by The
New England Journal of Medicine.

   The patients had a rare inherited disorder called Leber's congenital
amaurosis, which begins eroding eyesight at birth and leaves them blind by their
mid-20s.

   Though cataract surgery and medication can restore sight in patients with
other eye ailments, doctors have never before been able to restore vision to
patients with this kind of hereditary degenerative disease, says Albert Maguire,
an associate professor at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and
co-author of one of the studies.

   Leber's congenital amaurosis afflicts 2,000 to 10,000 people in the USA, says
Maguire's co-author Jean Bennett, a professor at the University of Pennsylvania.
There is no effective treatment. She hopes gene therapy may work for patients
with more common kinds of blindness.

   Two patients in her study began the trial barely able to see hand movements.
After treatment, they became three times as sensitive to light and could read
lines on an eye chart, according to an international team led by doctors at the
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the University of Pennsylvania.

   Stanford University researcher Mark Kay, former president of the American
Society of Gene Therapy, says the studies suggest gene therapy may be most
successful in patients in early stages of the disease, while they still have
some vision.

   In gene therapy, doctors aim to replace defective genes with normal ones,
using harmless viruses as delivery vehicles, Crystal says.

   Crystal says gene therapy may work particularly well with eye disorders
because the immune system, which can reject the virus carrying the genes, isn't
as active in the eye. And because it's easy to test vision, doctors know quickly
whether the therapy works.

   Despite high hopes for gene therapy, scientists have struggled to realize its
potential.

   For example, doctors have treated 20 to 30 children who suffer from a rare
and severe immune disorder. Though most of the children are healthy, several
developed leukemia. And in 1999, a teenager named Jesse Gelsinger died after
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              365 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                             April 28, 2008 Monday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: A-SECTION; Pg. A05

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 1023 words

HEADLINE: Altered Viruses Reversed Progressive Blindness, Studies Say

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Three young adults barely able to see because of a congenital and progressive
form of blindness have regained modest amounts of vision after getting
genetically engineered viruses injected into their eyes, the leaders of two
independent studies reported yesterday.

   The results were something short of miraculous. Three other patients showed
no increase in visual acuity, and the three who improved are still legally
blind.

   But to get any improvement at all during such an early phase of the research
suggests that the approach has promise for people with gene-based forms of
blindness, researchers said. The work could also provide a boost for the field
of gene therapy, which for 15 years has tried and mostly failed to treat
diseases by giving people new genes -- and in a few high-profile cases has
sickened or even killed them.

   "We're learning things as we go along," said Jean Bennett of the University
of Pennsylvania, who with Albert M. Maguire led one of the two studies. "We were
not really going for a cure. But we do view it as a success in that their vision
has improved. I'd call it a dramatic response."

   Others took a more conservative view, noting that some of the key measures of
improvement were subjective and could not be conclusively linked to the therapy.
In an editorial to appear in the New England Journal of Medicine along with the
study results, Joan W. Miller of the Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary called
the results "suggestive of efficacy."

   Still, videos of some of the experimental subjects trying to navigate through
a dimly lit obstacle course show notable improvement in the weeks and months
after the injections. Scientists said they are hopeful that the treatment will
prove even more beneficial in younger patients, whose retinas have only begun to
degenerate.

   "If we can get any benefits in people with such advanced disease, then when
we start to treat children, and when we treat a greater part of the retina and
give a higher dose, the expectation is we can get even better results," said
Robin R. Ali of University College London, who led the other study.

   Both teams are moving ahead with tests in younger patients and at higher
doses.

   The experiments involve patients with Leber's congenital amaurosis, a rare
disease caused by a defect in a single gene that is crucial to the retina's
ability to convert light into signals to the brain. Affected children have
impaired vision from birth and are typically blind by age 30.

   The British and Pennsylvania teams took somewhat different approaches. Each
involved what are known as adeno-associated viruses, popular among gene-therapy
researchers because of their ability to deliver new genes to cells.

   In this case, the teams used genetic engineering techniques to load the
viruses with healthy versions of the rpe65 gene, the gene that is faulty in
people with Leber's. Then they injected tens of billions of the viruses into the
tiny space behind the retina.

   They treated just one eye of each patient, in part so as not to put both eyes
at risk of side effects but also to allow for comparisons of visual acuity after
the treatment.

   The Pennsylvania team, whose patients were ages 19 to 26, reported the more
impressive results. All three scored better on visual acuity tests, showing
improvements equivalent to being able to read three lines lower on a standard
eye chart, after initially not being able to make out the very largest letter.
The treated eyes of all three patients also became about three times more
responsive to light as measured by how much the pupils contracted.

   One patient suffered retinal damage, apparently as a side effect, though team
members said they think they know how to avoid that in the future.

   One patient also experienced a small improvement in an untreated eye. That
unexplained effect in part highlights the limitations of acuity tests, which are
subject to factors such as general health, mood and the placebo effect.

   Indeed, experts said, there is no way short of an autopsy to know whether the
injected genes integrated into the retinal cells and are functioning.

   The British study, using a somewhat different viral vehicle made by Targeted
Genetics of Seattle, treated three patients, ages 17 to 23. Only one-third of
the retina of each treated eye was injected, out of an abundance of caution. One
patient had significant improvement in light sensitivity, but none had better
acuity.

   In both studies, some patients were for the first time able to get through a
cluttered, dimly lit room unaided, according to the reports. They will be
published in May but were released yesterday to coincide with a presentation at
a medical conference.

   "Before treatment, you can see he bumps into the walls and he's disoriented
and has to be pointed in the right direction. He clearly just feels his way
around," Ali said of one patient, who was videotaped before and after. "Six
months after surgery, he could walk through without bumping into anything and
take the same length of time that a normal person could."

   That patient, Steven Howarth, said in a statement released by Targeted
Genetics that he is pleased.

   "Now, my sight when it's getting dark or it's badly lit is definitely better.
It's a small change -- but it makes a big difference to me," Howarth, 18, said.

   Paul A. Sieving, director of the National Eye Institute, which led the
research that identified the rpe65 gene but was not involved in the latest
research, said Howarth's anecdote jibes with his observation that even modest
improvements in vision can make for big gains in the quality of one's life.

   "From the numbers, you can't imagine there's any real improvement," Sieving
said. "But if I give you just a little vision, someone on the street can't even
tell you have an impairment."

   About 450 genes have been implicated in eye diseases, Sieving said,
suggesting that the approach could have potential for many.

   Arthur W. Nienhuis, president of the American Society of Gene Therapy and a
faculty member at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, called the
results "highly encouraging."

   "I think the field is really beginning to turn the corner," Nienhuis said.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              366 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 The Hartford Courant Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            April 26, 2008 Saturday
                  5 NORTHWEST CONNECTICUT/SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CONNECTICUT; Pg. B4

LENGTH: 1325 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH NOTES

BODY:

   Health Notes appears Saturdays on a space-available basis. Items should be
e-mailed to healthnotes@courant.com and sent 14 days in advance. Please include
the full address and ZIP code of the event location and an information phone
number.

   BEREAVEMENT SUPPORT

   Hartford Hospital's pastoral services department and VNA Healthcare Hospice
will moderate a program open to families and caregivers who have lost a loved
one and who need guidance and support, Monday from 1 to 2:15 p.m. at Hartford
Hospital Room 116, 85 Jefferson St., Hartford. The program is free and
registration is not required. Call 860-545-2290.

   ARTHRITIS

   Eastern Connecticut Health Network will present a free program, "Arthritis of
the Knees," Tuesday from 6 to 7 p.m. at Manchester Memorial Hospital, 71 Haynes
St., Manchester. Can early diagnosis and treatment halt the progression of
arthritis in the knees? Is partial knee replacement an effective treatment
option? Orthopedic surgeon Dr. Vipul Dua will answer these questions and others.
Registration is required. Call 888-299-3676.

   LYMPHOMA

   The Connecticut Chapter of the Lymphoma Research Foundation will hold a free
program titled "Living Life with Lymphoma: Managing Stress, Anger & Anxiety"
Tuesday from 6:30 to 8 p.m. at the University of Connecticut Health Center, 263
Farmington Ave., Farmington. Guest speaker Dr. Dennis McCann. Presentation will
help lymphoma survivors, family members and caregivers deal with stress and
anxiety by learning skills to help live in the present. Patients, families and
friends are encouraged to attend. Registration is suggested. Call 800-235-6848
or e-mail connecticut@lymphoma.org or online at www.lymphoma.org/connecticut.

   MINIMALLY INVASIVE SURGERY

   Dr. Ioannis Raftopolous, a specialist in bariatric surgery, will discuss
minimally invasive surgical treatment of obesity on Wednesday from 6:30 to 8
p.m. at the St. Francis Care Center for health Enhancement, 35 Nod Road, Avon.
Free. Registration is required. Call 877-783-7262.

   STEM CELL TRANSPLANTATION

   The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, in collaboration with Yale-New Haven
Hospital and Yale Cancer Center, will present a free educational program for
patients and caregivers titled "Exploring Stem Cell Transplantation," Wednesday
at 5:30 p.m. at Yale-New Haven Hospital, 20 York St., New Haven. This lecture
will provide an overview of stem cell transplantation, a review of current and
emerging techniques for treatment of leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, myeloma
and Hodgkin's disease, as well as the management of stem cell
transplantation-related side effects. The speaker will be Dr. Stuart Seropian,
associate professor of medical oncology at Yale School of Medicine and an
attending oncologist at YNHH. Complimentary dinner will be provided.
Registration is required. Call 203-427-2049.

   CPR FOR INFANTS & CHILDREN

   Hartford Hospital's department of emergency medical services education will
hold a child and infant CPR training recommended for the general public,
especially parents and grandparents and caregivers, on Wednesday from 6 to 9
p.m. at Hartford Hospital's Education and Resource Center, 560 Hudson St.,
Hartford. Learn how to administer CPR, protect against choking, home safety and
injury prevention. Fee is $35. Registration is required. Call 860-545-1888 or
800-545-7664.

   BREAST CANCER

   Dr. Patricia A. DeFusco, board certified medical oncologist and principal
investigator of breast cancer prevention and treatment research for the National
Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, will hold a free presentation, "Are
You at Risk For Breast Cancer?", Wednesday at 6:30 p.m. Hartford Hospital's
Windsor Healthcare Center, 1060 Day Hill Road, Windsor. DeFusco will cover
established risk factors for breast cancer, treatment options and the STAR trial
(for postmenopausal women at high risk of developing breast cancer).
Registration is required. Call 860-545-1888 or 800-545-7664.

   CANCER AND NUTRITION

   The Hospital of Central Connecticut's Gengras Bray Cancer Center will hold a
free lecture, "Fight Cancer with Your Fork," Thursday at the New Britain General
campus, 100 Grand St., New Britain. Kim Dalzell, a registered dietitian and
doctor of holistic nutrition, will discuss how diet and lifestyle changes,
combined with medical treatment can help fight cancer. Refreshments will be
served at 6:30 p.m. and lecture will begin at 7. Registration is required. Call
860-224-5299.

   VARICOSE VEINS

   Dr. Lori Greenwald, a vascular surgeon, will explain the latest treatments
for varicose veins, on Thursday from 6:30 to 8 p.m. at the Mandell Jewish
Community Center, 335 Bloomfield Ave., West Hartford. Free. Registration is
required. Call 877-783-7262.

   PARKINSON'S SYMPOSIUM

   The Connecticut Parkinson's Working Group will hold free a symposium titled
"Parkinson Disease Research in 21st Century: In Search of the Cure," May 3 at 10
a.m. at the Welte Auditorium, Central Connecticut State University, 1615 Stanley
St., New Britain. Leading researchers will discuss the topics of
neuroprotection, stem cell therapy and gene therapy. Registration is required.
Call 860-343-8278.

   DIABETES

   The Bristol Hospital Center for Diabetes will hold its Annual Community
Education Program, May 3 from 9 a.m. to noon at the Clarion Hotel, 42 Century
Drive, Bristol. Feature speaker Ginger Lewis, register nurse, a well known
national and international speaker, whose humorous and interactive program will
help individuals become the "Captain of Your Ship," in managing your diabetes.
Cost is $5 per person or $8 per couple. Registration is required. Call
860-314-2087.

   STROKE RISK

   Dr. Phaniraj Iyengar, a stroke specialist and Dr. Robert Krug, a physiatrist,
will review risks factors for stroke, May 6 from 6:30 to 8 p.m. at the St.
Francis Care Center for Health Enhancement, 31 Sycamore St., Glastonbury. Free.
Registration is required. Call 877-783-7262.

   LOOK GOOD, FEEL BETTER

   In partnership with the American Cancer Society, Hartford Hospital will a
free program "Look Good Feel Better," for women who are undergoing cancer
treatment, May 5 from 5:30 to 7:30 p.m. at The Helen & Harry Gray Cancer Center,
85 Retreat Avenue, Hartford. Cosmetology professionals will teach beauty
techniques to help combat the appearance-related side effects of cancer
treatment. Registration is required. Call 860-545-2954

   BREATHE EASY

   Harford Hospital will hold a free program "Breathe Easy," May 6th from 5 to 6
p.m. at Hartford Hospital, Room 704, 85 Jefferson St., Hartford. A smoking
cessation specialist will facilitate a community education and relapse session
for smokers and ex-smokers. Registration is not required. Information, call
860-545-3127.

   THYROID

   Dr. Jorge Diez, an endocrinologist, will discuss thyroid disease, May 6 from
6:30 to 8 p.m. at the St. Francis Care Medical Office Facility, 7 Elm St.,
Enfield. Free. Registration is required. Call 877-783-7262.

   SLEEP DISORDERS

   Dr. Asher Qureshi, a sleep specialist, will give a talk on sleep disorders,
May 6 from 6:30 to 8 p.m. at The Mandell Jewish Community Center, 335 Bloomfield
Ave., West Hartford. Free. Registration is required. Call 877-783-7262.

   HEALTHY SMILE

   The University of Connecticut Health Center Discovery Series will hold a free
program, "A Winning Smile," May 6 at 7 p.m. in the Health Center's Keller
Auditorium, 263 Farmington Ave., Farmington. Experts from UConn Health Center
will discuss the best ways to keep your teeth white and how to choose among the
many whitening products that are available. In addition the will present
information about how natural-looking dental implants can be a long-term
solution to missing teeth or problematic dentures. Registration is required.
Call 800-535-6232.

   SHOULDER PAIN

   St. Francis Care at Enfield will present a free workshop on shoulder pain led
by physical therapist, Kimberly LaQuerre, May 8 from 6:30 to 8 p.m. at the St.
Francis Care Medical Office Facility, 7 Elm St., Enfield. Advance registration
is required. Call 877-783-7262.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                              367 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: Engineer mom found fulfillment in biotech field

BODY:

   Who: Marianne Price,

   executive director of the Cornea Research Foundation of America

   Having children has taught me more than I ever thought possible and sent my
career on a surprising trajectory.

   Some may view children as a career impediment, but surprisingly my children
gave me my big break. After 15 years working as an engineer specializing in
metal and ceramic coatings research at Union Carbide and its Praxair spinoff, I
hung up my lab coat to become a full-time mom after the birth of our fourth
child. This transition provided a welcome opportunity to develop new friendships
and explore new interests.

   Although I had long harbored a fantasy of taking up painting if I ever found
time, I discovered my most fulfilling activities were those that combined
science with education, such as acting as a docent at The Children's Museum or
substitute teaching math and physics.

   As my youngest child prepared to enter kindergarten, I prepared to rejoin the
work force. But first I sought advice from a career specialist about whether to
invest in the training necessary to become certified as a high school science
teacher or return to my original choice, engineering. Surprisingly, the answer
came back "neither." My best match was with biotech, a field that was just in
its infancy when I attended college 20 years earlier. Fortunately, the Indiana
University Medical Center was brimming with biotech opportunities. It was like
entering a whole new world. After investigating different specialties, I became
fascinated with genetics and completed a Ph.D. under the tutelage of renowned
gene therapist Dr. Mary Dinauer.

   Although such a complete change of career was exhilarating, it was also
somewhat unsettling to return to "rookie" status after having once been a "pro"
at something so entirely different. Yet as a former engineer, my overwhelming
feeling was continual awe at the realization of how elegant and sophisticated
biological systems are compared with our human creations.

   I was offered an opportunity to transition from laboratory to clinical
research as director of research and education at the Cornea Research Foundation
of America. The foundation's vision is to restore people's sight, and its
mission can be summarized in the acronym RISE: research, innovation, service to
humanity and education. How incredible to find a position that synthesized the
science and education elements I most enjoyed. In addition, one of the most
fulfilling aspects of clinical research is the direct impact it has on people's
lives, compared with laboratory research, which might result in a new treatment
10 or more years down the road. To have patients who are participating in a
clinical study share how thankful they are to be able once again to see a sunset
or their grandchildren is an incredibly moving experience.

   Looking back, I so appreciate the big break my children provided. It was an
opportunity to step aside from the field I had been diligently pursuing to
explore new vistas, to investigate what seemed fulfilling. It's a little scary
to step away from something you've become good at doing, or even for an engineer
to look around one day and find they're surrounded by people who don't think
like engineers at all. But taking a break and trying something new turns life
into a journey of discovery. What more could one ask than that?

   _______

   Marianne Price

   Age: 55.

   Job title: Executive director of the Cornea Research Foundation of America.

   Duties: Directs the research and education programs of the foundation.

   About the foundation: A nonprofit clinical research and educational
organization based in Indianapolis. It houses the largest database of its kind
in the Western Hemisphere, with more than 5,000 documented transplants. The
organization has participated in more than 70 clinical and investigational
studies and published extensively. It oversees approximately a dozen eye-related
studies.

   Experience: Project manager and senior project manager at Union Carbide Corp.
and Praxair.

   Education: Bachelor's degree in metallurgical engineering and materials
science from the University of Notre Dame; master of business administration
degree and doctorate in medical and molecular genetics from Indiana University.

   Hobbies: Reading, hiking, kayaking.

   Personal: Married to Dr. Francis Price Jr.; four children; two grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2008


                              368 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                                ADVANCE Edition

SECTION: IMAGE; Inq Col Rick Nichols; Pg. M04

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: Experiments show bioengineer may actually be a chocolatier

BYLINE: By Rick Nichols; Inquirer Columnist

BODY:

   On a recent afternoon, willowy Rachel Gordon (she has already abandoned
Handwerger, her maiden name), 26, and her soon-to-be husband, David Gordon, 27,
joined me over a smoothie (her) and falafel wrap (him) at a lunch stand in the
Reading Terminal Market.

   I'd already had their chocolates - they're really her chocolates, though he
inspired the ganache infused with Benton's smoked Tennessee bacon - and they are
lovely chocolates, dark, and a bit winey in the coating (72 percent); a flake of
fleur de sel giving the toothsome caramels, in particular, a lushly soft and
salty finish.

   The proprietors of r+d chocolate (for research and development, and Rachel
and David) are still perfecting their product: Rachel has a standing weekly
order of 25 packets of her turtles and caramels and tangy chocolate ganache -
two pieces to the packet ($2) - at the Reading market's Fair Food Farmstand. And
she makes another 50 or so pieces to sample to friends. And occasionally small
boxes for special orders; a restaurant in Queen Village seems interested. (Her
own wedding is interested, too.)

   So they are not exactly Asher's. Nor is it the moment - not with just months
of intense chocolate research under her belt - to quit her day job, which is
organizing scientific conferences for the American Association for Cancer
Research. She is a newly minted Ph.D. in bioengineering; she worked on chemical
delivery systems for gene therapy.

   But something else has been calling. She began with cupcakes. She'd take
three recipes from, say, Cook's Illustrated, or King Arthur Flour, and sample
them at a blind tasting. Then she'd take the winner and change one ingredient at
a time - maybe the amount of eggs, or yolks, or flour. Then she'd sample them
out again, color-coding the cupcake liners.

   She used precision lab technique; sensitive scales, digital thermometers.

   "Then I woke up one morning," she says, "and I decided it was time to eat a
truffle." It was a lightbulb moment. She'd had a profound attraction to
chocolate from the time he met her, says David, who is studying the philosophy
of language. What neither of them realized was her aptitude for chocolate-making
.

   Was she really a chocolatier trapped in a bioengineer's body? "We didn't
think she'd get so good so fast," says David.

   She makes the chocolates that she sells at a friend's restaurant kitchen on
Passyunk Avenue. But she experiments at home in Center City, using local cream
and butter and raspberries; making two ganaches, for instance, then tweaking one
- "changing one iteration," and watching in shock and awe at the difference.

   She tried out the turtle on David's father, a Hershey bar man. He found the
caramel too chewy. The next batch? He said the squares were un-turtle-like. Then
they were too big. Then she quartered them, softening the caramel, dry-roasting
the marcona almonds.

   Rachel likes to watch people's faces when they eat the chocolate to catch
their involuntary reaction - to pick up an eyebrow arching, a nostril widening,
the first tiny glint of a smile.

   She watched David's father after the final turtle: "I look for that face. And
this face wasn't a 'This is just food face.' It was, 'This is the perfect turtle
face!' "

   So what was a science project has taken on deep aspects of the humanities,
vulnerable to whimsy, shaped by delight, giving rise to a surprising image: "I
picture myself," Rachel says, "in a storefront."

   She has had her kitchen disasters, knocking molten chocolate all over the
side of the refrigerator (then melting it off with the hair dryer).

   But she has come to realize that time moves slowly at her day job, then
speeds by in her kitchen: "I look up," she says, "and it's 1 a.m."

   Choices don't get much clearer than that.

   Contact columnist Rick Nichols at 215-854-2715 or rnichols@phillynews.com.
Read his recent work at http://go.philly.com/ricknichols.

   212-537-6481

   www.rdchocolate.com


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                              369 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                                ADVANCE Edition

SECTION: IMAGE; Inq Col Rick Nichols; Pg. M04

LENGTH: 650 words

HEADLINE: Experiments show bioengineer may actually be a chocolatier

BYLINE: By Rick Nichols; Inquirer Columnist

BODY:

   On a recent afternoon, willowy Rachel Gordon (she has already abandoned
Handwerger, her maiden name), 26, and her soon-to-be husband, David Gordon, 27,
joined me over a smoothie (her) and falafel wrap (him) at a lunch stand in the
Reading Terminal Market.

   I'd already had their chocolates - they're really her chocolates, though he
inspired the ganache infused with Benton's smoked Tennessee bacon - and they are
lovely chocolates, dark, and a bit winey in the coating (72 percent); a flake of
fleur de sel giving the toothsome caramels, in particular, a lushly soft and
salty finish.

   The proprietors of r+d chocolate (for research and development, and Rachel
and David) are still perfecting their product: Rachel has a standing weekly
order of 25 packets of her turtles and caramels and tangy chocolate ganache -
two pieces to the packet ($2) - at the Reading market's Fair Food Farmstand. And
she makes another 50 or so pieces to sample to friends. And occasionally small
boxes for special orders; a restaurant in Queen Village seems interested. (Her
own wedding is interested, too.)

   So they are not exactly Asher's. Nor is it the moment - not with just months
of intense chocolate research under her belt - to quit her day job, which is
organizing scientific conferences for the American Association for Cancer
Research. She is a newly minted Ph.D. in bioengineering; she worked on chemical
delivery systems for gene therapy.

   But something else has been calling. She began with cupcakes. She'd take
three recipes from, say, Cook's Illustrated, or King Arthur Flour, and sample
them at a blind tasting. Then she'd take the winner and change one ingredient at
a time - maybe the amount of eggs, or yolks, or flour. Then she'd sample them
out again, color-coding the cupcake liners.

   She used precision lab technique; sensitive scales, digital thermometers.

   "Then I woke up one morning," she says, "and I decided it was time to eat a
truffle." It was a lightbulb moment. She'd had a profound attraction to
chocolate from the time he met her, says David, who is studying the philosophy
of language. What neither of them realized was her aptitude for chocolate-making
.

   Was she really a chocolatier trapped in a bioengineer's body? "We didn't
think she'd get so good so fast," says David.

   She makes the chocolates that she sells at a friend's restaurant kitchen on
Passyunk Avenue. But she experiments at home in Center City, using local cream
and butter and raspberries; making two ganaches, for instance, then tweaking one
- "changing one iteration," and watching in shock and awe at the difference.

   She tried out the turtle on David's father, a Hershey bar man. He found the
caramel too chewy. The next batch? He said the squares were un-turtle-like. Then
they were too big. Then she quartered them, softening the caramel, dry-roasting
the marcona almonds.

   Rachel likes to watch people's faces when they eat the chocolate to catch
their involuntary reaction - to pick up an eyebrow arching, a nostril widening,
the first tiny glint of a smile.

   She watched David's father after the final turtle: "I look for that face. And
this face wasn't a 'This is just food face.' It was, 'This is the perfect turtle
face!' "

   So what was a science project has taken on deep aspects of the humanities,
vulnerable to whimsy, shaped by delight, giving rise to a surprising image: "I
picture myself," Rachel says, "in a storefront."

   She has had her kitchen disasters, knocking molten chocolate all over the
side of the refrigerator (then melting it off with the hair dryer).

   But she has come to realize that time moves slowly at her day job, then
speeds by in her kitchen: "I look up," she says, "and it's 1 a.m."

   Choices don't get much clearer than that.

   Contact columnist Rick Nichols at 215-854-2715 or rnichols@phillynews.com.
Read his recent work at http://go.philly.com/ricknichols.

   212-537-6481

   www.rdchocolate.com


GRAPHIC: Photograph by: Feed Loader

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                              370 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 6, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: OPINION; Editorial pages Desk; Part M; Part M; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1356 words

HEADLINE: Tainted medicine;
Financial conflicts of interest are raising some upsetting questions about the
trustworthiness of research.

BYLINE: Jerome P. Kassirer, Jerome P. Kassirer is a physician and distinguished
professor at the Tufts University School of Medicine.

BODY:

   Last month, our trust in the objectivity of medical research was violated.
The New York Times reported that a study showing that annual CT scans of smokers
for lung cancer could remarkably reduce deaths from the disease was
surreptitiously paid for by the tobacco industry. The 2006 study, published in
the New England Journal of Medicine, was in part funded by an obscure charity,
the Foundation for Lung Cancer, which, it turns out, got its money from the
parent company of Liggett Group Inc., a cigarette manufacturer. A critic's
designation of this funding as "blood money" quickly crisscrossed the country.

   The potentially tainted lung cancer study raises a question that should give
us a painful knot in our collective abdomen. What don't we know about clinical
research in the U.S. that could be bad for our health?

   With federal funding for research declining, private industry has stepped
forward to fill the money vacuum, and many clinical investigators have eagerly
accepted the largesse.

   We usually think of "industry" in terms of pharmaceutical companies. But
research is also paid for by food companies, disease-oriented organizations such
as the American Diabetes Assn. and foundations with impressive but ambiguous
names whose motives are as obscure as their titles.

   The episode that first highlighted how financial conflicts of interest might
be harmful to patients' health involved Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a
mild form of a genetic disorder that made him deficient in a protein essential
for metabolism. Still, he was healthy because he could manage his condition
through diet and medication.

   In 1999, he volunteered for a research study at the University of
Pennsylvania. The scientists conducting the study replaced the gene responsible
for Jesse's protein deficiency by attaching it to a common cold virus and then
infecting him with the "harmless" virus. In four days, Jesse was dead.

   It was subsequently disclosed that the virus-carrier technique used to treat
the teenager had been patented, and that both the study's lead scientist and the
medical center where it was conducted held stock in the company that owned the
patent.

   The scientist denied that his use of the gene therapy technique was
premature. But critics wondered whether his financial interests and those of the
medical center had influenced the decision to push the experiment forward before
there was sufficient evidence of the technique's lack of toxicity.

   Unfortunately, there are many other clinical research studies in which the
participants' financial interests may have played a role. In 2003, the British
Medical Journal published a summary of dozens of clinical studies on the effect
of various drugs on patients. The summary showed that drug studies funded by
pharmaceutical companies were about four times more likely to have outcomes
favorable to the companies than similar ones paid for by such noncommercial
entities as the National Institutes of Health. An analysis of more than 200
research articles on the effects of milk, soft drinks and juices on health,
published in the Public Library of Science/Medicine in 2007, produced a similar
conclusion. Studies paid for by milk and beverage companies were four to eight
times more likely to be favorable to them than those funded by noncommercial
entities.

   It's not only clinical research that is corruptible. Clinical-practice
guidelines for the recommended treatment of various diseases -- such as those
produced by the American Heart Assn. or the American Society of Nephrology --
may also in part reflect the financial interests of contributors.

   Guidelines on the use of statin drugs to lower cholesterol, nicotine patches
to stop smoking, Epogen to treat anemia and testosterone to boost the energy of
tired, elderly men were tainted by the participation of physicians who had
accepted speaking or consulting fees from companies that stood to benefit from
their recommendations, according to numerous newspaper stories, some published
by The Times.

   Evidence unearthed in lawsuits and by investigative reporters shows that some
Food and Drug Administration panels stacked with members deemed friendly to drug
companies made questionable judgments about drug approvals. One such drug was
Rezulin, which is used to treat diabetes. The drug was kept on the market
despite accumulating evidence that it was causing liver failure in some patients
and killing others.

   What are the possible consequences of financial bias in clinical research and
practice guidelines? One is that physicians may be more likely to prescribe a
drug for a condition that should first be treated with non-pharmacologic
remedies. Another is that prescribing the newest, research-touted drug may
expose patients to side effects not fully recognized in the drug's clinical
trials. Still another is that new drugs are the most expensive on the market,
even though they may be no more effective than cheaper, generic substitutes.
Cost is especially relevant when treatment requires diagnostic tests such as CT
scans, MRIs and biopsies. These tests are expensive, and some can be risky.
Experience shows that once such tests are approved by the FDA for use in a
single clinical condition, they are quickly used by doctors in many others.

   So what can be done about our conflict-riddled system? Most of the brouhaha
has been over the failure of physicians conducting research projects to disclose
the sponsors of their studies or their personal financial ties to the companies
whose drugs, techniques or devices they are testing. Some say that requiring
them to reveal the financial interests would be a great disinfectant. But this
is magical thinking. For instance, if I had known that the researchers at Weill
Cornell Medical College conducting the CT scans of smokers were in part funded
by a cigarette manufacturer, would I have automatically concluded that they
might rig the study to produce a favorable outcome?

   Maybe, if I were a soothsayer. In fact, disclosure of financial ties may give
a scientist or researcher a clean conscience, but that doesn't erase the
possibility of a conflict. The point is that disclosure may be necessary, but it
is not sufficient to resolve the complex financial relationships often found
buried in clinical studies.

   What then do we do? For starters, editors of medical journals must thoroughly
vet the funding sources of -- and possible financial conflicts of interests of
their authors in -- the studies they approve for publication. They should not be
able to hide behind their personal judgments that financial relationships
involved in a study had no consequences for the outcome. Second, academic
medical centers should pay more attention to their researchers' financial
conflicts of interest and the possible financial benefits to medical centers of
researchers' inventions. Finally, practice-guideline committees and FDA panels
should reduce their reliance on financially conflicted physicians when they
select doctors and panel members. This would reassure the public that they are
producing clinical policies untainted by financial ties to drug or device
companies.

   For some years, I have believed that the medical profession should reform
itself by devising its own policies for dealing with its conflicts of interest.
But the efforts so far have been superficial. Some academic medical centers have
eliminated gifts or resident and staff lunches paid for by pharmaceutical
companies. But they have continued to allow drug companies to pay staff members
for work as consultants or speakers, which may introduce bias in their
decision-making. Few have addressed possible institutional conflicts resulting
from patents.

   Sensing public concern, Congress has recently stepped into the fray by
holding hearings on pharmaceutical and device companies' payments to individual
physicians. But congressional staffers are already beginning to ask the next
question: How is this money being used? What influence does it have on
researchers and the policies of medical centers and professional societies? Are
their decisions blemished by such donations? These questions will not go away.

CORRECTION-DATE: April 13, 2008

CORRECTION:

   Medicine: An article in the April 6 Opinion section about financial conflicts
tainting medical research stated that the American Society of Nephrology issues
clinical-practice guidelines. It should have said the National Kidney
Foundation.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)  PHOTOGRAPHER:Susan Tibbles For The Times

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2008


                              371 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 300 words

HEADLINE: Grim Outlook for an AIDS Vaccine

BODY:

   Back in 1984, federal health officials, flush with excitement over discovery
of the virus that causes AIDS, famously predicted that they would have a vaccine
ready for market within three years. Now, after almost a quarter-century of toil
and struggle, the effort has crashed in failure. No one yet knows whether a
vaccine to prevent the disease will ever be possible.

     David Baltimore, a Nobel-winning biologist, sounded a note of despair in an
address to the American Association for the Advancement of Science in February.
He noted that the virus has evolved in a way that makes it virtually impossible
to attack by priming the immune system, the usual goal of a vaccine. Repeated
efforts have failed, he said, leaving ''no hopeful route to success.'' The best
hope, he said, may lie in the biological equivalent of a ''Hail Mary'' pass -- a
wholly new approach that would combine gene therapy, stem cells and immunologic
therapy to thwart the disease.

     At a conference at the National Institutes of Health last Tuesday, AIDS
experts assessed how to proceed after the failure of the most promising vaccine
candidate in two large clinical trials last year. Early results showed that
those who received the vaccine may actually have been more likely to become
infected with the virus than those who did not.

     At least one organization that treats AIDS patients has called for giving
up on a vaccine and shifting the money to testing, treatment and prevention.
That is too defeatist. Federal health officials are rightly determined to
increase financing for basic laboratory research, curtail big clinical trials of
existing vaccine candidates, and funnel money to researchers with novel ideas.
There is little doubt that a vaccine would be the most effective and cheapest
way to shrink the AIDS epidemic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2008


                              372 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            March 29, 2008 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: Building on research;
Wells Center's head blends science, business

BYLINE: DANIEL LEE DANIEL.LEE@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Dr. Mervin Yoder could some day be crowded out of his small office at the
Indiana University School of Medicine just from the paperwork.

   Research documents are piled high on his desk. While apologizing for the
clutter, Yoder plans to use his new position as director of the Herman B Wells
Center for Pediatric Research at the medical school and Riley Hospital for
Children to produce reams more research and turn it into ideas for new medical
businesses and treatments.

   Yoder -- a professor of pediatrics at IU and co-founder of an
Indianapolis-based adult stem cell startup EndGenitor -- wants to increase the
number of research investigators at the center from 34 today to 70 over the next
decade. And he wants those scientists to think more like entrepreneurs when it
comes to advancing their research.

   He said he also hopes to work with the Riley Children's Foundation to create
a new endowment worth about $100 million to help support operations at the Wells
Center.

   But all of those goals, Yoder said, depend on sound basic research.

   "It's the only way you'll discover the causes of disease and the mechanisms
through which those diseases basically harm children," said Yoder, also a
practicing neonatologist. "If you can discover what that fundamental cause is,
then hopefully you can come up with a new treatment."

   Yoder, 55, replaced Dr. Mary Dinauer as the Wells Center's director March 1.
Also a professor of pediatrics, Dinauer, who had served as director since 2000,
will continue her work in gene therapy.

   The Wells Center, which officially opened in 1991, was created to provide
resources -- from lab space to technical advice -- for IU and Riley scientists.
It could provide the fundamental research into the root causes of a disease. Or,
it could find a way to advance later-stage research by creating a startup
company or cutting a licensing deal with a drug company.

   The journey from an idea in a lab to a treatment at the patient's bedside is
a long one. To become a treatment for humans, research must advance from the
studies of molecules and cells, to trials in animals, to human trials until,
hopefully, a new treatment is approved. Many ideas stall.

   A place such as the Wells Center is needed to foster a healthy life-sciences
sector in Indiana, said David Johnson, chief executive of BioCrossroads, a
life-science initiative for Indiana. "You have to have people with the
intellectual firepower who can do that research," he said.

   The Wells Center has been enjoying strong growth in recent years. From 2000
to 2007, during Dinauer's tenure, the center grew from 25 to 34 scientist
investigators, while its employment grew from 181 to 233.

   The center also increased its National Institutes of Health funding from
$8.92 million in 2000 to $12.5 million in 2007.

   Yoder plans to build on that and encourage the center's researchers to build
ties with the Indiana University Research and Technology Corp., a nonprofit that
seeks to help commercialize university research.

   Yoder said he learned the value of building such teams from the creation of
EndGenitor Technologies, which he co-founded in 2005.

   Housed in IU's Emerging Technologies Center near the Downtown Canal,
EndGenitor focuses on adult stem cells that mature into the lining of new blood
vessels.

   EndGenitor, which has received about $3 million in funding, still is in its
early stages. But the company is attracting a small amount of revenue from
selling stem cells to other researchers, according to Ronald Henriksen,
EndGenitor's chief executive.

   Henriksen said Yoder has a knack for delving deep into research -- but also
for effectively communicating the potential of that research.

   "Merv is an outstanding teacher in helping poor MBAs like me understand the
science," said Henriksen, who also is chief investment officer of Indianapolis
venture-capital firm Twilight Venture Partners.

   Call Star reporter Daniel Lee at (317) 444-6311.

   ___________________________

   Dr. Mervin Yoder

   Titles: Director, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research; Richard and
Pauline Klingler Professor of Pediatrics at the Indiana University School of
Medicine; and member of the IU Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center.

   Research specialty: Adult stem cells.

   Medical specialty: Neonatology; sees patients at Riley Hospital for Children
and Community Hospital North four to six nights a month.

   Education: Bachelor's degree from Malone College, Canton, Ohio; master's
degree from Indiana State University; medical degree from Indiana University;
residency and fellowship, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   Entrepreneurial activity: Co-founder, EndGenitor Technologies, an
Indianapolis-based startup focused on adult stem cells that mature into the
lining of new blood vessels.

   Personal: Married, with two children; native of Topeka, Ind.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2008


                              373 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    The San Francisco Chronicle (California)

                              March 7, 2008 Friday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH LOOKS AT HAIR LOSS;
Research into stem cells, gene therapy, cloning and drugs could yield
multibillion-dollar industry

BYLINE: Bernadette Tansey, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   Biotechnology has introduced many wonders to the world. New drugs to treat
deadly diseases. Microbes that digest oil spills. Fluorescent fish. Remarkable
inventions all.

   But what has biotech ever done for bald people?

   Some may feel sheepish raising the question, given the weightier problems
needing a scientific fix. Hair loss is not a life-threatening condition,
concedes Kaiser Permanente dermatologist Paradi Mirmirani. But half the
population, both male and female, see their locks thinning by age 50 - and many
can't take the loss lightly, Mirmirani said.

   "I have tearful patients in my office many times a day," she said. "When they
lose their hair, they feel like they've lost their identity."

   That passionate attachment is helping to speed research on new treatments
because investors see a potential gold mine in the field. Most health plans
don't reimburse for anti-balding drugs or transplants, but many people will pay
out of their own pockets even if the cost is a bit hair-raising.

   Industry sources estimate that Americans spend more than $1 billion a year on
approved drugs for hair loss and hair transplants.

   That explains why a small but determined bunch of companies and academics are
mining the hair shaft for clues to the molecular mechanisms of balding. They're
throwing an arsenal of high-tech tools at the condition: genome studies, stem
cell stimulation, gene therapy, a type of tissue engineering often called "hair
cloning" and even robotics.

   The chance of much better treatments in time for your high school reunion? A
big maybe.

   Much is still unknown about the phenomenon of balding, a trait that only
humans and some monkeys share, said Stanford University Professor Anthony Oro.
It's not even clear why humans, over the course of evolution, shed most of their
thicker body hair but kept a crop on the head.

   For a minority of balding people, episodes of hair loss stem from diseases
such as skin infections and immune system disorders, or stresses such as surgery
and childbirth. Treatments for such hair loss are often geared to fix the
underlying cause.

   But by far the most common type of hair loss is the slow, inexorable thinning
of the locks on a timetable set by genes inherited from the father or mother.

   Certain genes make the top of the scalp more vulnerable to a male hormone,
dihydrotestosterone or DHT, that shuts down follicles so they don't produce new
hairs. The result is male-pattern baldness, which starts with a receding
hairline and bald spot. The same interplay of male hormones and heredity can
cause a general thinning of hair in women.

   Only two drugs are approved by the Food and Drug Administration to treat
common baldness - Merck's Propecia and Johnson & Johnson's Rogaine and its
generic equivalent, minoxidil.

   Propecia, a pill usually prescribed only for men, blocks production of DHT.
The mechanism is not fully understood for Rogaine, an over-the-counter solution
that is applied to the scalp.

   Both drugs can promote regrowth or slow the rate of hair loss for some
people, to some extent. But there's plenty of room for improvement.

Multibillion-dollar market

   "There is clearly a great need for more treatments for hair growth," said Dr.
Vera Price, a UCSF dermatology professor who heads the medical center's hair
research center. "Pharmas, the biotech industry, venture capitalists are aware
of this huge consumer need and the fact that it represents a multibillion-dollar
market."

   Pfizer Inc. of New York is working on an experimental drug that works the
same way as Rogaine, as well as another compound that mimics the effect of
thyroid hormones.

   Among the small biotech companies attacking the problem is AndroScience Corp.
of San Diego, which is developing a drug that degrades the cell receptors for
DHT. Drugs for balding, however, usually work only on follicles that are still
active.

   The alternative is transplants. A Mountain View startup, Restoration
Robotics, is developing automated equipment to help surgeons perform hair
transplants faster, and possibly cheaper.

   Hair-transplant surgeons take follicles from the back and sides of the head,
which seem immune to the balding effects of male hormones, and move them to the
crown. The success of transplants has always been limited, however, by the
finite amount of hair a patient still has left to move around.

Reviving follicles

   For those hoping for a new technology that will carpet a bald scalp like
Astroturf, the best shot may come from a small group of companies that are
trying to cultivate new follicles like seedlings. Experiments are challenging
the long-held notion that new follicles are never formed in humans and that
follicles can never be revived once they become inactive.

   A pilot study in humans is planned within a few months using a strategy
outlined in May by Dr. George Cotsarelis, a University of Pennsylvania
dermatology professor who discovered that mice healing from wounds could produce
hair follicles. Cotsarelis theorized that the healing process created a window
of time when new skin structures could form.

   The Boston company he co-founded, Follica Inc., is trying to duplicate the
regenerative environment of wound healing in humans by using a modified form of
microdermabrasion, a form of skin treatment that grinds off dead surface skin
cells and encourages repair by deeper cells.

   Along with that mild injury to the scalp, Follica applies drugs to promote
the growth of new follicles.

   If new follicles form on top of a bald scalp, will they have the decadeslong
lifespan of a baby's follicles, or will they quickly succumb to the male
hormones that caused the baldness in the first place? That's a question raised
by Chris Ehrlich, a partner in the Menlo Park VC firm InterWest Partners, which
has helped fund Follica.

   "We view it as a very early, very high-risk project," Ehrlich said. "But if
it works, it would be great."

   In another approach, company scientists at Atlanta's Aderans Research
Institute are taking certain key cells from the scalp and trying to multiply
their numbers by growing them in culture. Two cell types were chosen because
they exchange chemical signals that foster follicle formation. If the method
works, the propagated cells could be injected into the scalp as "hair seeds" to
create new follicles.

Wigmaker does research

   The tactic is often called "hair cloning," but no hairs or follicles are
produced in the culturing step, said Aderans executive Dr. Ken Washenik. The
research is a project of Aderans Co. Ltd, the world's largest wigmaker, and its
affiliate Bosley, a major hair transplant company.

   Other companies are trying variations of this method. Washenik said he once
predicted a treatment would be ready in five years. "But at this point I think
it's better not to make an estimate because I'm really not sure," he said.

   Oro, who studies hair stem cells at Stanford, said work on the regeneration
of the follicle mini-organs could some day yield health benefits that go beyond
defeating hair loss.

   The scalp provides an accessible means of studying the role of stem cells in
the regeneration of an organ. And many organs use the same similar chemical
growth signals as follicles, he said.

   "If we understood how to regrow hair, it would help us understand how to
regenerate the liver, the pancreas and other organs," Oro said.

New approaches to baldness

     ·    Drugs: Companies including Pfizer of New York and AndroScience of San
          Diego are working on experimental drugs that would promote regrowth of
          hair and slow down hair thinning.
     ·    Tissue engineering: Aderans Corp. in Japan and other companies are
          trying to multiply key cells that could seed the regrowth of follicles
          on a bald scalp.
     ·    Hair through healing: Follica Inc. of Boston is hoping the process by
          which the body heals skin wounds can also give rise to new follicles.
     ·    Source: Chronicle research


   "If new follicles form on a bald scalp, will they have the lifespan of a
baby's follicles, or will they quickly succumb to the hormones that caused the
baldness in the first place? "

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2008


                              374 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                             March 1, 2008 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 996 words

HEADLINE: Cambridge biotech firms departing city for suburbs; Available space,
affordability prove incentives

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   As the epicenter of biotechnology in Massachusetts, Cambridge is home to top
university researchers and scores of companies, including Genzyme Corp., Biogen
Idec Inc., and Vertex Pharmaceuticals Inc. But as lab space in the city becomes
increasingly scarce and expensive, several biotech companies have recently taken
flight to the suburbs.

   Cambridge-based Shire Human Genetic Therapies last month said it will move
its headquarters and many of its 675 local employees to the site of the former
Raytheon Co. headquarters in Lexington. Altus Pharmaceuticals Inc., which has
160 workers, plans to move its headquarters to a Waltham office park this
summer. And several smaller biotech companies, such as ImmunoGen Inc., WMR
BioMedical Inc., Magen Biosciences, and Microbia PE Inc., all recently decided
to move their operations from Cambridge to nearby towns, according to real
estate firm Colliers Meredith & Grew.

   In a sense, Cambridge may be a victim of its own success. Many biotech
executives have long insisted on planting their flags in Cambridge, so they
could be close to other biotech companies and prestigious academic institutions,
like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, that provide a steady stream of
talent and potential partners. But as the industry has boomed, real estate
developers have struggled to keep up with the demand, even though the amount of
lab space in Cambridge has more than doubled since 2000. As a result, rents have
doubled and vacancy rates have shriveled by two-thirds in the past four years.

   In the suburbs, lab space costs about $27 per square foot, compared with $59
in Cambridge, giving companies a strong incentive to move.

   "It's a substantial amount of savings," said Dan Cordeau, senior vice
president of Jones Lang LaSalle, a commercial real estate agency. Biotech
companies "don't all have to be in Cambridge," he added.

   In addition to the cost, some midsize and larger companies say they are
increasingly having trouble finding blocks of prime office and lab space large
enough to accommodate all their workers at one site, making it more cumbersome
to conduct business. Altus, which is developing a drug to treat cystic fibrosis,
has four locations in Cambridge, but says it can consolidate its campus in
Waltham.

   "It's very important for us to get everyone under one roof and be able to
give them first-class facilities," said John Jordan, Altus spokesman.

   Lab space could become even more of an issue if Governor Deval Patrick's life
sciences initiative, which was approved by the state House of Representatives on
Thursday and is now being considered in the Senate, spurs existing companies to
expand, and attracts more business to Massachusetts.

   Shire HGT also said it would have been difficult to find enough space in
Cambridge. The company, a unit of British drug maker Shire PLC, has 675
employees in Massachusetts, but plans to double that in the next eight years. By
moving to Lexington, Shire HGT senior vice president William Ciambrone said, the
company will be able to "grow the entire organization in one contiguous space."
Shire also cited the lower costs of being in Lexington.

   That's largely because companies have more options and real estate is cheaper
outside of Boston and Cambridge - vacancy rates average 20 percent in the
suburbs, compared with 7 percent in Cambridge and 2 percent in Boston, according
to commercial real estate firm Richards Barry Joyce & Partners. Parking and
developing new buildings can also be more challenging in urban areas.

   The Cambridge space crunch is forcing other companies to consider moving as
well, including Vertex, one of the state's best known biotech companies, and
Amag Pharmaceuticals Inc., which is seeking federal approval to market a
treatment for patients with chronic kidney disease. Amag spokeswoman Kristen
Galfetti said the firm has been scouting sites in Lexington and Waltham in
addition to Cambridge. The company wants to double the size of its headquarters
to 50,000 square feet, she said.

   Vertex, meanwhile, is considering building or leasing a new campus for its
growing workforce. While Vertex executives say they have not decided whether to
leave Cambridge, the company has reportedly been looking at moving to Boston's
Fan Pier area.

   Other Cambridge companies plan to keep their headquarters in the city, but
have moved or expanded some operations in the suburbs. For instance, Genzyme
recently decided to build a $260 million drug manufacturing plant in Framingham,
at a 14-building complex that includes a large research center and a small
manufacturing plant. Genzyme, which mainly develops expensive drugs to treat
rare diseases, has had a presence in Framingham since it bought a small biotech
company there in 1989, and has gradually expanded the operations. It now has
4,500 employees statewide, including 1,330 in Cambridge and 1,800 in Framingham.

   "We've had more people in Framingham for many years," said Genzyme senior
vice president Mark Bamforth.

   Yet Cambridge still has more cachet than the suburbs, and some companies are
willing to cope with the downsides.

   James Mullen, Biogen Idec chief executive, said the company has no plans to
move its research or headquarters operations out of Cambridge. Biogen Idec,
which makes drugs to combat multiple sclerosis and other diseases, has 1,750
employees in Massachusetts, including 1,575 in Cambridge.

   "We've concluded we really need to be right there in the heart of the city,"
Mullen said in an interview last month. "There's a huge labor pool in
Cambridge."

   And as Shire, Altus, and other companies give up space, biotech industry
officials say start-ups and small growing companies are ready to fill the void.

   "It's a good thing," said Robert Coughlin, president of the Massachusetts
Biotechnology Council in Cambridge, of the larger companies' migration to the
suburbs. "It's positive for smaller companies that want to be here, but can't
find space."

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

GRAPHIC: CAMBRIDGE Pedestrians cross Main Street in Kendall Square. As the
biotech industry has boomed, real estate developers have struggled to keep up
with the demand for lab space in the city. WALTHAM High rents and low vacancy
rates in Cambridge are prompting many firms to move to the suburbs, where lab
space costs $27 per square foot, compared with $59 in Cambridge.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2008


                              375 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2008 The Detroit News
                              All Rights Reserved
                          The Detroit News (Michigan)

                            February 29, 2008 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 171 words

HEADLINE: People on the move

BODY:

   Publishing

   Who's Who Publishing Co., Columbus, Ohio, said that Monica Morgan will serve
as the associate publisher of Who's Who In Black Detroit.

   Health care

   Mukarram Siddiqui, M.D. was recently appointed section chief of
cardiovascular services under the department of medicine for DMC Sinai-Grace
Hospital. Dr. Siddiqui, currently Sinai-Grace's medical director of
electrophysiology, will continue to serve in that capacity along with the added
responsibilities of his new post.

   The American Society of Gene Therapy announced that Frank Mortl III of
Northville has been appointed executive director.

   Human services

   The Guidance Center has named Sharon Williams of Detroit to its board of
directors.

   Williams is a vice president, government markets at Amerigroup, a
Virginia-based health care organization

   Advertising

   Thomas Bogner Jr ., Kathleen Carollo , David Colucci , Jennifer Grasso ,
David Spencer and Darin Swan have been named vice presidents at Campbell-Ewald,
according to Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Anthony Hopp.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2008


                              376 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                          February 27, 2008 Wednesday
                                Suburban Edition

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B05

DISTRIBUTION: Maryland

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: State Hopes to Attract Emerging Industry

BYLINE: Philip Rucker; Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Boosting Maryland as a hub of nanobiotechnology research, legislators and
higher education leaders joined yesterday to propose a $5 million state program
to award research grants and lure private-sector firms to locate in the state.

   The Coordinating Emerging Nanobiotechnology Research in Maryland Program
would leverage federal and state money to establish new research centers and
foster public-private partnerships.

   Nanobiotechnology is an emerging field of research that combines engineering
and life sciences to help identify new solutions to health-care and
environmental problems.

   The research requires microscopes capable of viewing matter that is
approximately 100,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair. It helps
develop gene therapies for such diseases as cystic fibrosis and cancer as well
as advances in homeland security.

   The program would be created through legislation introduced by Senate
President Thomas V. Mike Miller Jr. (D-Calvert) and Del. Heather R. Mizeur
(D-Montgomery).

   "This industry promises to change our world profoundly," Miller said. "It's a
very significant step we're taking today."

   Maryland is the wealthiest state in the union per capita and is home to such
prominent academic research institutions as Johns Hopkins University as well as
federal facilities such as the National Institutes of Health. Proximity to the
nation's capital and an already vibrant biotechnology sector make the state an
ideal hub for the nanobiotechnology research industry, Miller and Mizeur said.

   Mizeur said that Maryland could become the "international epicenter" of the
field.

   "Maryland is putting the flag down: Come here," she said. "This industry is
poised to be an economic blockbuster for Maryland."

   Miller said he wants Maryland to be more competitive in luring
nanobiotechnology firms.

   "We're challenged by other states, but we're going to win," he said. "What
we're looking to be is the leader, to be the first. We have the ideal location
in Maryland to be the center of this industry."

   William E. Kirwan, chancellor of the University System of Maryland, said the
state's $5 million investment in the research fund will be repaid "many times
over" by the private investment that is sure to follow.

   "Why Maryland? Why nanobiotechnology?" Kirwan asked. "Nanobiotechnology is
going to be the next big thing."

   The state fund would be overseen by the Maryland Technology Economic
Development Corp., and the needed $5 million would have to be included in next
year's budget. Miller said that Gov. Martin O'Malley (D) has agreed to support
the initiative.

   Nanobiotechnology research is important to the pharmaceutical industry as
well as computer chip manufacturers, said Peter Searson, director of the
Institute for NanoBioTechnology at Johns Hopkins.

   Nariman Farvardin, senior vice president for academic affairs and provost at
the University of Maryland, described nanobiotechnology as a promising field.

   "Nanotechnology is going to pave the way for another important revolution,"
Farvardin said.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2008


                              377 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; HEALTH PLANS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1479 words

HEADLINE: Lacking Cure, a New Tack on a Muscle Disease

BYLINE: By REED ABELSON

BODY:

   For more than four decades, on telethons featuring celebrity performers and
children in wheelchairs, Jerry Lewis has been raising money each Labor Day for
the Muscular Dystrophy Association and  the disease that helped make ''poster
child'' part of the American idiom.

     On the most recent telethon, which was staged in Las Vegas and raised $63.8
million, the ''Law and Order'' actress Mariska Hargitay spoke of patients'
''hope that M.D.A. research will lead to treatments and cures.'' Mr. Lewis, who
has never disclosed why he chose this disease as his cause,  once again closed
the broadcast with an emotional rendition of the song ''You'll Never Walk
Alone.''

     But for all the money collected toward a cure,  Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, the most common form of the disease,  still confines thousands of
boys in this country to wheelchairs in their early teens. Many do not live past
their 20s.

     It is a stark reminder of how American medicine -- with its focus on
breakthrough treatments  -- can sometimes fail a complex, rare and stubbornly
uncurable disease. Single-minded in their pursuit of a cure, doctors and
researchers for years all but ignored the necessary and unglamorous work of
managing Duchenne (pronounced doo-SHEN) as a chronic condition.

     The approach is changing at a few medical centers, which are focused on
making better use of available therapies to eke out longer lives for their
patients. Rather than concentrate only on a cure, some researchers are now
intent on developing drugs  that may alleviate the effects of the disease.

     But, absent a cure, too many doctors around the country still assume there
is little or nothing that can be done for the muscle-wasting condition, parents
and specialists say.

     ''We're in a stone age with Duchenne,'' said Dr. Linda H. Cripe, a
pediatric cardiologist at the Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. She
describes Duchenne patients as ''a group of kids that pediatric medicine had
forgotten, a group of lost boys.''

     Among those is Josh Winheld, who years ago served as the Muscular Dystrophy
Association's poster boy in Southeastern Pennsylvania. Now, at age 29, Mr.
Winheld is among the oldest Duchenne patients seen at the Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, in part because of the unusually close oversight of his doctors.
But the recent discussion of new drugs, however promising, holds little hope for
him because he is already almost completely paralyzed.

     ''I feel totally lost,'' he said.

     Using a ventilator to help him breathe and a defibrillator to regulate his
heart,  and nourished by a feeding tube, he is able to move his head and operate
his motorized wheelchair with a slight movement of his fingers.

     He lives outside of Philadelphia with his parents and requires
around-the-clock care. His medical expenses are covered by a combination of his
parents' private insurance and state assistance.

     Duchenne is caused by a mutation of the gene for dystrophin, a protein in
muscle. The disease occurs almost exclusively in males, about once in every
3,500 live births, and occurs about a third of the time when there is no family
history of the disease.

     With the discovery of the gene in 1986, most of the research attention and
financing focused on gene therapy -- coming up with a way to cure the disease by
replacing  the defective gene.

     ''There was great hope at the time,'' recalled Mr. Winheld, who has his own
blog (winheldsworld.blogspot.com) and  is publishing his memoirs. ''We always
thought 'cure.' ''

     But the size of the gene and the variety of mutations have made even
diagnosis problematic and researchers are now looking elsewhere for an answer.

     The lack of interest in the mundane has also slowed progress in knowing
what available therapies are the most useful. Large pharmaceutical companies
often ignore a rare disease like Duchenne, and they are unwilling to undertake
further research into treatments like steroids, where any benefits they show are
shared by other manufacturers.

     ''The economics aren't there,'' said Charles Farkas, head of the health
care practice in the Americas for Bain & Company.

     The current focus has changed to trying to identify the patient's mutation
and then using a cocktail of different drugs tailored for that specific
mutation.

     ''For too long, I was stuck on it as the home run or nothing,'' said H. Lee
Sweeney, a professor and medical researcher at the University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, who is among the researchers now taking a different
approach. ''The home run may skip the next two generations of these kids,'' he
said.

     Others are pushing doctors to focus on making the best use of what
therapies are now available. ''For a very long time, this disease was no hope
and no help,'' said Patricia Furlong, founding president of Parent Project
Muscular Dystrophy, a nonprofit group in Middletown, Ohio, who lost two sons to
the disease. Her group has been instrumental in prodding doctors to concentrate
on helping existing patients.

     And it is often the parents who insist the doctors keep trying.

     Two years ago, a 16-year-old Duchenne patient named Anthony Hoel stopped
walking. His doctors in Minneapolis assumed there was nothing they could do and
told Anthony's father, Tom, to accept the fact that his son would be in a
wheelchair. The doctors ''were content to follow the old rule book,'' said Tom
Hoel.

     About a week after corrective surgery and extensive rehabilitation at
Cincinnati Children's Hospital, Anthony, now 18, walks with the aid of leg
braces.

     ''He is a real success story,'' said Dr. Brenda Wong, Anthony's doctor at
Cincinnati.

     The challenge for Josh Winheld's doctor, Richard Finkel, in caring for
someone whose disease is advanced is to keep a close  watch on his patient so he
can quickly address any problems.

     During a recent visit, for example, a nutritionist went over Josh's diet,
making sure he got enough calories but not too much liquid to stress his heart,
while Dr. Finkel examined Josh carefully and tried to determine if there were
any changes in his condition.

     Dr. Finkel is also among the doctors studying a new drug aimed specifically
at a mutation that causes about 15 percent of the cases. Clinical trials for the
drug, PTC124, are expected to begin enrolling patients early this  year.

     To date, the greatest progress has been through the use of steroids.   But
exactly when steroids should be started, which work best and how best to manage
the side effects still remain unclear.

     And unlike their counterparts in cystic fibrosis, a disease where
specialists have successfully stretched life expectancy for patients well into
their adulthood, doctors have been slow to develop clear standards of care and
aggressively track the results of varying treatments to determine how best to
manage the disease.

     ''We've had the tools, and we haven't used them as effectively,''
acknowledged Dr. Finkel.

     The result is that patients are often treated much later than they should
be, with some doctors referring a patient to a cardiologist only after he has
developed heart failure or waiting  too long to start a patient on steroids.

     The Muscular Dystrophy Association, which raises tens of millions each year
through Jerry Lewis's telethon and other efforts, has also been criticized for a
lack of focus on the specific needs of patients with Duchenne.

     The organization finances some 225 clinics across the country, including
the one at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.  While Duchenne is the most
common of the dystrophies, the association also raises money and provides
services for more than three dozen conditions, including  amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease.

     The association has no direct oversight of the clinics, some of which may
have little experience in treating a patient with Duchenne.

     Dr. Valerie A. Cwik, the association's medical director,  says the group
is now working to create a formal research network to gather and share
information about Duchenne. ''People have recognized there are gaps in our
knowledge of this disease,'' she said.

     There is also a federal effort  under way to draft recommendations to treat
Duchenne. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says these
recommendations are likely to be made public late this year or early next year.
''That is going to go a long way to standardize care,'' Dr. Cwik said.

     And even as experts say there is significant promise in some of the new
drugs being studied, doctors like Dr. Wong at Cincinnati say they need to remain
committed to making the seemingly small advances that buy patients like Anthony
Hoel more time on his feet, or give  Josh Winheld a chance to complete his
graduate degree once his memoirs are published.

     ''The outcome can be changed if you tweak little, little details,'' Dr.
Wong said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Tom Hoel was told two year ago doctors could do nothing for his
son Anthony, now 18, who has muscular dystrophy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK LYONS FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. A1)
Anthony Hoel, now 18, walking with the aid of leg braces at Cincinnati
Children's Hospital. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK LYONS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.
A16)
 Anthony Hoel had corrective procedures and extensive rehabilitation at
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MARK LYONS FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. A16)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2008


                              378 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          February 20, 2008 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Living; Pg. B10

LENGTH: 1194 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: The Oregonian

BODY:

   Oregon drug program

   adds SAIF to its pool

   SAIF Corp., Oregon's not-for-profit workers compensation insurer, has chosen
the Oregon Prescription Drug Program to provide pharmacy benefits for roughly
45,000 injured workers a year.

   The move is a boost to the drug program's effort to pool buying power and
thereby expand its clout to bargain with pharmaceutical companies for volume
discounts on prescription drugs for uninsured and underinsured Oregonians.

   Most injured workers covered by SAIF require prescription drugs, so the new
contract will increase the drug plan's business by more than 18,000 claims a
month, said Missy Dolan, administrator. She announced the SAIF contract during
testimony Thursday before the House Health Care Committee.

   To expand its bargaining power further, the Oregon drug program joined its
Washington counterpart last year to form the Northwest Prescription Drug
Consortium. By adding SAIF Corp., the Oregon plan's biggest group member, the
consortium's membership exceeds 350,000.

   That includes about 61,000 uninsured or underinsured Oregonians who enrolled
as individuals to get prescription discounts of up to 60 percent on qualifying
drugs.

   Gov. Ted Kulongoski said in a statement that the new partnership with SAIF
would help control the rising cost of prescription drugs while offering injured
workers quicker access to prescriptions.

   Uninsured or underinsured individuals can enroll in OPDP free by calling
800-913-4146 or visiting the Web site: www.opdp.org.

   Don Colburn

   OHSU spinoff gets

   $1.65 million grant

   Najit Technologies Inc., an Oregon Health & Science University spinoff
company, has been awarded a $1.65 million grant from the National Institutes of
Health to develop tests that will help detect suspected bioterrorist attacks.

   Mark Slifka, an associate scientist at OHSU's Vaccine & Gene Therapy
Institute and president and chief scientific officer of Najit, will work with
Anne Rimoin, an epidemiologist and assistant professor at the University of
California at Los Angeles, to develop rapid and accurate diagnostic tests for
pox viruses, including smallpox and monkey pox.

   The last natural case of smallpox was reported in 1977, and by 1980, it was
declared extinct in nature. Vials of the smallpox virus still remain in secure
research laboratories in the United States and Russia; however, since Sept. 11,
there has been concern that terrorists could obtain and release a weaponized
form of smallpox.

   Official joins panel

   on emergency services

   Dr. Ritu Sahni, Oregon's emergency medical services director, has been
appointed to a national committee that will advise the federal government on
emergency medical services issues.

   Sahni will serve a two-year term as a member of the National EMS Advisory
Council, a newly formed advisory body to the U.S. Department of Transportation
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration.

   Sahni is medical director of state emergency medical services and trauma
systems in the Oregon Department of Human Services. He also is an associate
professor of emergency medicine at Oregon Health & Science University and serves
as medical director of the Lake Oswego Fire Department.

   Sahni is one of five physicians appointed to the 26-member board. Kyle
Gorman, executive officer of Clackamas County Fire District No. 1, also was
appointed.

   Kidney cancer vaccine

   gets test in Springfield

   Oregon Urology Institute in Springfield is the Oregon study site for an
experimental kidney cancer vaccine, TroVax, developed by Oxford BioMedica.

   Researchers hope to enroll more than 700 patients across the U.S. and in 10
other nations. The study is testing whether TroVax, added to first-line,
standard therapy, prolongs survival of patients with a type of kidney cancer
called clear-cell renal adenocarcinoma that has advanced locally or spread
beyond the kidney.

   Dr. Dawn Bodell in Springfield is heading the Oregon arm of the federally
registered study. For more information call 541-284-5508.

   Joe Rojas-Burke

   County health records

   go wireless with grant

   Legacy Health System has awarded $20,000 to support implementation of
electronic health records for the Multnomah County Health Department's Homeless
Program, including the mobile medical van and two satellite clinics.

   The grant helped enable the van to be connected to the county using wireless
technology.

   The Health Department began implementing electronic health records in October
2005. Since then, six health centers, two homeless outreach clinics, the van and
12 school-based health centers have such records.

   Forum will discuss

   care for veterans

   The Oregon Health Forum will convene a breakfast forum Feb. 26 on the state
of veterans care and ideas for improving access.

   Jeff Rogers, a former assistant U.S. attorney for Oregon and a mental health
counselor, will moderate a panel of policy experts:

   Paula Brown, deputy director of the Oregon Department of Veterans Affairs;
Sgt. 1st Class Phillip "Vince" Jacques, area manager of the Oregon National
Guard reintegration team; Sidney A. Lee, president of the African American PTSD
Association; and Jim Sardo, program co-manager of the substance abuse treatment
program and PTSD clinical team at the Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

   Forum attendees will discuss options available to veterans and ways to
increase awareness of veterans' needs and reduce the stigma surrounding veterans
seeking out care, particularly for mental health disorders.

   Register for the event at www.healthforum.org or by calling 503-226-7870.

   Study seeks newborns

   with diabetes in family

   If you're expecting a baby or have a newborn and you, your spouse or a child
have Type 1 diabetes, the TEDDY Study wants you.

   The study is the largest launched to find environmental causes of Type 1
diabetes.

   TEDDY (The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young) is screening
newborns for increased diabetes risk. Those at highest risk will be invited to
participate in a follow-up study of diet, infections, allergies and
environmental exposure during childhood.

   Although TEDDY also tests newborns from the general population, there is a
need for newborns with a parent or sibling with Type 1. Both the initial
screening and follow-up study are paid for by the National Institutes of Health
and are free to the families.

   For more information, email TEDDY@pnri.org or call 888-324-2140.

   Session set on kitchen

   safety with vision loss

   How do you set up your kitchen safely and efficiently if your eyesight is
diminishing? What new electronic devices can help you function better?

   Gail Webb, a low vision specialist with the Oregon Commission for the Blind,
is hosting a workshop to help navigate the daily issues thousands of Oregonians
with low vision face.

   The Art of Low Vision, sponsored by the Oregon Chapter of the Foundation
Fighting Blindness, will be from 6 to 8 p.m. Feb. 26 at the OCB offices, 535
S.E. 12th Ave.

   Those who arrive at 5:30 p.m. can meet other Oregonians who are dealing with
vision loss caused by macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa and other
degenerative eye diseases.

   The workshop is free, but let organizers know you'll attend by e-mailing
Oregon@fightblindness.org Call 503-640-7812 for more information.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2008


                              379 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            February 17, 2008 Sunday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Study uncovers way to fight leukemia;
UCSD researchers use gene therapy

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: LA JOLLA

BODY:

   LA JOLLA -- A UCSD research team has found a promising way to attack chronic
lymphocytic leukemia, the most common form of adult leukemia in the United
States.

   The discovery was published last week in the online issue of the Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences. The National Institutes of Health, the
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society and private donors paid for the study.

   Dr. Thomas Kipps, deputy director of research at the UCSD Moores Cancer
Center in La Jolla, injected six leukemia patients with a gene therapy vaccine
developed at the University of California San Diego.

   The therapy helped three patients make antibodies against their leukemia
cells, Kipps and his colleagues said. The researchers extracted some of these
antibodies and mixed them in test tubes with leukemia cells from 70 other
people.

   The antibodies again attacked the leukemia cells. Kipps and his team
determined that a protein found only on the surface of leukemia cells reacted
with the antibodies.

   "The result raises hope that it may be possible to activate patients' immune
systems against their own cancer," Kipps said.

   He said the study is exciting because it may lead to a method for identifying
and combatting leukemia cells in the earliest stage of chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, when it is more treatable.

   "We can also use it to identify any residual leukemia cells that remain after
treatment," Kipps said. "If not controlled, they would make the disease return
over time."

   The Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Research Consortium at UCSD is the largest
group of its kind west of Houston, Texas, Kipps said. Its experts have treated
thousands of patients worldwide and are tracking 4,000.

   More than 15,000 people in the United States are diagnosed with chronic
lymphocytic leukemia each year, according to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.
The disease is characterized by abnormal growth of lymphocytes in the marrow and
lymph nodes, growth that crowds out normal blood-forming cells. Leukemia cells
cannot fight off an infection like normal lymphocytes.

   Symptoms of the disease include fatigue, shortness of breath, swollen lymph
nodes and repeated infections.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Dr. Thomas Kipps, deputy director of research at the
UCSD Moores Cancer Center in La Jolla, injected six leukemia patients with a
gene therapy vaccine developed at the University of California San Diego. He is
shown with Dr. Joanne Mortimer.; PHOTOBY: Union-Tribune 2005 file photo

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2008


                              380 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                            February 15, 2008 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 987 words

HEADLINE: Life sciences plan gets a makeover $1b House bill called boost for
Patrick

BYLINE: Matt Viser Globe Staff

BODY:

   House Speaker Salvatore F. DiMasi unveiled a plan yesterday that would give
$1 billion over 10 years to the state's life-sciences industry and hand Governor
Deval Patrick an opportunity for a major political victory.

   While DiMasi's proposal to boost the biotechnology and medical-device
industry differs in some key respects from the one Patrick proposed last year,
it does incorporate the major elements of the governor's initiative to build on
the state's reputation as a national hub for scientific research.

   The big-ticket bill is one of several areas of potential agreement between
DiMasi and Patrick that have emerged this week on Beacon Hill, setting up
chances for Patrick to gain momentum after a frustrating first year, if the
freshman governor is willing to compromise.

   DiMasi is seeking to put his own imprint on the life sciences plan with an
array of narrowly targeted, regional spending initiatives that would benefit
individual companies, communities, and University of Massachusetts campuses.
Even roadbuilders, vocational high school students, and scientists in Israel get
a piece.

   "Everybody's going to find something to like in this," said Representative
Daniel Bosley, one of the chief writers of the legislation.

   The plan includes $12.6 million to build an interchange on Interstate 93 near
Andover, where the state wants to spur development of science-related companies;
$12.9 million to improve sewage treatment in Framingham, which would benefit an
expansion planned by Genzyme Corp.; and $30 million for vocational and technical
high schools to improve life sciences courses. About $10 million would be used
to establish a partnership with scientists in Haifa, Israel.

   The bill calls for $95 million to build a life science center at the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst and $90 million for a center for genetic
research and genetic therapy on the UMass Medical School campus in Worcester.

   "We need to extend our lead, and we need to expand our dominance," DiMasi
told a room full of lawmakers, scientists, and lobbyists.

   "We have the young talent, the brain power. We have the institutions. Now,
ladies and gentlemen, we have the political will."

   Although Patrick's bill was much more broadly defined, the governor said
yesterday he was pleased that the House was taking action on legislation that
has been stalled on Beacon Hill for months.

   "It's definitely progress," Patrick told reporters. "The speaker has kept his
word, which is to keep this moving."

   Patrick recently began calling for more action from the Legislature, warning
in his State of the State address last month about "the cost of inaction."

   He has also suggested that biotech companies were choosing to locate
elsewhere because the House was taking too long to take up his initiatives.

   DiMasi said Patrick's nudging had not spurred the recent movement.

   "It has nothing to do with any of that, believe me," DiMasi said yesterday.
"We're on our own schedule here. ... You can see how complicated this bill was.
It's been in the works day in and day out. We have our own goals."

   "It's unnecessary to say there's inaction. Just look at the product that was
produced here," he added. "... It's not like he makes a proposal and it has to
be done that way. This is a legislative process."

   The life sciences bill is the second sign of progress between Patrick and
DiMasi this week. On Tuesday, DiMasi embraced another of the governor's key
initiatives, tightening corporate tax laws to make it harder for companies to
avoid state taxes.

   DiMasi, however, is proposing cutting the state's corporate rate much more
quickly and more dramatically than Patrick has, and the governor has not said
whether he agrees.

   "The governor should be pleased," said Michael J. Widmer, president of the
Massachusetts Taxpayers Foundation. "Both of the bills were amended
significantly, but the essence of what the governor has proposed carries
forward."

   Patrick first introduced the life-sciences measure in May 2007, and with
DiMasi and Senate President Therese Murray smiling at his side, it appeared it
would be quickly passed.

   But the governor did not file the bill until July, the House did not assign
it to a committee until the end of summer, and there were disagreements over how
the money should be distributed.

   The redrafted version that DiMasi and House leaders issued yesterday mirrors
Patrick's plan in broad measures, designating $500 million in bonds for capital
projects, $250 million in research grants, and $250 million for targeted tax
credits to Massachusetts-based companies.

   The House bill also establishes five regional offices throughout the state,
expanding the state bureaucracy by about a dozen employees who would help
businesses decide whether to locate in Massachusetts.

   "It's not just Cambridge and Boston anymore," said Bosley, a North Adams
Democrat and chairman of the Joint Committee on Economic Development and
Emerging Technologies. "It's Worcester, Fall River, and the Pioneer Valley."

   Some suggested yesterday that the House version runs the risk of getting
bogged down with too many earmarks that wouldn't have the same impact as fewer,
larger grants.

   "The one note of caution is the issue of scale," said William Guenther,
president of Mass Insight Corporation, a Boston think tank. "If we break the
money up into too many different pools that are too small, we risk marginalizing
the impact."

   House leaders declined to say yesterday how many jobs the legislation would
create. Patrick has said it would bring 250,000 jobs, a figure that some call
too high.

   The bill will be taken up next week by the House Committee on Ways and Means
and is expected to be before the full House in two weeks.

   The Senate has been largely supportive, although Murray declined to comment
yesterday other than to say through a spokesman, "We're looking forward to
taking up the legislation as soon as possible."

   Matt Viser can be reached at maviser@globe.com

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2008


                              381 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 599 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:

   Report highlights baby-bottle risk

   Chemicals

   Parents who heat plastic baby bottles risk feeding their children a synthetic
hormone linked with medical, reproductive and developmental problems, according
to a University of Missouri study released last week.

   The chemical - bisphenol A - is used in making hard, polycarbonate plastic
and leaches out of the bottles when heated to 80 degrees or filled with hot
liquids, researchers said. Bisphenol A is a synthetic estrogen that can cause
feminization in boys, an onset of early puberty in girls, prostate and breast
cancer, and some forms of diabetes.

   At a news conference, consumer groups said the new Missouri study confirmed
earlier warnings and is significant because it examined major brands of baby
bottles sold in the United States and Canada.

   Approximately 90 percent of all plastic baby bottles sold in the United
States are made with bisphenol A.

   Industry groups, however, disputed the study's conclusions.

   Amy Chezem, a spokeswoman for the Juvenile Product Manufacturers Association,
which represents baby-bottle makers, said the findings are not new.

   "The industry has been dealing with the issue - it's just scare tactics for
parents," she said.

   Chezem noted that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration studied the issue and
had not found a problem.

   McClatchy-Tribune

   AIDS

   Gene therapy makes virus self-destruct

   For the first time, researchers have slowed and possibly stopped the AIDS
virus from reproducing in patients by using a gene therapy that tricks it into
self-destructing.

   The results, announced last week, are heartening not just for people infected
with HIV but also for the field of gene therapy, which remains highly
experimental more than 20 years after scientists figured out how to use viruses
to insert therapeutic genes into a cell's genome.

   Mostly, the results are a big step forward for the biotech start-up that is
developing the novel therapy and for its collaborators at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   "The buzzword in the field is viral `fitness,' meaning how well the virus can
replicate," said Gary McGarrity, executive vice president for scientific affairs
at VIRxSYS Corp. in Gaithersburg.

   "In eight of the nine patient samples we studied, we see diminished HIV
fitness up to two years after treatment."

   That raises the hope that even if medical science cannot come up with the
Holy Grail of AIDS research - a vaccine to prevent HIV infection - patients
might be able to keep HIV under control, perhaps without relying on the toxic
drug cocktails that commuted what was once a death sentence.

   McClatchy-Tribune

   Sexual health

   Gel might boost low libido in women

   Thanks to Viagra, Cialis and Levitra, men with erectile dysfunction can get
on board the Food and Drug Administration-approved love train. But women who
experience a different sexual problem - sagging libido - have been left at the
station.

   That may be changing.

   BioSante Pharmaceuticals Inc. is testing the safety and effectiveness of
LibiGel, a testosterone gel for women designed to combat declines in sexual
arousal associated with menopause. There are currently no drugs available in the
U.S. specifically approved for pumping up lackluster libido in women.

   The Lincolnshire, Ill.,-based company is conducting two trials, comprising
1,000 women, to test the effectiveness of the gel, which is applied to the upper
arm. The company will also test the gel's safety in a trial of as many as 3,100
women using LibiGel or a placebo.

   If the trials go well, the drug could be available by prescription by 2011,
says BioSante chief executive Stephen Simes.

   Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                              382 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2008 Globe Newspaper Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Boston Globe

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Drug maker Shire promises 680 jobs But some question wisdom of $48m
state-local aid package

BYLINE: Todd Wallack Globe Staff

BODY:

   After months of playing coy, the British drug maker Shire PLC says it plans
to go forward with a $394 million expansion in Lexington that is expected to
create 680 jobs over the next eight years, one of the largest economic
development projects in the state.

   The decision is a coup for Governor Deval Patrick, who has been aggressively
trying to encourage Shire and other life sciences companies to expand or move to
Massachusetts. And it comes as Patrick is pressing legislators to approve the $1
billion life sciences initiative he proposed last year. Lawmakers are expected
to unveil the latest version of the bill today, and vote on it within two weeks.

   Shire executives said they were already committed to going forward with a
portion of their project in Lexington. Shire's Human Genetic Therapies unit,
which develops drugs to address rare medical disorders such as Fabry disease, is
based in Cambridge, but needs additional office and laboratory space nearby to
accommodate its rapid growth. Shire, however, threatened to build the
centerpiece of the expansion project, a pharmaceuticals manufacturing plant, in
another state if Massachusetts didn't come up with an attractive enough
incentive package.

   Shire said Massachusetts initially offered $24 million, compared with $40
million from Rhode Island, $42 million from North Carolina, and $50 million from
South Carolina, according to documents obtained by the Globe. But after the
company threatened to go elsewhere, the Town of Lexington agreed to give Shire
$7.6 million in tax breaks over 20 years. And on Dec. 10, Patrick, Senate
President Therese Murray, and House Speaker Salvatore DiMasi signed a letter
promising to secure $40.5 million to help Shire - making the total incentive
package worth more than $48 million. At least some of that is expected to be
included in the life sciences bill. Patrick also personally courted Shire, even
calling executives while he was on a trade mission in China two months ago.

   Still, Shire executives said they decided to wait until yesterday to publicly
confirm plans to go forward with the project, because they wanted to see what
would happen with the life sciences bill.

   "Now we feel confident that the commitment letter will be honored," said
Sylvie Gregoire, president of Shire Human Genetic Therapies.

   Jessica Cotrone, a company spokeswoman, said Shire also wanted to coordinate
its announcement with the state. Cotrone said Shire hopes Patrick will attend a
groundbreaking for its plant in the next two months.

   Some criticized the decision to offer Shire $48 million in incentives. State
Senator Mark Montigny, who questioned the offer, said he has concerns about
steering tax breaks to particular companies or industries.

   "The government is highly incompetent with picking winners and losers," said
Montigny, a New Bedford Democrat. "It comes down to who is the best at public
extortion."

   Jim Stergios, executive director for the Pioneer Institute, a Boston think
tank, said it would be better for the state to focus on finding ways to reduce
the cost of doing business in Massachusetts, such as lowering the cost of
unemployment insurance, instead of offering tax breaks to specific firms.

   State Representative Daniel Bosley, who helped shape the life sciences bill,
said he generally shares Montigny's concerns. But Bosley said there are
exceptions, like Shire, that deserve support.

   "Sometimes, you say this is a good company that we want to invest in," said
Bosley, a North Adams Democrat. Shire's project is particularly important, he
said, because it includes hundreds of manufacturing jobs that will help the
economy and generate tax revenue.

   And Shire HGT's senior vice president, William Ciambrone, said that without
the additional tax incentives, it probably would have built the plant in North
Carolina.

   North Carolina and South Carolina officials did not return calls seeking
comment. But Saul Kaplan, executive director of the Rhode Island Economic
Development Corporation, said it had only preliminary discussions with Shire.

   "We made repeated efforts to try to connect with the company to see whether
they were serious [about Rhode Island], and they weren't," Kaplan said.

   Shire plans to renovate several buildings and build a manufacturing plant on
Patriot Way in Lexington, near the intersection of Route 2 and Interstate 95.
Some of the buildings were formerly used as Raytheon Corp.'s headquarters before
the defense contractor moved to Waltham four years ago.

   The company currently has about 675 employees in Massachusetts and expects to
have 1,350 - mostly in Lexington - within eight years. Most of Shire's jobs in
Cambridge will gradually be moved to Lexington.

   Shire's Human Genetic Therapies unit has two key drugs on the market to treat
rare diseases: Elaprase for Hunter syndrome and Replagal for Fabry disease. In
the first nine months of the last fiscal year, HGT recorded more than $229
million in sales from Elaprase and Replagal, up from $90.8 million in the same
period a year earlier. The unit also has other experimental therapies in the
works, including some to treat Gaucher disease.

   Todd Wallack can be reached at twallack@globe.com

   SIDEBAR:

   PARENT COMPANY

   PLEASE SEE PDF FOR CHART DATA

GRAPHIC: Sylvie Gregoire is president of Shire Human Genetic Therapies, which
plans a new plant in Lexington. Shire executive Sylvie Gregoire is confident
state incentives will come through.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                              383 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE ; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1188 words

HEADLINE: Hopes high for experimental Alzheimer's treatment

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A dramatic gene therapy trial at UCSD that involved injecting skin cells
containing human nerve growth factor into the brains of patients with
Alzheimer's disease may have taken a significant step forward.

   Instead of using modified skin cells from each patient as the carrier of a
gene that expresses the nerve growth factor (NGF), researchers are now employing
a harmless but naturally efficient virus.

   The viral approach, they say, is simpler and cheaper, and it may be more
effective.

   Building upon an earlier six-patient trial at Rush University Medical Center
in Chicago, UCSD neuroscientists are seeking a handful of local residents
already diagnosed with Alzheimer's to assess the safety and efficacy of a more
aggressive treatment.

   One patient -- a 79-year-old woman from Oceanside -- underwent treatment in
November. Three more study participants are sought. They must meet at least
three basic requirements:

   1. They must already have been medically diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.

   2. They must be between 50 and 80 years of age.

   3. They must be in general good health, without any medical implants that
might hinder tests.

   Alzheimer's is a devastating degenerative disease of the brain that gradually
erases a person's memories and cognitive functioning. It is not considered part
of the normal aging process, though its precise cause remains unknown. There is
no known treatment to prevent it or cure it.

   Approximately 5 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's; more women than
men. Ten percent of Americans over the age of 65 have the disease. By age 85,
that figure rises to 50 percent. By 2050, some estimates project as many as 16
million Americans will be grappling with the disease.

   Growing problem

   Needless to say, an effective treatment to slow the disease's progression, if
not reverse it, has become something of a neurological holy grail.

   In 2001, UCSD scientists made headlines by injecting genetically modified
skin cells from eight Alzheimer's patients into their brains at precise sites
where the researchers believed the disease was wreaking the greatest havoc.

   The skin cells had been altered to express the human form of nerve growth
factor, a protein found in all mammals that acts like a kind of brain-cell
fertilizer. By exposing neurons damaged by Alzheimer's disease to additional
growth factor, scientists hoped to prompt cells to repair themselves and grow
new connections, perhaps restoring lost cognitive function.

   The first trial in 2001 and 2002 was too small and limited to be conclusive,
but resulting data was encouraging. Tests showed patients' brains were
biologically more active, though how that played out in terms of improved mental
functioning was harder to measure. Patients themselves reported improvement --
or at least perceived a slower rate of memory loss -- with virtually no side
effects.

   The new trial is also small -- another safety test. But this time, there are
some big differences. Patients will receive much higher doses of nerve growth
factor in the form a gene therapy drug called CERE-110, developed by Ceregene
Inc., a San Diego-based biotechnology company and sponsor of the study.

   More critically, CERE-110 will be delivered to patients' brains via an
adeno-associated virus (AAV), a virus capable of infecting humans and some
primates, but not known to cause disease.

   "What we've done is take just the part of the virus that acts as a transport,
that lets it get into human cells. It's just a carrier of the gene for NGF,"
said Adam Fleisher, an assistant professor of neuroscience who is directing the
new study.

   "CERE-110 is injected by a neurosurgeon directly into an area of the brain
known to be affected by Alzheimer's disease," Fleisher explained. "It is
designed to be taken up by nerve cells in this region, which may then use the
NGF gene to make NGF protein. This protein may protect nerve cells from dying,
improve their function and even make them grow."

   The new viral technique is likely an improvement upon the earlier skin-cell
method, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski, a UCSD neurologist and neuroscientist who
helped lead the 2001 study. As a founder of Ceregene, Tuszynski is not directly
involved in the second trial, but he is serving as a consultant.

   "The AAV vector approach is simpler because there is no need to obtain cells
from each individual and expand them in culture, which requires months," he
said. "Instead, the AAV vector is produced in relatively large quantities and
can be used to treat any patient. This clearly reduces time and cost in
implementing the procedure."

   More importantly, perhaps, Tuszynski noted that earlier monkey studies using
the virus indicate nerve growth factor continued to be expressed at consistent
levels for at least six years after treatment. In contrast, data from skin-cell
studies indicates gene expression of nerve growth factor begins to decline
gradually within the first year.

   One woman's fight

   Sitting in Fleisher's office at UCSD's Alzheimer's Disease Research Center in
La Jolla, Eileen Greenwald listens to the talk of genes and viruses and nerve
growth factor with a keen and focused expression, though frankly, it's all a bit
beyond her.

   In 2005, Greenwald was diagnosed with Alzheimer's.

   "What we noticed first and most often was her inability to answer questions,"
said her husband, Hugh. "Whatever else was happening, Eileen could always ask
questions. Her brain won't let her stop asking questions.

   "But then she began to not remember the answers. We used to joke that she
just wasn't paying attention, but the forgetfulness got progressively worse over
the last 10 to 15 years."

   After Greenwald's diagnosis, a family member mentioned UCSD's Alzheimer's
research effort. Hugh brought Eileen for an assessment, hoping perhaps to enroll
her in a trial.

   "We wanted to help, but we had selfish reasons, too," he said. "We're
interested in anything that might delay further onset of the disease. Our
greatest hope is for recovery."

   Greenwald is the first of the four patients sought for the CERE-110 trial. In
November, in an eight-hour operation, doctors injected 80 microliters of AAV --
0.00541 of a tablespoon -- into two sites in her brain. She went home 24 hours
later, visibly no worse for the experience.

   It will take much longer, however, to see if the CERE-110 gene therapy slows
or reverses her disease. "It will take at least six months to a year before
we'll be able to see a change," said Fleisher.

   In the meantime, UCSD researchers are laying the groundwork for a
second-phase trial that would be much larger and more complex, involving many
more patients at multiple test sites around the country.

   Greenwald smiles at the news.

   Asked what she thinks about the trial, about what has happened to her and how
she feels, she frowns slightly, pondering the question. Then she turns to Hugh
and asks, "How do I feel?"

   "Good," he replies, gently.

   "Good," she answers, smiling again.

   Watching, Fleisher nods and explains.

   "It's not uncommon for Alzheimer's patients who are losing their memory to
lose confidence in their thoughts. They stop trusting their memory. They aren't
sure if what they remember is real."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Adam Fleisher, an assistant professor of
neuroscience who is directing the new research, looked over data from an earlier
Alzheimer's disease study. 2. Eileen Greenwald, who received an experimental
Alzheimer's disease therapy, and her husband, Hugh, listened to study director
Adam Fleisher.; PHOTOBY: 1,2. Scott Linnett / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                              384 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 2081 words

HEADLINE: Changes of heart;
Cardiovascular disease is different for women

BYLINE: Scott LaFee, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Maybe it won't surprise you -- today least of all -- to discover there's an
actual medical condition called broken heart syndrome. It's caused by a tragic
or shocking event that stuns the heart, producing classic heart-attack symptoms,
such as chest pain and shortness of breath.

   Fortunately, broken heart syndrome isn't fatal. Indeed, its effects are
transitory, usually soothed by a few days of bed rest and fluids, with no
permanent cardiac damage.

   Still, if you're a woman, take care: Your heart may be at greater risk than
you think.

   It remains a popular belief that cardiovascular disease is essentially a male
affliction. A 1998 survey by the National Center for Health Statistics found
that 46 percent of women believed breast cancer was their biggest health threat,
followed by other forms of cancer. Only 4 percent deemed heart disease to be
most threatening -- the same percentage who cited AIDS.

   In fact, cardiovascular disease kills almost 500,000 American women each
year, twice the number of all female cancer deaths combined. A woman is 10 to 14
times more likely to die of heart disease than of breast cancer, in part because
cancer is treated more effectively.

   Indeed, 40 percent of women do not survive their first heart attack. For
women under 50, a heart attack is twice as likely to be fatal as a similar event
in a man.

   "Women with heart disease tend not to do well," said Dr. Randall Moreadith, a
cardiologist who is chief medical officer at Cardium Therapeutics, a
biotechnology company based in San Diego. "You look at the database over the
last 10 to 20 years and you see a striking decline in heart disease mortality in
men, but none at all in women. It's a flat line."

   But why?

   Are women's hearts different from men's?

   Does cardiovascular disease harm women differently?

   Do women receive different treatment, and do they respond to it differently?

   There is no precise or entirely satisfying answer to any of these questions,
but the general response to all of them is yes.

   There are, in fact, discrete differences in men's and women's hearts.
Cardiovascular disease does afflict women differently than men (at least some of
the time), both in symptoms and in the damage done. Medical care does vary,
sometimes catastrophically so.

   In combination, these realities create a profound and widespread threat to
the health of many American women. An estimated 10 million to 50 million women
are at intermediate risk of heart disease, based on current assessment
guidelines.

   Cardiovascular disease tends to strike later in the lives of women -- at an
average age of 70 for women, as opposed to 60 for men. But the consequences are
frequently more devastating for women. According to one study, the death risk
for a woman experiencing a heart attack is 1.7 times that for a man.

   A different beat

   A woman's heart is physiologically different from a man's. It's smaller, both
in overall size and in the carrying capacity of its arteries and lesser blood
vessels. It beats faster, but it may take fractionally longer to relax between
beats. And for much of a woman's life, it is swathed in the powerfully
influential hormone estrogen.

   How much each of these factors influences the development of heart disease in
women isn't fully known. Certainly, women are susceptible to all of the basic
risk factors that affect male cardiovascular health, from genetics and
exacerbating diseases such as diabetes to smoking, heavy alcohol use, a poor
diet and inadequate exercise.

   "Women's health behaviors can be as bad or worse than a man's," said Dr. Lori
Daniels, a practicing cardiologist at UCSD Medical Center.

   The resulting disease, though, can manifest itself differently in a woman's
heart. In men, cardiovascular disease often involves deposits of plaque -- a
sticky concoction of cholesterol and other fatty substances -- accumulating
inside a major coronary artery until, like silt in a river, the blockage
significantly obstructs the vessel, blood flow is pinched, and the heart seizes.

   Coronary plaque is not an issue in many younger women with heart disease.
Their problem is an erosion of blood vessels, "as if you had rubbed sandpaper on
the artery walls," said Dr. Debra Judelson, a cardiologist and founder of the
Women's Heart Institute in Beverly Hills.

   Ulcers form at the eroded sites, followed by blood clots, which can break off
to block vessels downstream, causing heart attacks and strokes.

   Some women do experience plaque buildup. But unlike the case in men, the
plaque accumulates evenly and uniformly in the heart, most notably in smaller
blood vessels called arterioles. These vessels gradually lose their ability to
flex and expand with increased blood flow caused by physical or psychological
stress. Instead, blood flow diminishes, as does overall heart function. Doctors
call this microvascular disease.

   Estrogen seems to play conflicting roles. It is believed to be a plaque
fighter, slowing accumulation in women's hearts and inhibiting calcification or
hardening. Calcified plaque is more likely to become inflamed, increasing the
risk of a heart attack.

   But in some women, estrogen also increases the risk of blood clotting.

   "There's a lot going on here," said Judelson. "There's a lot we still don't
understand."

   Contra-indications

   Differences in how heart disease occurs in men and women mean, not
surprisingly, that there are symptomatic dissimilarities as well. Both sexes
generally experience the same classic signs of cardiac disease and arrest:

   * Chest discomfort, such as sensations of squeezing, pressure or pain

   * Discomfort radiating to neck, shoulders or arms

   * Shortness of breath

   * Nausea, cold sweats or dizziness

   But one-third of women who suffer heart attacks report no chest pain, and 71
percent say they felt only flulike symptoms in the weeks and months prior to
their attacks.

   Such women often seek medical care later than they should, sometimes too
late, given the high mortality rate of first-time female heart attacks.

   "There's a problem of symptom denial," said Dr. Denise Barnard, a
cardiologist and director of the Women's Cardiovascular Health Program at UCSD.
"Many women don't think they're having a heart attack. They think maybe their
bra's too tight or they're just over-tired. They put off going to the emergency
room until dinner is taken care of. Or they go to bed thinking they'll feel
better in the morning."

   When a man arrives at a hospital emergency room clutching his chest in pain,
everyone immediately assumes he's having a heart attack and acts appropriately,
said Barnard. When a woman comes in complaining of a backache and extreme
fatigue, a heart attack usually isn't the first diagnosis.

   "Women often (display) unusual symptoms of heart disease," said Moreadith.
"They'll say they just don't feel well. It's something they can't quite put a
finger on. As a cardiologist, you're confounded because they're not presenting
classic symptoms."

   A 1996 national survey of general practitioners found that more than 65
percent were unaware of gender differences in heart disease symptoms and warning
signs. Less than 40 percent had special training in diagnosing heart disease in
females.

   The situation has improved, say experts, thanks to extensive professional
education efforts and increased media attention, but the problem persists. A big
chunk of the reason is that doctors, including cardiac specialists, simply know
less about how heart disease affects females.

   Women have traditionally been under-represented in studies, comprising just
24 percent of participants in all heart-related research, according to the
Women's Heart Foundation, an advocacy group.

   Only in recent years has it become apparent that some traditional tools used
to assess heart health don't work as well in women as in men. For example,
electrocardiograms, or EKGs, which measure electrical activity in the heart, and
angiograms, X-rays of the heart, do not easily identify the subtler signs of
microvascular disease. Screening tools such as the standard treadmill test are
reasonably accurate for men but much less so for women unless combined with
other tests and overseen by a specialist.

   Gender bias

   When a woman suffers a heart attack or is identified with heart disease,
there's a pretty strong chance she will be treated differently -- if she is
treated at all.

   A study in The Journal of the American Medical Association in 2000 found
women less likely to have hospital tests or procedures related to heart disease.
Another study found men more likely to be prescribed cholesterol-reducing drugs,
even though research indicates both sexes benefit equally.

   Similarly, female heart attack survivors are less likely to receive beta
blockers, ACE inhibitors, even aspirin -- all therapies known to improve
survival. They are less likely to undergo bypass surgery.

   Reluctance on the part of surgeons could be due, in part, to the increased
difficulty (real or not) of operating on smaller, more fragile hearts. But a
more likely reason is fear of the end result: Women are two to three times more
likely than men to die from such operations, according to the Women's Heart
Foundation.

   That's because women facing significant heart surgery tend to be older than
men. A male with problematic heart disease may display telltale symptoms in his
50s or 60s; a woman might not until she's in her 70s. Surgery at that age tends
to be riskier.

   All of which argues for earlier diagnoses and less invasive interventions,
but those changes cannot occur without a better scientific understanding of what
makes a woman's heart tick.

   One current effort is Phase 3 clinical trial of a gene therapy drug by
Cardium Therapeutics. "It's one of a very few women-only interventional
cardiovascular trials," said Moreadith.

   Building upon a decade of research, Cardium is testing a drug called Generx
as a treatment for myocardial ischemia, or insufficient blood flow, in the
heart. The study, with multiple testing sites in California and the nation, will
ultimately involve 300 participants and continue through 2009.

   In theory, Generx works by encouraging the heart to grow new arterioles to
replace those damaged by disease. This natural healing process is called
angiogenesis. Moreadith says Generx simply ramps up the effort.

   Previous research indicates Generx isn't notably effective on men. "It
probably works on them, but we need to develop better (measurement tools),"
Moreadith said. "For women though, we've seen significant effect in their
microvascular system."

   On the whole, the differences between men and women and how they are affected
by cardiovascular disease are small. Most of the time, said Daniels, the
cardiologist at UCSD Medical Center, symptoms, treatments and outcomes are
basically the same.

   Except for the exceptions -- which all seem to bode worse for women.

   One final example: Female cardiac patients are far less likely to stick to
prescribed rehabilitation exercise programs than men are, even though the women
are at greater risk of a recurrence.

   "We don't know why women heart patients don't exercise as much as men," said
Dr. Christopher Blanchard, a researcher at Canada's Dalhousie University who is
studying the phenomenon. "We need to uncover the physical, social, environmental
and psychological barriers that prevent them from exercising even when they know
it will improve their health."

   Blanchard's point is well-taken, for men as well as for women. Heart disease
is preventable. Most key risk factors are products of behavior. An ailing heart
can be healed. All it may take is a change of heart.

   Under attack

   In the heart danger zone

   Am I having a heart attack?

   In most men and women, the warning signs of a heart attack are the same:

   * Pain or discomfort in the chest

   * Pain or discomfort radiating to the shoulders, neck and arms.

   * Shortness of breath

   Other symptoms can include cold sweats, nausea, indigestion and dizziness.

   Many women, however, display symptoms that aren't commonly associated with
heart disease. Prior to a heart attack, they may suffer from unusual fatigue,
poor sleep, general anxiety or unease, according to a 2003 study by the National
Institutes of Health. During a heart attack, major symptoms include extreme
weakness, vomiting and lightheadedness. A woman may feel severe back pain, but
no pain at all in the chest.

   Risk factors

   * Smoking

   * Diabetes

   * High blood pressure

   * High cholesterol levels

   * Poor diet

   * Overweight

   * Sedentary lifestyle

   * Family history of heart disease

   * Early menopause (before age 40)

   * Chronic, unresolved stress

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Research has revealed that female cardiac
patients are far less likely to stick to prescribed rehabilitation exercise
programs. 2. UNDER ATTACK; PHOTOBY: 1. Tim Boyle / Getty Images

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                              385 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          February 13, 2008 Wednesday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Living; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: The Oregonian

BODY:

   Environmental risks in

   pregnancy are targeted

   The Oregon Department of Human Services has received a $100,000 grant from
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The grant will go toward development
of education and assessment tools for public health nurses and pregnant women
about environmental health risks.

   The project will work with the Public Health Nurses of Oregon to educate
pregnant women about environmental exposure risks such as mercury, lead, tobacco
smoke and other hazardous chemicals. The goal is to prevent harmful exposures by
increasing the knowledge among public health nurses, who are the women's
principle care providers. Details: www.oregon.gov/dhs/ph or contact Katherine
Bradley, administrator, office of family health, 971-673-0232,
katherine.j.bradley@state.or.us

   Events will mark kids'

   dental health month

   The Oregon Health & Science University School of Dentistry is part of three
events marking children's national dental health month.

   * Celebration of smiles, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday, Portland Children's
Museum, 4015 S.W. Canyon Road. Open to all children and their families to
highlight the importance of early and regular oral health care (with each paid
adult ticket, one child 12 or younger will be admitted free). Children can paint
tooth molds; play in "Wally Gator," the giant reptile chair; get their face
painted; take home a paint-your-own tooth fairy pillow; and more.

   * Sealant day, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Tuesday, OHSU School of Dentistry, Dr. and
Mrs. Carl Rietman Pediatric Dentistry Clinic, 611 S.W. Campus Drive. For 10
years, OHSU has offered sealant day to Buckman Arts Elementary second-graders.
About 50 pre-screened Buckman second-graders will receive free sealants, thin
plastic coatings applied to the chewing surfaces of new permanent teeth to
prevent cavities.

   * Give Kids a Smile day, 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Friday, Feb. 29, OHSU School of
Dentistry Pre-doctoral Clinic, 611 S.W. Campus Drive. About 200 prescreened
uninsured children will receive a free checkup and learn how to better care for
their teeth.

   Visits will check for

   underage tobacco sales

   Hundreds of Oregon retailers will receive surprise visits the next six months
to see whether they are complying with laws that prohibit tobacco sales to
people younger than 18.

   This is Oregon's 14th year in the federal Synar Compliance Program aimed at
cutting youth smoking.

   According to the 2008 annual Synar report, 15.6 percent of the clerks at 622
retail outlets sold tobacco to minors during 2007 compliance testing. That's up
from 14.6 percent during 2006 and a record low 11.2 percent in 2005.

   During tobacco inspections a retired Oregon State Police officer and a minor
visit randomly selected retailers. The minor, age 15 or 16, tries to buy
cigarettes. If the clerk sells, he or she is cited for endangering the welfare
of a minor.

   If a state records a sales rate of more than 20 percent, it can lose as much
as 40 percent of its federal substance-abuse prevention and treatment block
grant.

   OHSU spinoff gets

   $1.65 million grant

   Najit Technologies Inc., an Oregon Health & Science University spinoff
company, has been awarded a $1.65 million grant from the National Institutes of
Health to develop tests that will help detect suspected bioterrorist attacks.

   Mark Slifka, an associate scientist at OHSU's Vaccine & Gene Therapy
Institute and president and chief scientific officer of Najit, will work with
Anne Rimoin, an epidemiologist and assistant professor at the University of
California at Los Angeles, to develop rapid and accurate diagnostic tests for
pox viruses, including smallpox and monkey pox.

   The last natural case of smallpox was reported in 1977, and by 1980, it was
declared extinct in nature. Vials of the smallpox virus still remain in secure
research laboratories in the United States and Russia; however, since Sept. 11,
there has been concern that terrorists could obtain and release a weaponized
form of smallpox.

   Poet will reflect on

   her breast cancer fight

   Poet Susan Deborah King will read from "One-Breasted Woman," a book of poems
that reflect upon her struggles with breast cancer.

   The reading will be from 6 to 7 p.m. Friday, at the OHSU Center for Women's
Health on the seventh floor of the Peter O. Kohler Pavilion, 3181 S.W. Sam
Jackson Park Road.

   The book is King's third collection of poems. She will also sign copies of
the book.

   Official joins panel

   on emergency services

   Dr. Ritu Sahni, Oregon's emergency medical services director, has been
appointed to a national committee that will advise the federal government on
emergency medical services issues.

   Sahni will serve a two-year term as a member of the National EMS Advisory
Council, a newly formed advisory body to the U.S. Department of Transportation
National Highway Transportation Safety Administration.

   Sahni is medical director of state emergency medical services and trauma
systems in the Oregon Department of Human Services. He also is an associate
professor of emergency medicine at Oregon Health & Science University and serves
as medical director of the Lake Oswego Fire Department.

   Sahni is one of five physicians appointed to the 26-member board. Kyle
Gorman, executive officer of Clackamas County Fire District No. 1, also was
appointed.

   Questions answered

   during free Heart Fair

   Scientists and clinicians will answer questions about heart health at the
Oregon Health & Science University Heart Fair.

   The event runs from10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Thursday in the ground floor atrium of
the OHSU Center for Health & Healing, 3303 S.W. Bond Ave. The building is
adjacent to the lower terminal of the Portland Aerial Tram.

   The event is free and features experts from the OHSU Heart Research Center,
as well as live jazz piano performances. For more information, call
503-494-2382. For more about events at OHSU for American Heart Month, go to
www.ohsu.edu/health/heart/events/events.cfm

   Community living

   for mentally ill boosted

   The Oregon Department of Human Services has awarded more than $13 million to
organizations to develop community living for 307 people with mental illness.

   Beneficiaries range from young adults and homeless people to those ready for
discharge from state psychiatric hospitals.

   The DHS Addictions and Mental Health Division granted money for projects in
15 counties:

   * Benton: $414,331, Shangri-La residential treatment home

   * Clackamas: $307,000, Northwest Housing Alternatives apartment complex and
residential treatment home

   * Columbia: $612,548, Columbia County Mental Health supportive apartments

   * Deschutes: $85,000, Housing Works transitional apartments; $1.94 million,
Telecare, two residential treatment facilities

   * Lane: $75,000, Brethren Community Services, apartment complex; $156,300,
Empowerment Services, two brokerage services; $248,006, Laurel Hill Center
supported housing services; $1.22 million, Shangri-la, two residential treatment
homes; $372,823, ShelterCare supported housing services

   * Linn: $201,223, Linn County Mental Health, supported housing services

   * Malheur: $1.28 million, Lifeways, supported housing and a residential
treatment facility

   * Marion: $649,285, Pelton Project residential treatment home

   * Morrow: $199,485, ColumbiaCare, addition to existing residential treatment
facility

   * Multnomah: $468,805, Empowerment Initiatives brokerage services; $812,771,
Cascadia supported housing services; $338,071, CODA supported housing services;
$125,927, Luke-Dorf supported housing

   * Polk: $85,000, Polk Community Development Corp. apartment complex;
$795,686, Polk County Mental Health supported housing services and a residential
treatment home

   * Tillamook: $68,000, J. Stewart, supportive apartments

   * Union: $735,802, Center for Human Development, residential treatment home

   * Washington: $459,530, Washington County Mental Health supportive housing
services; $295,333, Cascadia Behavioral Healthcare supported housing services.

   * Wheeler: $1.06 million, Morrow/Wheeler Behavioral Health residential
treatment facility

   All award amounts are conditional, subject to further negotiation.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2008


                              386 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY/HEALTH TODAY; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 798 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy effort tricks AIDS virus into self-destructing

BYLINE: MARIE MCCULLOUGH, McCLATCHY-TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   For the first time, researchers have slowed and possibly stopped the AIDS
virus from reproducing in patients by using a gene therapy that tricks it into
self- destructing.

   The results, announced last Wednesday, are heartening not just for people
infected with HIV but also for the field of gene therapy, which remains highly
experimental more than 20 years after scientists figured out how to use viruses
to insert therapeutic genes into a cell's genome.

   Mostly, the results are a big step forward for the biotech start-up that is
developing the novel therapy and for its collaborators at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   "The buzzword in the field is viral `fitness,' meaning how well the virus can
replicate," said Gary McGarrity, executive vice president for scientific affairs
at Virxsys Corp., in Gaithersburg, Md.

   "In eight of the nine patient samples we studied, we see diminished HIV
fitness up to two years after treatment."

   That raises the hope that even if medical science cannot come up with the
Holy Grail of AIDS research - a vaccine to prevent HIV infection - patients may
be able to keep HIV under control, perhaps without relying on the toxic drug
cocktails that commuted what was once a death sentence.

   "I think the Virxsys report is very important," said John Rossi, a molecular
biologist at the City of Hope in California, who is also working on a gene
therapy treatment for HIV.

   "A lot of HIV patients are over 60 now and they're suffering the consequences
of these toxic drugs. This shows there are alternatives."

   The field of gene therapy has suffered years of missteps and controversy -
notably the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger in an unrelated gene
therapy experiment at Penn.

   "I think the field is really starting to accelerate," said physician Carl
June, who leads the Penn team that is collaborating with Virxsys. "There was so
much frustration for years. But now there are new breakthroughs."

   The latest gene therapy, called VRX496, is still in early human testing
intended to demonstrate safety and determine the best dosages.

   Of the 54 patients who have been treated so far in the ongoing clinical
trial, none have experienced serious side effects, and many have seen clinical
signs of effectiveness - their HIV viral loads have fallen and their supply of
infection-fighting T cells has grown.

   A Penn patient, one of the first and sickest to be treated, remains well more
than four years later - even though conventional cocktails of anti-retroviral
drugs had stopped working for him.

   The lastest report, presented by Virxsys at a conference in Boston, looked
deep into the molecular level of blood samples from nine randomly chosen
patients to see whether the therapy was actually hitting its target.

   VRX496 capitalizes on the fact that viruses are impotent on their own, but
powerful inside a cell. That is the only place they can replicate, by hijacking
the host's molecular machinery. HIV seizes control by splicing its own genes
into the DNA of infection-fighting T cells, the backbone of the immune system.

   The genetic wizardry involved in outwitting HIV is complex. First, the
researchers remove T cells from an HIV patient and insert into those cells a
gene that stops the AIDS virus from reproducing. Then, using Penn's patented
technology, the T cells are multiplied a hundredfold and put back into the
patient.

   The vehicle, or "vector," that is used to insert this protective gene into
the T cells is novel in itself: a disarmed version of HIV.

   The gene carries instructions that eliminate the HIV virus' ability to wrap
its DNA in an armored shell. So when HIV invades the T cell, it steals this new
armor-making gene, escapes from the cell - and then finds itself unable to make
the shield it needs to break into more cells.

   The latest study also found that the inserted gene is a double-whammy for
HIV.

   The virus tries to simply delete the gene - its favorite mutating tactic for
becoming resistant to current drugs - but that, too, reduces its reproductive
"fitness." (It gets "wimpy," to use June's word.)

   The researchers found that blood samples from the nine cases presented were
in fact loaded with the virus, most of it having mutated into harmless forms.

   "For HIV to mutate around our treatment, it has to commit suicide," said
McGarrity, the Vrxsys executive.

   If this gene therapy becomes an approved treatment, still years away, the
estimated cost for the one-time series of infusions would be $130,000, said Riku
Rautsola, Virxsys' chief executive officer.

   While that's a hefty sum, the lifetime cost for conventional HIV-fighting
drugs is about $700,000.

   "We hope (VRX496) will become a frontline therapy once we have proven the
impact is durable," Rautsola said. "This would clearly be better in terms of
quality of life for the patients."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                              387 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2008 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            February 8, 2008 Friday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: GLENDALE REPUBLIC WEST; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: Garage sale to help family's medical bills

BYLINE: Christopher Ramirez, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Though Colton Ainslie's first birthday is only days away, his parents aren't
focused on buying him presents. Instead, they hope to provide him the greatest
gift of all: a healthy long life.

   Colton suffers from SCID, or severe combined immunodeficiency, a rare immune
disorder in which the body does not produce the special blood cells that resist
infection. The condition can prove fatal because it typically leads to severe
infections within the first six months of life.

   A garage sale to help cover the family's mounting health bills and travel
expenses is planned today and Saturday at Colton's grandmother's home in
Glendale.

   Born about 12 weeks premature on Feb.11, 2007, by August, Colton had
developed a severe cough, said his father, Mike. The cough resulted in multiple
visits to Phoenix Children's Hospital in November. But doctors could not
pinpoint why Colton's oxygen level was dipping and why he kept losing weight.

   He then was transported to Childrens Hospital Los Angeles at the beginning of
this year. There he was diagnosed with SCID. The genetic disorder had gone
undetected because Colton did not show symptoms for several months and newborns
are not routinely tested for it, his father said.

   The condition affects one in every 100,000 children, said Dr. Donald Kohn,
who heads the Division of Research Immunology and Bone Marrow Transplant at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   Colton now lays in a fully sterilized hospital room in Los Angeles to avoid
being exposed to bacteria. But he's not alone.

   His mother, Jessica, visits frequently, and Mike comes as often as work
allows.

   "It is very depressing to be in that room," said Colton's dad. "We have the
rubber gloves on and the rubber mask like you are going into surgery. We haven't
been able to touch him skin to skin."

   Plans are in motion, however, that will allow Colton to leave the hospital
for his Glendale bedroom. But he must first regain his strength and undergo a
procedure that is still in the developmental stages.

   Colton was taken off oxygen Monday and is finally breathing on his own,
Jessica said. He has been receiving injections for several weeks now to help
boost his immune system, she added.

   Still, while the Ainslies have health insurance that covers the bulk of
Colton's hospital costs and treatments, out-of-pocket expenses are considerable.
They incurred about $10,000 in health-related expenses last year.

   They could choose to have Colton continue with the twice-weekly injections
for the rest of his life. But that isn't an option because the shots are too
expensive, they said.

   Instead, they've opted for Colton to receive gene therapy, a procedure that
has been conducted before but is new enough to be considered in the research
stage.

   Three children at CHLA underwent the procedure in the past year, Kohn said.

   The therapy is working for them, but "three is still a small number," he
added.

   Once Colton is strong enough, doctors will remove a sample of Colton's bone
marrow and fortify it by introducing the gene needed by him to fight off
infections. It will then be reintroduced to boost Colton's immune system.

   "In a sense we're making him his own donor," Kohn said.

   Health care like that doesn't come cheap, though, so the Ainslies hope a
series of garage sales will help cover some of Colton's medical expenses and the
frequent flights to and from California.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2008


                              388 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2008 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           February 7, 2008 Thursday
                                 CITY-D Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Inq Health Daily; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: Study says genetic trick slows AIDS virus growth;
A Penn-linked test therapy is seen as holding great promise.

BYLINE: By Marie McCullough; Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:



   For the first time, researchers have slowed and possibly stopped the AIDS
virus from reproducing in patients by using a gene therapy that tricks it into
self-destructing.

   The results, announced yesterday, are heartening not just for people infected
with HIV but also for the field of gene therapy, which remains highly
experimental more than 20 years after scientists figured out how to use viruses
to insert therapeutic genes into a cell's genome.

   Mostly, the results are a big step forward for the biotech start-up that is
developing the novel therapy and for its collaborators at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   "The buzzword in the field is viral 'fitness,' meaning how well the virus can
replicate," said Gary McGarrity, executive vice president for scientific affairs
at Virxsys Corp., in Gaithersburg, Md. "In eight of the nine patient samples we
studied, we see diminished HIV fitness up to two years after treatment."

   That raises the hope that even if medical science cannot come up with the
Holy Grail of AIDS research - a vaccine to prevent HIV infection - patients may
be able to keep HIV under control, perhaps without relying on the toxic drug
cocktails that commuted what once was a death sentence.

   "I think the Virxsys report is very important," said John Rossi, a molecular
biologist at the City of Hope in California, who also is working on a
gene-therapy treatment for HIV.

   "A lot of HIV patients are over 60 now and they're suffering the consequences
of these toxic drugs. This shows there are alternatives."

   The field of gene therapy has suffered years of missteps and controversy -
notably the 1999 death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger in an unrelated
gene-therapy experiment at Penn.

   "I think the field is really starting to accelerate," said physician Carl
June, who leads the Penn team that is collaborating with Virxsys. "There was so
much frustration for years. But now there are new breakthroughs."

   The latest gene therapy, called VRX496, is still in early human testing
intended to demonstrate safety and determine the best dosages.

   Of the 54 patients who have been treated so far in the ongoing clinical
trial, none have experienced serious side effects and many have seen clinical
signs of effectiveness - their HIV viral loads have fallen and their supply of
infection-fighting T cells has grown.

   A Penn patient, one of the first and sickest to be treated, remains well more
than four years later - even though conventional cocktails of anti-retroviral
drugs had stopped working for him.

   Yesterday's report, presented by Virxsys at a conference in Boston, looked
deep into the molecular level of blood samples from nine randomly chosen
patients to see whether the therapy was actually hitting its target.

   VRX496 capitalizes on the fact that viruses are impotent on their own but
powerful inside a cell. That is the only place they can replicate, by hijacking
the host's molecular machinery. HIV seizes control by splicing its own genes
into the DNA of infection-fighting T cells, the backbone of the immune system.

   The genetic wizardry involved in outwitting HIV is complex. First, the
researchers remove T cells from an HIV patient and insert into those cells a
gene that stops the AIDS virus from reproducing. Then, using Penn's patented
technology, the T cells are multiplied a hundredfold and put back into the
patient.

   The vehicle, or "vector," that is used to insert this protective gene into
the T cells is novel in itself: a disarmed version of HIV.

   The gene carries instructions that eliminate the AIDS virus' ability to wrap
its DNA in an armored shell. So when HIV invades the T cell, it steals this new
armor-making gene, escapes from the cell - and then finds itself unable to make
the shield it needs to break into more cells.

   The latest study also found that the inserted gene is a double-whammy for
HIV. The virus tries to simply delete the gene - its favorite mutating tactic
for becoming resistant to current drugs - but that, too, reduces its
reproductive "fitness." (It gets "wimpy," to use June's word.)

   The researchers found that blood samples from the nine cases presented
yesterday were in fact loaded with the virus, most of it having mutated into
harmless forms.

   "For HIV to mutate around our treatment, it has to commit suicide," said
McGarrity, the Virxsys executive.

   If this gene therapy becomes an approved treatment, still years away, the
estimated cost for the one-time series of infusions would be $130,000, said Riku
Rautsola, Virxsys' chief executive officer. While that's a hefty sum, the
lifetime cost for conventional HIV-fighting drugs is about $700,000.

   "We hope [VRX496] will become a frontline therapy once we have proven the
impact is durable," Rautsola said. "This would clearly be better in terms of
quality of life for the patients."

   Contact staff writer Marie McCullough at 215-854-2720 or
mccullough@phillynews.com.


LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2008


                              389 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section ST; Column 0; Society Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 277 words

HEADLINE: Robin Rosenthal, Richard Rothfeld

BODY:

   Robin Marci Rosenthal,  the daughter of Sandra Rosenthal and the stepdaughter
of Charles Rosenthal of Woodbury, N.Y., was married in the Bahamas on Saturday
to Richard Z. Rothfeld, the son of Harriet Rothfeld and Eric A. Rothfeld of New
York. Melvin Grant, a justice of the peace and marriage officer for the Bahamas,
officiated at the One & Only Ocean Club  on Paradise Island, at a ceremony led
by Rabbi Yaakov Nerenberg.

     Mrs. Rothfeld, 29, is the visual merchandising manager in New York for
American subsidiary of Chopard, the Swiss watch and jewelry firm; she works on
store design, merchandise displays and promotional events. She graduated from
the Fashion Institute of Technology.

     Her stepfather owns   Great Neck Plumbing and  Heating in Great Neck, N.Y.
Her mother is the office manager for the medical staff at Plainview Hospital in
Plainview, N.Y., part of the North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System.

     Mr. Rothfeld, 28, works in New York with his father, managing the family's
investments. Until June the bridegroom was an associate at the New York law firm
Proskauer Rose. He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received a
law degree from New York University.

     His father retired  as the president and  chief executive of Sun Apparel of
El Paso, Tex., the licensee of  Polo jeans and other brands that became part of
the Jones Apparel Group in New York.  He is on the boards of Syracuse
University; Prep for Prep, an organization that sends outstanding public school
students to private day schools in New York City and boarding schools throughout
the Northeast;  and the Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy in Stamford, Conn.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2008


                              390 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           February 2, 2008 Saturday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 2477 words

HEADLINE: FOCUS ON HEROISM OF THESE AIRMEN

BODY:

   This article was about the Tuskegee Airmen, also known as the Red Tail
Squadron, who flew bomber escorts over Europe in World War II, and whether or
not they lost one or more American bombers to the German Luftwaffe fighter
pilots.

   This question is, in my opinion, not really that important .

   What is important is the fact that their overall flying and air combat record
was quite impressive by any standards, then or now.

   Let's face it, fellow Americans, the bottom line should be what they did
accomplish, despite the adversity they faced and overcame. It is the stuff that
heros and legends are made of.

   Joseph P. Corell, Clearwater

   Facts can be elusive

   Someone wrote, "The maddest thing of all is to see the world as it is and not
as it should be." History is built upon facts, and to presume to know them all
65 years after the event is folly.

   Thank God for the heroism of the Tuskegee Airmen who saved the lives of many
others fighting for freedom. God Bless America and all of its veterans and their
families.

   Douglas R. Kinsman, St. Pete Beach

   Questionable claims

   I have the utmost respect for those who fought in World War II. My oldest
living brother had 23 missions over Germany as a radio operator in a B-17.

   He was a member of the 511th Squadron, 351st Bombardment Group. He was shot
down but survived the war.

   He has always said that the Tuskegee Airmen's claims where false.

   Another article published last year by Daniel Haulman, a historian at the Air
Force Historical Research Agency, also said the claims of no bombers lost was
false. In fact he even published the dates the bombers were lost: June 9, July
12, July 18 and March 24, 1945. There were at least 25 total losses.

   I will be sending your article to my brother.

   Terry E. Hobt, Tarpon Springs

   We need a new attitude toward health care

   Several of the candidates running today have plans to reform the health care
system. But so many of their plans still involve private health insurance. I
used to think that there was nothing wrong with that. Then I saw Michael Moore's
film Sicko and my attitude changed completely.

   I propose something that will cause great changes for the better in our
health care system and won't cost cent: a change of attitude.

   If the decisionmakers in insurance and pharmaceutical companies and
Washington cared about human life a just tiny bit more than money, we would have
a vastly different medical system and nation. But they have shown again and
again that they do not.

   For-profit health care is simply that: profiting off the suffering of human
beings. Is it any wonder that it has resulted in injustice, corruption and is
falling apart? I don't know the statistics on preventable deaths from insurance
companies' denial of treatment. There were two people in Moore's film, and that
is two people too many. As long as corporations can make huge profits from
illness, nothing will change. The cause of death will still be greed.

   Why is the United States the only industrialized Western nation without
government health care? I understand that the systems in other countries are not
perfect, but the concept behind them is not only morally admirable but also
sensible. The attitude is that health care is a human right, not a luxury
product.

   Think about it. You might change your attitude, just that tiny bit.

   Paula Tabor, Zephyrhills

   Letters on health care - Jan. 24

   A call for compassion

   It was great last week to see two Florida letter writers who have
constructive criticism regarding our inadequate hodgepodge of health care. We
have friends in Canada, England and Australia. Each has a member of their family
who would have been financially and emotionally devastated had they been in
America.

   Instead, their family members have been taken care of with excellent medical
care. Please tell me why we, as the wealthiest country in the world, with
insurance and drug companies making billions for themselves, their CEOs and
stockholders, can't develop a plan to care for our citizens. Our lawmakers need
to hear from us continually until they unwrap their consciences to see what
compassion is. We can and should have equal medical care for all here. What in
God's name is the problem?

   Lilyan V. Dayton, New Port Richey

   The public pays - Jan. 24, letter

   Not in the marketplace

   The letter writer nailed it! The taxpayer is funding health care anyway,
therefore the country's health care should not be a "marketplace" system such as
Republican Mitt Romney suggests.

   "Marketplace" means HMOs paying millions per year to stockholders and CEOs
and more millions for stock options. What if education, the fire and police
departments, the court system, road repair, all city and county services, etc.,
were "marketplace"? They are all socialism. Let's face that dirty word, meaning
paid for by the taxpayers. We've had land barons, oil tycoons, movie moguls,
steel and coal magnates. We certainly don't need health care czars.

   Elinor Wencka, Tampa

   Social Security

   Problem needs addressing

   As a soon-to-graduate student at USF and first- time presidential voter, I am
extremely concerned that I've heard little from the candidates about a major
issue that will affect my generation: Social Security.

   There is a huge group of people who are about to start collecting their
Social Security benefits: the baby boomers. The problem is that the number of
baby boomers' babies, who will pay the money to provide the Social Security
benefits, is very small in relation to the number of baby boomers who will be
collecting it. And in the not-too-distant future, the number will be even
smaller. Remember, any time a government gives a benefit to one group, it does
so at the expense of another.

   I work just about full time supporting my college studies, and I've gotten
beyond the shock of seeing how much of my paycheck is left over after the
government takes its share. But I'm really concerned that in the future the
portion of my check going to support retired people as they play golf will be
enormous.

   I urge all people under the age of 40 to start asking the candidates just how
they intend to make sure that the transfer of wealth from the younger generation
to the older one is not going to break us.

   Mike Loschiavo, Tampa

   No scholar flight at USF

   Florida's $2-billion budget deficit is an incredible challenge for our public
colleges and universities. I appeal to the private sector to add desperately
needed increased support to our system with investments in partnerships with our
academic institutions in order to ensure a better future for all.

   As a full-time instructor employed in the USF College of Nursing, I have
personally observed the incredible quality of education that is provided. I must
also note that we have absolutely amazing senior faculty members who are
scholars, researchers and teaching professors. Many of them are invited as
expert consultants to universities across the nation to share their wisdom with
other scholars in their field.

   Although we need all of the support and financial assistance that we can get
with the drastic financial cuts, I personally do not anticipate a "scholar
flight" from USF. I believe that our faculty members are truly dedicated to
serving the public and are a part of the USF community for the long run. They
are loyal and persistent advocates for quality, public higher education.

   Joan Morris, ARNP, instructor, USF College of Nursing, Lutz

   $113M flows out of state - Jan. 19

   Institute is good for Florida

   It's truly unfortunate that the St. Petersburg Times has created confusion
over a tremendous economic development project that will bring great benefits to
the citizens of Florida.

   In January the Oregon Health & Science University's Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute announced its intention to create VGTI Florida, a nonprofit biotech
research institute that will be located in the Florida Center for Innovation at
Tradition, a new research park under development in Port St. Lucie. The
institute plans to create at least 200 high-value jobs, and to work in
collaboration with other biotech organizations and state universities to explore
new approaches in vaccine development.

   The funding for this project comes partly from the Florida Innovation
Incentive Fund, created by the Florida Legislature to provide incentive funding
that will help grow Florida's burgeoning life sciences sector. Unfortunately,
because VGTI was established by an Oregon university, some would have you
believe that this funding is enriching residents of other states at the expense
of our own citizens. Nothing could be further from the truth.

   None of the dollars for this project will "flow out of state," as the Times'
headline breathlessly reports. Instead, the money will be invested in a new
Florida nonprofit - a corporation that will create jobs in Florida and drive
increasing scientific investment in Florida. The Oregon Health & Science
University, in fact, has voluntarily prohibited any sharing of local funding
with VGTI Florida.

   Perhaps what is most concerning is the suggestion that this project somehow
comes at the expense of Florida's universities. The Innovation Fund was created
to augment current research efforts and to create greater opportunities within
the Florida university system, specifically by recruiting world-class life
sciences institutes to work in partnership with our universities.

   The goal is collaboration and, in fact, VGTI Florida's business plan relies
heavily upon successful integration of its research with the Florida university
system. Any new companies spun off into the private sector by VGTI Florida will
be domiciled and funded here in Florida. That was a policy created by the
Legislature when it created the Innovation Fund, and it assures newly created
jobs and prosperity to benefit Floridians.

   Gov. Charlie Crist, Senate President Ken Pruitt, House Speaker Marco Rubio
and the entire Florida Legislature should be commended for their efforts to
welcome VGTI Florida to Port St. Lucie.

   Larry Pelton, president, Economic Development Council of St. Lucie County,
Port St. Lucie

   Fla. colleges may shrink - Jan. 24, story

   Cut scholarship booty

   Florida's state government and the entire university system should have seen
this hurricane coming. It's been brewing for years. For the last 20 years,
Florida's Prepaid College Plan has allowed parents to pay a relatively modest
fee to cover their children's future tuition and housing. Too bad the program
forgot to factor in the massive inflation rate tied to today's college
education. As all of these children have reached college age, the state has made
a payout to the universities. Unfortunately, what parents have paid in and what
the state is willing to pay are way out of alignment with the real costs of a
college education.

   Compound this scenario with the Bright Futures Scholarship, which rewards
every student who achieves a 970 on the SAT and a 3.0 weighted average in the
classroom with 75 percent tuition paid, and you can easily see why Florida's
universities are in dire straits.

   I've had one parent tell me that between the Bright Futures scholarship and
the Florida Prepaid plan, her child actually made money attending college.

   There is no question that parents should be able to defray some of the costs
of a college education through a plan like Florida Prepaid. But to assure that
the full cost of their child's college education will be covered 10 or 15 years
after they buy into the program is just plain ludicrous.

   It would be a lot easier for Florida to limit the Bright Futures Scholarships
to students who have really excelled in the classroom. To limit awards to the
current high-end Bright Futures Scholarship would be a step in the right
direction. This scholarship awards students 100 percent tuition if they have
achieved a 1270 SAT and a 3.5 weighted average. Even then, students should be
awarded tuition reimbursements based on need. There are countless parents in
this state who could well afford to pay Florida's meager tuition but are let off
the hook with the current system.

   State Sen. Jim King says the only "responsible thing to do is to cut
enrollment." Not true, senator. That option only hurts the students. What our
state government should be doing is making it a lot more difficult to take home
the scholarship booty. By making it easy for mediocre students to qualify for a
paid education and making it even easier for their parents to avoid paying a
dime, the state has severely diminished the quality of education at our public
universities.

   Yes, it's time to raise tuition, but it's also time to take a red pen to the
Florida Prepaid and Bright Futures programs. Both could use a major overhaul.

   Caryn Russ, Tampa

   Brutal dictator aided Indonesia growth Jan. 28, story

   Atrocity ignored

   Why would you print a lengthy obituary of Suharto and make no mention of his
Ford/Kissinger-approved invasion of Christian East Timor in 1975, which resulted
in the 25-year Indonesian occupation of that small country, during which 300,000
East Timorese - one third of the population - died either at the hands of the
murderous Indonesian army or from malnutrition and disease brought on by their
savage rule?

   There was no mention, either, of the fact that when the East Timorese voted
for independence from Indonesia in a U.N.-sponsored referendum in 1999, the
Indonesian army went on a rampage and killed another 30,000 civilians, including
Catholic priests and nuns trying to protect parishioners who had sought refuge
in their churches.

   No self-respecting news outlet would ignore such an atrocity.

   R.G. Wheeler, St. Petersburg

   Chow time (frenzy of hungry pelicans) Jan. 30, photo

   Worth framing

   What a great picture by Willie J. Allen Jr. Even on the black and white
newsprint, it looks worthy of a frame. I hope this picture makes it into the
archives.

   James Stephenson, Indian Shores

   Mud pies and dirt cookies

   A contrast in cuisine

   While Americans will be indulging ourselves with food and drink during the
Super Bowl, people in other parts of the world will be eating dirt. Literally.

   Two items appeared in the St. Petersburg Times on Wednesday. One included two
recipes for mud pie. The other was a story about dirt cookies.

   Ingredients for the two mud pie recipes include butter, flour, sugar,
semisweet chocolate, sweetened condensed milk, chocolate crumb pie crust,
chopped pecans, cold milk, instant chocolate pudding mix, and whipped topping.

   Dirt cookies are made of dirt, salt and shortening.

   Survival on dirt cookies was the headline over the story on page 7A. The
subhead was "Rising costs take food out of mouths in Haiti, where most people
live on less than $2 a day."

   The two recipes for mud pie were in the Taste section, along with stories
about how to customize frozen pizza with your favorite toppings, a color photo
and feature on absinthe, and recipes for black bean tortilla bake and creamy
wild mushroom bisque.

   Paul Cooper, St. Petersburg

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Courtesy of Homan & Reilly Designs: These pilots at Tuskegee
(Ala.) Army Air Field were photographed before leaving for Europe during World
War II. The Tuskegee Airmen, known as Red Tails for their planes' markings, flew
more than 300 missions. About 130 survive today. PHOTO, Associated Press: A
Haitian woman prepares cookies made of dirt, water, salt and shortening. In the
country's poorest quarters, where thousands buckle under rising food prices and
rampant unemployment, mud has become a staple.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2008


                              391 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2008 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                            January 27, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: COMMENTARY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1060 words

HEADLINE: Florida Bets House On Oregon While Short-Changing Its Own

BODY:

   Florida universities are considering layoffs, tightening admissions and
raising tuition because of the state's budget crisis. Meanwhile, state leaders
are giddy about their $118 million incentive package that lured an outpost lab
from the Oregon Health & Science University to Port St. Lucie.

   Does anyone see something wrong with this picture?

   It's unconscionable that at the same time Florida's universities are facing
the worst fiscal crisis in a generation that taxpayers' dollars would go to
another state's public university.

   The prestigious journal "Nature" declared the arrangement an "unprecedented
move" and noted it is believed to be the first time a state has financed a
research facility for another state's university.

   Certainly, that's not a distinction for which state leaders should be proud.

   But as it turns out, this unprecedented deal is far more complex and muddy
than what it might seem. And the clumsy nature in which key information is being
disclosed to the public that's footing the bill speaks volumes about the
willy-nilly nature of Florida's biotech investment.

   Thursday a St. Lucie County economic development official revealed to us that
there are secret negotiations going on between Oregon officials and at least two
Florida universities to bring them in as partners in the venture. But this
disclosure came only after news that Florida would be pumping money into another
state's venture was greeted with outrage.

   The Florida Board of Governors wasn't told about these talks, nor was it
briefed during more than six months of negotiations between Florida officials
and Oregon that there might be a role for Florida universities. Such briefings
have been routine in other Florida deals with private biotech companies.

   That's no way to handle a major scientific investment in Florida, and
certainly no way to assure the public that their dollars are being spent wisely.

   If anything, it shows that creating a nexus between Florida's university
research efforts and these public giveaways has become an afterthought. And that
does not bode well for Florida's interests.

   It is perhaps most troubling that the Oregon Health & Science University's
Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute was recruited to Port St. Lucie because of
its research relationship with Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies,
which has already set up shop there, thanks to $80 million in state and local
incentives.

   The money for the incentive package comes not from education funding, but
from tax dollars set aside for economic development. About $60 million comes
from state coffers, the remainder from local government in Port St. Lucie in the
form of $53 million in infrastructure and additional tax and impact fee rebates.

   Economic development officials predict the creation of OHSU's VGTI-Florida
will generate 1,466 jobs over 20 years. The facility and spinoff ventures will
produce $4.2 billion in economic activity in Florida. The laboratory plans on
studying immunity issues that come with aging, with Florida providing a vast
supply of retirees to study.

   No one is going to quibble that's not worthy research, and if the economic
predictions hold true, it's not a bad return on investment.

   But it will be Oregon officials who create this company, hire the scientists
and chart the direction for this new venture. It will be for years to come, an
Oregon outpost financed by Florida.

   By law, Florida universities can't tap into that incentive fund and instead
have a separate source of funding for scientific ventures called the Centers for
Excellence program. But a Florida university could have done exactly what Oregon
did - spin off a private, non-profit company that would be awarded the funds -
had it been given the opportunity.

   Larry Pelton, president of the Economic Development Council of St. Lucie
County and a key negotiator in this and Florida's other biotech incentive
awards, says no money from Florida will revert to Oregon and any spinoff
companies that emerge out of the laboratory will stay in Florida.

   But Oregon still stands to benefit.

   It will earn yet-to-be determined royalties from any discoveries made by a
new lab. Pelton says any royalties or licensing income that goes back to Oregon
will be negotiated on a case-by-case basis when new discoveries go to market.

   But consider the stakes: The state's most famous university-led discovery,
Gatorade, alone brings in $9 million a year and helped put the University of
Florida on the map. The glaucoma drug Trusopt, also discovered at UF, brought in
another $20 million annually.

   The biggest royalty pay day was at Florida State University, where the
cancer-fighting drug Taxol was developed. FSU earned more than $210 million in
royalties from Taxol.

   People in Oregon weren't thrilled with the idea of their public institution
establishing a satellite lab across the country, but they were placated by the
caveat that they will benefit from the royalties.

   As it stands now, the benefit for Florida in this economic deal is one that
continues to cast the state in a subservient economic role. For now, the boost
for Florida is in the construction and service industries - the exact same model
that has us in such deep financial trouble.

   The Oregon deal reveals how too many leaders - and that includes Gov. Charlie
Crist, Senate President Ken Pruitt (whose home district is Port St. Lucie) and
Port St. Lucie officials - appear to view Florida as a desperate biotech
wannabe. They are eager to attract innovative ventures from elsewhere but not
willing to commit the investment necessary to nurture home-grown operations.

   Taxpayers should be outraged that state leaders are looking to the Pacific
Northwest for innovation, when we should be able to do the same work ourselves.
And they should be furious that when tens of millions of tax dollars are in
play, key institutions are left out of the loop and the public is kept in the
dark.

   Perhaps the deal will eventually prove a good investment for Florida. But as
things stand, it comes off as a $118 million vote of no confidence in Florida.

   Photo credit: Photo submitted by Oregon Health & Science University

   Photo: Oregon Health & Science University, shown above, is creating a
non-profit Florida venture seeded by state and local tax money.

   Copyright © 2008, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: OUR OPINION

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2008


                              392 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2008 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                           January 24, 2008 Thursday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 Metfront

LENGTH: 585 words

HEADLINE: On the front lines in battle against diabetes, Baylor gets federal
boost;
Designation will bring more funds for research

BYLINE: TODD ACKERMAN, Staff

BODY:

   Baylor College of Medicine has received federal designation as the
Southwest's first diabetes center, a step toward ramping up its efforts to find
a cure for the fifth deadliest disease among of Americans.

   The designation by the National Institutes of Health, announced on Wednesday,
joins Baylor with a network of 16 other centers that receive special funding,
collaborate on research and act as national resources on diabetes.

   "This designation will be a catalyst," said Dr. Lawrence Chan, Baylor's
chairman of diabetes research who will serve as director of the center. "It'll
grow the program, especially clinical research and diabetes-related genomic
medicine; establish new relations with people not previously doing diabetes
research; and attract more research dollars."

   Baylor has 57 researchers in 10 departments working on diabetes and gets
roughly $55 million a year from the National Institutes of Health for research
into the disease. It will receive $5 million more over five years through the
new designation.

   Diabetes occurs when the body doesn't make or properly use insulin, a hormone
that regulates blood sugar and helps convert food into energy.

   The problem is acute in Texas, one of 11 states that rank the highest in
diabetes cases. At least 8 percent of adults in those states are diagnosed with
the disease, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. About
1.4 million Texans 18 and older have been diagnosed, and about 400,000 adults
are believed to have undiagnosed diabetes. Diabetes afflicts 10.3 percent of
blacks in Texas, 8 percent of Hispanics and 7.8 percent of whites.

   The National Institutes of Health-designated diabetes centers nearest to
Baylor are at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, University of California,
Los Angeles/UC-San Diego, the University of Colorado at Boulder and Washington
University in St. Louis. Most of the rest are in the Northeast.

   Baylor announced Wednesday that it will dedicate more than 20,000 square feet
of space in its new Margaret M. Alkek Building for Biomedical Research for
diabetes research. It also is recruiting a diabetes researcher for a position
funded by the $100 million gift recently given by Houston Texans owner Bob
McNair.

   Baylor's best-known research into diabetes was perhaps the news five years
ago that researchers had developed a gene therapy that prompted cells in the
liver of diabetic mice to produce insulin.

   Chan said Baylor scientists hope the research will progress to a cure.

   The centers are part of an integrated program of diabetes and related
endocrinology and metabolism research overseen by the NIH's National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Of its 17 centers, 10 are
biomedical research-focused centers - Baylor among them - and seven are training
centers that also have clinical research.

   Baylor also has federally designated centers focusing on AIDS, cancer, the
human genome and digestive diseases, among others.

   ...

   DIABETES FACTS

   - Diabetes occurs when the body fails to produce or properly use insulin, a
hormone that's needed to convert sugar, starches and other food into energy.

   - Type 1 diabetes results from the body's failure to produce insulin. People
must inject themselves with insulin daily. An estimated 5 percent to 10 percent
of Americans diagnosed with diabetes have Type 1.

   - Type 2 diabetes results from insulin resistance, combined with relative
insulin deficiency. Most Americans diagnosed with diabetes have Type 2.

   Source: American Diabetes Association

NOTES: todd.ackerman@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2008


                              393 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2008 The Washington Post
                              All Rights Reserved

                              The Washington Post

                            January 22, 2008 Tuesday
                                 Every Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. HE01

DISTRIBUTION: District-Maryland

LENGTH: 716 words

HEADLINE: One Size Does Not Fit All

BYLINE: Sally Squires

BODY:

   The 36-year-old South Asian immigrant didn't seem like a typical candidate
for a heart attack. He was lean, a nonsmoker and had healthy blood pressure,
although his cholesterol levels hovered just above normal. But when his chest
pain lasted for an hour, he headed for the emergency room.

   Good thing. Not only was he having a major heart attack, which doctors
treated with clot-busting drugs, but he also had three badly blocked arteries
that required bypass surgery and was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes.

   So how does a young guy seemingly in good health suddenly become such a
medical train wreck?

   Add ethnicity to the list of risk factors for heart disease, Type 2 diabetes
and the metabolic syndrome, which is a cluster of problems including high blood
pressure, elevated blood sugar and too many blood fats. This case was reported
in 2006 in the journal Circulation by an international team of doctors who hoped
to alert colleagues to watch for similar patients who  might be slipping under
the medical radar.

   An estimated 3 million transplanted South Asians live in the United States
and Canada. Studies suggest that this diverse group -- with family roots in
India, Pakistan, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh -- is three to five times more
likely to have a heart attack or to die from heart disease than the overall U.S.
population. This is true even though many of them are at a healthy weight, by
Western standards.

   Research hints at other ethnic differences. African Americans seem to be at
much greater risk of high blood pressure compared with other groups. Pima
Indians and other indigenous peoples have soaring rates of Type 2 diabetes, a
condition that is also two to five times more common in Hispanics than in
non-Hispanic whites here.

   The explanation appears to be the way fat accumulates. At the same weight,
people of some minority groups, including South Asians, pile on more fat around
the middle. Those differences are prompting some international health groups to
adjust their screening tools by race.

   Take the well-known body mass index, or BMI. It uses height and weight to
gauge risk of weight-related complications. (BMI is calculated by dividing a
person's weight in kilograms by height in meters squared.

   The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute sets a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 as
healthy; 25 to 29.9 as overweight and 30 and higher as obese.

   But studies suggest that these cutoffs  may give a false sense of security to
people of Asian ancestry and cause unnecessary concern to those with African
roots.

   So the World Health Organization has lowered the BMI cutoff for obesity for
Asians from 30 to 25.

   The International Diabetes Federation (IDF) has also set varying cutoffs for
waist circumference. In Americans, the IDF says, waistlines of 40 inches or
larger are cause for concern in men, 35 inches or larger in women. For residents
of Europe and the Middle East, the IDF set cutoffs of 37 inches for men, 32 for
women. Men from China, Central America and South America are advised by the IDF
to keep their waists at less than 35 inches; for women in these areas, the limit
is 32 inches.

   "I definitely pay attention to the race of my patients," notes Dipanjan
Banerjee, a cardiovascular fellow at Stanford University and co-author of a
recent report in the International Journal of Obesity on using ethnic-specific
criteria to improve the diagnosis of the metabolic syndrome. "If I see a South
Asian man who is young with chest pain, I know that the probability of his
having heart disease is higher than a Caucasian man the same age. So I do tend
to be more aggressive with those patients."

   But Banerjee also notes that taking into account the ethnicity of patients
gets into some thorny questions.

   Race is generally self-reported and may reflect a person's identity more than
his genetic makeup. "How do you determine who is actually African or Indian?" he
asks. "What we are trying to capture with these crude racial classifications is
a greater understanding of risk factors."

   He envisions a day when doctors will instead sample genetic profiles that
will be far more accurate than skin color or country of origin in assessing
risk. "We are moving towards genetic therapy for cardiovascular disease and
other medical conditions," he says. "That is what we are all trying to do."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2008


                              394 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            January 20, 2008 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: Report says UMDNJ put federal funding at risk
Monitor finds careless research oversight

BYLINE: JOSH MARGOLIN AND TED SHERMAN, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Hundreds of millions of dollars in federal grants could be at risk because of
lax research oversight at the state's medical university, according to a
previously undisclosed portion of the federal monitor's report.

   The new material, whose conclusions University of Medicine and Dentistry of
New Jersey officials vigorously disputed, found the school had "no research
compliance capability" - jeopardizing future funding, as well as the health of
patients in clinical studies.

   At issue is the university's problem-plagued Office of Ethics and Compliance,
and UMDNJ's ability to audit research spending and report violations of clinical
studies' guidelines to the federal government. The confidential portion of the
report found the ethics office, whose director recently resigned and which
missing other key personnel, had failed in performing critical oversight of
federal research grants.

   "UMDNJ admittedly has no research compliance capability at all and none is
anticipated," the monitor stated in the report.

   University officials vehemently challenged the assertions.

   "We have a significant amount of research compliance. We have over 20 years
of history of research compliance at this university," said Denise V. Rodgers,
executive vice president of academic and clinical affairs. "Do you think people
. . . would risk their reputation coming to an institution if there was no
research compliance? Not a chance."

   The monitor, Herbert J. Stern, would not comment on the new findings,
contained in a heavily redacted report issued Jan. 3. The sections released to
the public two weeks ago noted only serious shortcomings within the compliance
office - a department set up a year ago to help reform a long-troubled state
institution beset by fraud and blatant political interference.

   The full report - a copy of which was reviewed by The Star-Ledger - went to
the U.S. Attorney's office and the university.

   The new disclosures marked the latest in a long series of allegations of
wrongdoing at the publicly funded institution, which have included the hiring of
a powerful legislator to help boost his pension in exchange for millions in
state funding; kickbacks to cardiologists in return for patient referrals to a
cardiac surgery program with a high mortality rate; and more than $400 million
in waste, fraud and abuse.

   U.S. Attorney Christopher Christie, who was briefed on the compliance
findings, called it a "serious matter" that seemed to have started long before
UMDNJ came under the scrutiny of his office in 2005.

   "It's always a problem when you don't have sufficient internal controls on
any program. It is even a greater problem for an institution like this," he
said, citing UMDNJ's well-documented troubles with patronage, no-bid contracts
and violations of Medicare and Medicaid laws.

   Rep. Frank Pallone (D-N.J.), who chairs the House subcommittee that oversees
the National Institutes of Health, said that agency would likely decide to take
swift disciplinary action against UMDNJ for any failure in oversight.

   "I don't think that this is acceptable," he said. "The problems (at UMDNJ)
seem to continue and more are arising."

   The monitor, who was appointed two years ago after the university was
indicted for Medicaid fraud, ended his tenure at UMDNJ on Dec. 31. Federal
prosecutors this week moved to dismiss the original charges.

   PUTTING PATIENTS AT RISK

   In the public version of his final report, the monitor found UMDNJ had
significantly improved since the string of scandals that nearly shut down the
$1.6 billion university. However, he singled out UMDNJ's ethics and compliance
office for criticism. The university's chief ethics officer, Michael R. Clarke,
resigned last month after less than 18 months on the job, saying he wanted to
return to the private sector. The university is now searching for a successor.

   Stern's rebuke of the compliance office was far more harsh in the full report
not released to the public. It alerted UMDNJ to failures that investigators only
recently began looking into before the deferred prosecution agreement that led
to the monitorship termination in December.

   All of the monitor's reports released to the public have been edited to omit
details of any ongoing investigations, and the final report cited 42 open
investigative files based on "allegations of legal and ethical breaches or
conflicts of interest."

   The confidential report mentioned only one specific example of UMDNJ's
compliance failures - which the university also disputed. It involved a
researcher conducting studies using the drug Celebrex, which carries an FDA
"black box" warning to indicate a significant risk of serious or even
life-threatening adverse effects.

   The monitor's report said the physician, Todd Stitik, an osteoarthritis
specialist at the UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School in Newark, had placed patients
at risk in a clinical research study and the university failed to file mandatory
reports with the government. The report offered no details.

   University officials said they had filed reports, and suspended Stitik's
research after a routine audit - but insisted the issues were administrative in
nature. Rodgers, the executive vice president of academic and clinical affairs,
said there was no evidence that any patients were ever endangered.

   Stitik did not return calls for comment and Rodgers said Stitik has
voluntarily stopped participating in any research.

   In rebutting the monitor's conclusions, UMDNJ spokeswoman Anna Farneski said
FDA officials have conducted two random audits at UMDNJ in the last five years
and "raised no concerns to us." She declined to release those audit reports.

   Rodgers attributed the monitor's findings to a "misunderstanding" over the
fact that the university has not yet hired a research compliance officer. She
said research at UMDNJ comes under multiple layers of oversight, including an
Institutional Review Board; a Human Subjects Protection office; an office of
research, as well as an institutional compliance officer and other academic
officials.

   "This university has over ($115 million) in grants from NIH," she said. "You
can believe that if they had big concerns that we had no research compliance we
would have not been able to get that money?"

   NIH's efforts to monitor its research grants have been criticized by federal
authorities. On Thursday, the inspector general of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services issued a report that said NIH makes almost no effort to
oversee financial conflicts of university professors working on federally funded
research projects.

   When told of UMDNJ's response to Stern's findings, John Inglesino, an
attorney on the staff of the monitor, declined to discuss details of the
confidential report, but said the findings are accurate.

   "We are very familiar with the structure of UMDNJ after monitoring the
institution for two years," Inglesino said. "We stand behind this report as we
have stood behind all the others."

   Many research institutions nationwide stepped up compliance efforts following
the death eight years ago of an 18-year-old who was a participant in a
gene-therapy experiment led by a University of Pennsylvania researcher who had a
financial stake in the biotechnology company sponsoring the trials.

   Greg Koski, former director of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services' Office of Human Research Protections, said institutions are paying
more attention to conflicts and other compliance issues.

   "Many are doing a much better job. They realize they have to," said Koski,
currently senior scientist for the Institute for Health Policy at Massachusetts
General Hospital. "You cannot simply sweep it under the rug and hope it will go
away."

   Josh Margolin may be reached at jmagolin@starledger.com or (609) 989-0267.
Ted Sherman at tsherman@starledger.com or (973) 392-4278.

   Infobox: "We are very familiar with the structure of UMDNJ after monitoring
the institution for two years. We stand behind this report as we have stood
behind all the others." --JOHN INGLESINO, attorney

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2008


                              395 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2008 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                           January 19, 2008 Saturday
                            0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: LOCAL & STATE; Pg. 1B

DISTRIBUTION: LOCAL & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 782 words

HEADLINE: $113M FLOWS OUT OF STATE

BYLINE: SHANNON COLAVECCHIO-VAN SICKLER, Times Staff Writer

HIGHLIGHT:

   The money will go to a university in Oregon to create a research center in
Florida.

BODY:

   As Florida's public colleges prepare to slash their budgets by the millions
yet again, a research university more than 3,000 miles away is celebrating
$113-million in incentives from the state and from the Florida Senate
president's district.

   Gov. Charlie Crist, after consulting with Senate President Ken Pruitt and
House Speaker Marco Rubio, earlier this month granted $60-million to lure a
research unit from Oregon Health & Science University to the fast-growing
biotechnology research cluster on Florida's east coast.

   The money comes from the Innovation Incentive Fund, created in 2006 under
then-Gov. Jeb Bush to attract companies that work in "innovation and technology
development," said Dale Brill, director of the Office of Tourism, Trade and
Economic Development. The city of Port St. Lucie, meanwhile, has pledged
$53-million in incentives, according to Oregon Health officials.

   The university joins a handful of institutions - Scripps Research Institute,
the Burnham Institute for Medical Research, the Stanford Research Institute, the
Torrey Pines Research Institute - that have been lured to Florida's treasure
coast in recent years with taxpayer dollars.

   Oregon Health's endeavor here will be modeled on its 7-year-old Vaccine &
Gene Therapy Institute in Beaverton, Ore., where more than a dozen researchers
are gaining acclaim for their study of infectious diseases ranging from AIDS to
monkeypox.

   But critics say the $60-million incentive - roughly the amount Florida
lawmakers cut from the 11 state universities' budgets during the special session
this past fall - would better benefit one of Florida's three research
institutions, like the University of Florida or University of South Florida.

   Both have medical schools and are conducting vaccine research, and both are
facing additional cuts of as much as $30-million this budget year.

   Moreover, it's not the first time since Florida's budget crisis began last
year that millions in state money went to a higher education institution outside
the public system.

   The University of Miami, where Rubio, a Republican, got his law degree, got
$80-million in taxpayer dollars for a genomics institute this year. As with
Oregon Health, UM's money came from the Innovation Incentive Fund.

   "We're going through these very critical decisions - painful decisions - in
our public universities, and money is being given to out-of-state institutions,"
said Carolyn Roberts, chairwoman of the Board of Governors that oversees the 11
public institutions. "All research is valuable and important, but we are at a
critical point in our university system.

   "We're to the point not only of faculty and personnel layoffs, we're to the
point that the budget situation could threaten our most sacred agreement, and
that is articulation."

   Brill said Florida's public universities are important to the state's future
economic success, "which is going to depend on innovations." But that doesn't
mean other institutions can't help as well, he said.

   "We see this as adding to our research base," Brill said, citing the
institute's success in Oregon. "The real strength and attractiveness of this
project is the demonstrated return on investment from this group.

   State officials anticipate the Oregon vaccine institute, known in Oregon as
VGTI, will generate 1,466 jobs over 20 years. The facility and spinoff ventures
will produce $4.2-billion in economic activity in Florida, he said.

   "So we spent $60-million to get a $4.2-billion return," Brill said.

   The institute recently received more than $10-million from the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation to accelerate the pace of HIV vaccine development. Institute
researchers also work with Oregon Health's primate research arm, which in 2001
produced the world's first genetically modified nonhuman primate.

   No faculty or staff will move from Oregon. Instead, the institute will
recruit a new group of scientists and staff.

   According to Oregon Health, Florida officials contacted them in September and
asked them to consider opening a facility in Florida.

   Port St. Lucie is where Pruitt, a Republican, lives, but Brill said Oregon
Health chose to locate there because of the proximity to existing biomedical
research entities.

   Pruitt's office did not respond to an interview request.

   But in a video posted on the vaccine institute's Web site, Crist thanks
Pruitt for "your leadership and commitment in bringing VGTI to Florida."

   "You bring important expertise to Florida's biotech cluster," Crist tells the
institute in the video. "You will join some of the most prestigious biomedical
institutes in the nation, dare I say the world."

   Shannon Colavecchio-Van Sickler can be reached at svansickler@sptimes.com or
(813) 226-3403.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2008


                              396 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2008 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            January 18, 2008 Friday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: Damages ruling spells deep cuts at OHSU

BYLINE: TED SICKINGER, The Oregonian

BODY:

   SUMMARY: Liability   | The school will pare programs and raise tuition after
justices lift the cap on malpractice awards

   Oregon Health & Science University plans to announce today that it will cut
200 to 300 jobs, raise tuition by 10 percent to 25 percent, trim construction on
Portland's South Waterfront, and restructure or close a score of clinical,
research and education programs.

   The cutbacks are OHSU's first specific responses to an Oregon Supreme Court
ruling in late December that cleared the way for the family of a brain-damaged
child to pursue millions of dollars in malpractice damages from the university.

   The ruling effectively eliminated a liability cap of $200,000 designed to
protect state agencies from major damage awards.

   OHSU figures the ruling will add $30 million a year in insurance and
administrative expenses. That's only 2 percent of OHSU's annual operating budget
of about $1.5 billion, but it amounts to about two-thirds of its annual support
from the state's general fund.

   In an institution that is struggling to become self-supporting, it means big
cutbacks to programs and services.

   "This is of an unprecedented magnitude," OHSU President Joe Robertson said.

   Robertson planned to send an e-mail with details to OHSU staff late Thursday.
He will address and take questions from employees in a meeting at 11 a.m. today.

   Robertson stressed that OHSU wasn't crying wolf as the Oregon Legislature
prepares for a special session next month. He said he had met with the governor
and legislative leaders. While they expressed concern about OHSU's finances,
they weren't optimistic about providing more money soon.

   OHSU, which is Portland's largest private employer with about 12,000 staff,
hopes the Legislature will quickly establish a higher cap on damage claims that
will pass court muster. That could significantly reduce the December ruling's
costs to OHSU, but not soon enough to avert the restructuring.

   "To be crystal clear, even if there is a legislative remedy tomorrow, there
is no financial relief for OHSU until that remedy is tested in the courts,"
Robertson said.

   He said the cuts are structured to protect the institution's core programs
and research expertise.

   "The scope of OHSU will be reduced, but the quality will not be compromised,"
he said.

   "At the end of the day, (Oregonians) can have the same confidence in the OHSU
experience, whether that's in the clinical, research or educational arena.
Unfortunately, there won't be as many OHSU experiences to choose from."

   Among the menu of proposed cuts and revenue sources that OHSU will outline
today:

   * Cut 200 to 300 jobs, including positions in financial services, human
resources, information technology and legal affairs. Adjust benefits for new
hires.

   * Reduce the medical school class from 120 to 115. Reduce clinical rotations
in Bend and Eugene. Raise tuition 10 percent to 25 percent in the schools of
dentistry, medicine and nursing.

   * Transfer or close the Russell Street dental clinic in Portland.

   * Close or transfer the rural health clinic in Union. Discontinue services to
the Health Network for Rural Schools and the Union County corrections program.

   * Delay planned upgrades and maintenance on university buildings.

   * Downsize or close the March Wellness Center on South Waterfront.

   * Defer a new South Waterfront support services building and other capital
spending.

   * Slash unfunded research in the schools of dentistry, medicine and nursing.

   * Downsize the school of science and engineering, the former Oregon Graduate
Institute, and integrate it with the school of medicine.

   The elimination of the state tort cap comes when the university is looking to
stem large losses from research and education activities and to stabilize its
finances after a period of rapid expansion. The added insurance premiums could
blow a $150 million hole in the five-year financial plan that Robertson unveiled
in early December to achieve those goals.

   The cutbacks could discourage some top-notch scientists and clinicians OHSU
recruited during its recent expansion --and put at risk the revenue they
attract. Although OHSU says it will maintain its core programs, other states are
always on the lookout for talent. Florida recently offered a lucrative incentive
package and secured an expansion of OHSU's Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute
there.

   OHSU is the core tenant of Portland's newest urban development, and the
cutbacks would slow its expansion on South Waterfront. The university also has
planned to build a new medical campus on nearby land donated by the Schnitzer
family.

   OHSU has lobbied the state --largely unsuccessfully --to support more
education programs to meet a shortage of medical providers forecast in coming
years. The current financial woes would not only reduce class sizes but also
push tuition at OHSU to the highest among public schools nationwide and in the
middle of the pack among private schools.

   Robertson said the restructuring plan was developed over the past 10 days
with emphasis on maintaining excellence as well as bolstering financial
stability.

   "OHSU is and will remain financially sound," he said. "That's why we felt the
need to act swiftly."

   Ted Sickinger: 503-221-8505, tedsickinger@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2008


                              397 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 17, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 104 words

HEADLINE: QUEST

BODY:

   THEORY: DINOSAURS BUGGED

   Asteroid impacts or volcanic flows have been blamed for killing the
dinosaurs, but a new book argues that the rise of disease-carrying insects may
have contributed to the dinosaurs' extinction. "What Bugged the Dinosaurs?" by
George and Roberta Poinar is from Princeton University Press.

   ALCOHOLISM: RAT RESEARCH

   Rats bred to be heavy consumers of alcohol sharply reduced their drinking
after receiving gene therapy, scientists in Chile and Colorado reported. The
rats were injected with a gene that shuts off the aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
enzyme, which is needed to eliminate products of alcohol metabolism.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2008


                              398 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2008 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                           January 17, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: SLIDELL PICAYUNE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: ALD screening for newborns being sought

BYLINE: By Beth Martin, St. Tammany bureau

BODY:

   A Slidell native leading a national nonprofit organization that educates
people about adrenoleukodystrophy and the need for its cure looks forward to new
legislation and gene therapy that could benefit families affected by the
debilitating neurological disorder.

   David Cry, who moved after Hurricane Katrina to Tulsa, Okla., is among those
lobbying for legislation that promotes newborn screening programs, which could
address ALD.

   The Newborn Screening Saves Lives Act of 2007 aims to educate parents and
health-care providers about newborn health screenings, help states expand and
enhance newborn screening programs and improve follow-up care for infants with
illnesses detected through the programs. The U.S. Senate unanimously approved
the measure, but the House of Representatives referred it to committee in
December.

   The proposal also calls for new technologies in newborn screening and
congenital, genetic and metabolic disorders, which could include ALD.

   "I feel that the passage of this legislation would allow the approach to ALD
treatment to change drastically," Cry said. "Rather than hearing about boys who
are diagnosed when it is already too late for treatment, knowing at the day of
birth that the likelihood exists will allow research to proceed on a different
path. By making this mandatory, cerebral ALD may well be eliminated in just a
few short years."

   Cry supports efforts to introduce similar state legislation, in the absence
of any federal laws, in Louisiana, Mississippi Alabama, Florida, Oklahoma and
Texas. "None of the states do (routine newborn screenings for) ALD," he said.

   ALD, a genetically-determined neurological disorder, affects about 1 in every
17,000 boys worldwide with symptoms typically apparent in those 4 to 10 years of
age. It is characterized by the loss of myelin and progressive dysfunction of
the adrenal gland.

   Symptoms, such as loss of vision, hearing, speech and coordination, progress
rapidly and lead to a vegetative state usually within the first year, according
to information cited by the Cry-established ALD Foundation.

   The disease in the adult form known as adrenomyeloneuropathy affects men from
20 to 40 years of age and, in the majority of cases, affects the spinal cord
with multiple sclerosis-like symptoms, progressing more slowly than those of
ALD. Cry was diagnosed with AMN, in a nonfatal degree, about 10 years ago and
has limited mobility.

   "We all need to work toward meaningful solutions for ALD," he said.

   One of the problems with the incurable disorder is the lack of viable
treatment options, given a limited amount of long-term success stories
associated with bone marrow transplantation.

   A French physician announced at a recent European medical conference that he
and a medical team had successfully treated two ALD-diagnosed boys with gene
therapy bone marrow transplantation.

   The procedure involved fixing the defected gene on the X chromosome
responsible for the disorder in cells from each of the boy's own bone marrow,
eliminating the concern that the body would reject "foreign" transplanted stem
cells.

   Cry said the medical community is waiting to see if complications will arise
from the procedures, but that they reportedly have resulted in improved medical
conditions for the boys from Spain.

   "I'd like to see it duplicated in the United States," he said, noting
optimism for the apparent medical breakthrough.

   For more information, visit the ALD Foundation Web site,
www.aldfoundation.org.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2008


                              399 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 220 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths FOLKMAN, JUDAH, M.D

BODY:

    FOLKMAN--Judah, M.D. The Board, Advisory Board, Leaders Council, Executive
Board of Scientific Advisors, and the Scientific Advisory Committee of The
Breast Cancer Research Foundation mourn the passing of Dr. Judah Folkman, a
brilliant and dedicated scientist. BCRF was proud to support Dr. Folkman's
groundbreaking research in anti-angiogenesis for over a decade. His
contributions to science will save many lives. Dr. Folkman was a compassionate,
warm and wonderful friend to all who knew him. We extend heartfelt sympathy to
his family. Evelyn H. Lauder, Chairman Myra J. Biblowit, President Margaret
Mastrianni, Deputy Director Larry Norton, M.D., Scientific Director

    FOLKMAN--Judah, M.D. Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy, Inc. (ACGT) mourns
the loss of Judah Folkman, M.D., an initial member of its Scientific Advisory
Council. In September 2006, ACGT honored Dr. Folkman with its first Lifetime
Achievement Award for his discovery and leadership in the field of angiogenesis
research into the treatment of cancer. Dr. Folkman's guiding inspiration will be
deeply missed by all of us at ACGT as well as those in the entire scientific
community who were so fortunate to be associated with him. Board of Directors
Scientific Advisory Council Barbara and Edward Netter, Co-Founders Alliance for
Cancer Gene Therapy, Inc.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2008


                              400 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1074 words

HEADLINE: Team Creates Rat Heart Using Cells of Baby Rats

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   Medicine's dream of growing new human hearts and other organs to repair or
replace damaged ones received a significant boost Sunday when University of
Minnesota researchers reported success in creating a beating rat heart in a
laboratory.

     Experts not involved in the Minnesota work called it ''a landmark
achievement'' and ''a stunning'' advance. But they and the Minnesota researchers
cautioned that the dream, if it is ever realized, was still at least 10 years
away.

     Dr. Doris A. Taylor, the head of the team that created the rat heart, said
she followed a guiding principle of her laboratory: ''give nature the tools, and
get out of the way.''

     ''We just took nature's own building blocks to build a new organ,'' Dr.
Taylor said of her team's report in the journal Nature Medicine.

     The researchers removed all the cells from a dead rat heart, leaving the
valves and outer structure as scaffolding for new heart cells injected from
newborn rats. Within two weeks, the cells formed a new beating heart that
conducted electrical impulses and pumped a small amount of blood.

     With modifications, scientists should be able to grow a human heart by
taking stem cells from a patient's bone marrow and placing them in a cadaver
heart that has been prepared as a scaffold, Dr. Taylor said in a telephone
interview from her laboratory in Minneapolis. The early success ''opens the door
to this notion that you can make any organ: kidney, liver, lung, pancreas -- you
name it and we hope we can make it,'' she said.

     Todd N. McAllister of Cytograft Tissue Engineering in Novato, Calif., said,
''Doris Taylor's work is one of those maddeningly simple ideas that you knock
yourself on the head, saying, 'Why didn't I think of that?'<0>'' Dr.
McAllister's team has used a snippet of a patient's skin to grow blood vessels
in a laboratory, and then implanted them to restore blood flow around a
patient's damaged arteries and veins.

     The field of tissue engineering has been growing rapidly. For many years,
doctors have used  engineered skin for burn patients. Engineered cartilage is
used for joint repairs. Researchers are investigating the use of stem cells to
repair cardiac muscle damaged by heart attacks. Also, new bladders grown from a
patient's own cells are being tested in the same patients.

     Dr. Taylor is a newcomer to tissue regeneration. She began her professional
career at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx investigating
gene therapy and then cell therapy. She said she switched to tissue regeneration
when she realized the limiting step in trying to generate an organ was not the
number of cells needed, but the complexity of creating a three-dimensional
structure.

     ''The heart is a beautiful organ,'' Dr. Taylor said, ''and it's not one
that I thought I'd ever be able to build in a dish.''

     Her view changed about three years ago when she recalled that cells were
removed from human and pig heart valves before they were used to replace damaged
human ones. As she contemplated replacing the old rat cells with new ones, Dr.
Taylor followed another of her mantras: ''Trust your crazy ideas.''

     Progress came in fits and starts. ''We made every mistake known, did every
experiment wrong and had to go back and do them right,'' Dr. Taylor said.

     She poured detergents like those in shampoos in the rat's arteries to wash
out the heart cells and then injected neonatal cardiac cells. The first two
detergents she tested failed. But a third concoction led to a clear, translucent
scaffold that retained the heart's architecture.

     After injecting the young rat heart cells into a scaffold, she stimulated
them electrically  and created an artificial circulation as the equivalent of
blood pressure to make the heart pump and produce a pulse. The steps also helped
the cells mature. Tests like examining slices of the heart under a microscope
showed they were living cells.

     To test the biological compatibility of the new hearts, the team
transplanted them into the abdomen of  unrelated live rats. The hearts were not
immediately rejected. A blood supply developed. The hearts beat regularly. And
cells from the host rats moved in and began to reline the blood vessels, even
growing in the wall of the hearts.

     Dr. Taylor is now conducting similar experiments on pigs as a step toward
human work. ''Working out the details in a pig heart made a lot more sense''
because the anatomy of the porcine heart is the closest to humans and pigs are
plentiful, she said.

     ''The next goal will be to see if we can get the heart to pump strongly
enough and become mature enough that we can use it to keep an animal alive'' in
a replacement transplant, Dr. Taylor said.

     As for human hearts, the best-case situation would be to obtain them from
cadavers, remove their cells to make a scaffold and then inject bone marrow,
muscle or young cardiac cells from a patient. The process of repopulating the
scaffold with new cells would take a few months, she said.

     The body replaces its proteins every few months, so the hope is that the
body will create a matrix that it recognizes as its own.

     One potential problem is that antirejection drugs might be required to
prevent adverse immune reactions from the scaffold. In that case, Dr. Taylor
hopes such therapy would be needed only temporarily.

     Many things that work in experiments on animals fail in humans because of
the species barrier. Dr. McAllister said that in Dr. Taylor's case ''the
principal problem in escalating it to humans is one of scale, not of cell
biology, and that is an easier problem to solve potentially.''

     Dr. Taylor said, ''If it works, it means that there will be many more
organs available for transplants.''

     Because the components of the biologic matrix differ for every organ, Dr.
Taylor expects that scientists will be able to do tests to answer two
fundamental questions: Can a stem cell be placed anywhere in the body and still
produce a heart, kidney or other organ? Or must a stem cell be placed in its
anatomic position to do so?

     Such tests might include taking stem cells from one organ, for example a
kidney, and putting them in a kidney, liver or heart to begin to understand if
the stem cells are innately committed to produce kidneys or whether they will
convert to produce livers or hearts.

     Beginning Jan. 15, Adam Liptak's column, ''Sidebar,'' will appear on
Tuesdays. Dan Barry's column,  ''This Land,'' will return on Monday, Jan. 21.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2008
