
                              601 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                            October 13, 2006 Friday
                              METRO FINAL Edition

SECTION: FTR; FEATURES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1118 words

HEADLINE: THE GIFT OF LIFE: CANCER SURVIVOR SINGS THE PRAISES OF EMBRACING TIME
AND POSSIBILITIES

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT

BODY:

   Life is a gift, Joseph Wanchik tells others.

   He should know. He survived polio as a teenager and lives with its lifelong
side effects, including muscle weakness and back pain. He can dance and walk but
not run or jump, as a result.

   At 44, he was diagnosed with a very advanced case of melanoma, a type of skin
cancer. He recalls his doctor telling him, "You have one of the worst kinds of
cancer you can get."

   Wanchik didn't expect to live more than a year. He and another man were the
only two of 30 people enrolled in an experimental cancer vaccine study, at what
is now Detroit's Harper University Hospital, who didn't die during the
treatments.

   Five surgeries and several years of treatments afterward, Wanchik told
himself that if he lived to his 50th birthday, he'd throw himself a big party.

   He did. Five years after that, at 55, he threw himself another party.

   Sunday, Wanchik, now 75, held his sixth Celebrate Life party, at Alcamo's
Hall in St. Clair Shores.

   With him were more than 30 other cancer survivors, whom he honored with
carnation boutonnieres, and for some of the ladies, a dance to the Varitones
Orchestra, playing Big Band-era tunes, even Lawrence Welk's "Bubbles in the
Wine" theme song. They ate a hearty buffet dinner, took pictures and listened as
an advanced melanoma survivor, Thomas May, told his story. May has been free of
cancer for 15 months after participating in the nation's first gene therapy
study for cancer. Wanchik read about May in a recent Free Press story and
invited him to join the festivities.

   "They genetically reengineered me, folks," said May of Allen Park, a Ford
Motor Co. quality control engineer, getting laughter with his remarks. "I've
been altered."

   Wanchik has followed the progress of his own study. Recently, he heard the
other survivor had died of colon cancer. Wanchik has no explanation for his good
fortune other than it must be God's will.

   His experience with polio taught him how to live with disability. Cancer, he
says, gave renewed purpose to his life.

   "Oftentimes it's the adversity in life that makes people do more things with
their lives," he says.

   Wanchik is a cancer survivor with a full life. He volunteers singing and
playing the mandolin, piano and guitar most days at Sunrise Assisted Living in
Grosse Pointe Woods. He travels internationally with the world-class Detroit
Concert Choir, a group that has won 18 international singing competitions. He
served for years as its president and has been on its board since its inception
20 years ago. He also leads the congregation in song as cantor at St. Nicholas
Byzantine Catholic Church in Detroit and is president of the Danbury Lane Home
Owners Association in Harper Woods. He works out daily; cooks for church events;
cuts the hair of a few friends; and visits the sick and dying, including a
longtime friend with breast cancer, Mary Paonessa, 74, who attended some of his
parties. He attended her funeral Saturday, the day before this year's party.

   "It's not so much that people are scared of cancer," he says. "It's fear of
dying in pain."

   Once comfortable and convinced she would not be "terrorized in her death,"
Paonessa accepted that she had had a full life, one that had been well worth
living, he says. "We all know we'll leave this world," he says. "It's what we
leave that counts."

   Wanchik's professional legacy as an inventor of devices for the disabled came
mostly after his cancer diagnosis.

   One invention, a foam pad placed between the knees, helps people with muscle
spasms avoid hurting themselves when their knees involuntarily bang together.
Another is a knee-spreader that helps people with spinal cord injuries
catheterize themselves. A leg-lifter helps people with leg weakness raise their
limbs. A splint helps hold hands in a neutral position.

   "Cancer made me more creative," says Wanchik, a retired occupational
therapist at Detroit's Rehabilitation Institute of Michigan. He was an
orthotist, - a specialist who works with devices like braces and artificial
limbs to help disabled people move, walk and perform daily tasks.

   Among staffers at the institute, Wanchik also was known for having a good eye
for hiring talented therapists and for insisting that staffers be responsive to
anyone who called, says Chris Christopoulos, 83, of Grosse Pointe Woods, also an
orthotist who worked at the institute.

   "He didn't want to see people getting shifted around," says Christopoulos,
wearing a carnation at the party to designate his survivorship with bladder
cancer.

   The Rev. Robert Barter, 70, pastor of St. Nicholas, knows Wanchik as the man
with a bass voice so easy to follow that the congregation enjoys joining him in
song. He said Wanchik is also known as a churchman who will volunteer for
whatever job needs doing, even if it means joining a largely female crew in the
kitchen.

   Diagnosed in 1965 with testicular cancer, Barter shares Wanchik's philosophy
that cancer, though terrifying, can be life-changing.

   "I used to worry about details," he says. "Life itself is what is most
important. Everything else is secondary."

   Wanchik, who never married, has been the mainstay of a large extended
Slovakian family and the financial provider for his parents, an aunt and a
brother.

   He wants others to know that more people survive cancer than die of it.

   This year, there will be 1.4 million Americans alive with cancer, compared to
a half-million who will die of it, according to the American Cancer Society.

   Even the most advanced and most threatening cancers aren't necessarily the
death sentence they once were, Wanchik says. He wants more survivors to share
their stories and experiences.

   A favorite quote from a source Wanchik no longer remembers is: "Troubles are
opportunities for us to grow, to become better, not bitter."

   "I've had polio and cellulitis. I've had shingles three times. I've had back
surgery and a broken leg, besides cancer," he says.

   "Every time I say, what am I going to learn from this one? And how can I help
somebody else going through the same thing?"

   (SIDEBAR)

   Joseph Wanchik's advice for living with cancer

   1. Focus on progress made against cancer.

   2. Find a clinical study to explore your options.

   3. Stay active, positive and focus on what lessons you can learn from
adversity.

   Resources

   "Cancer is a Word, Not a Sentence: A Practical Guide to Help You Through The
First Few Weeks" by Dr. Robert Buckman (Firefly Books, $19.95)

   "Praying Through Cancer: Set Your Heart Free From Fear" by Susan Sorensen and
Laura Geist (W Publishing Group, $14.99).

   Tell your story

   Are you a cancer survivor? How has it changed you?

   Share your story at www.freep.com.

   Contact PATRICIA ANSTETT at 313-222-5021 or panstett@freepress.com.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo SUSAN TUSA Detroit Free Press

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              602 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           October 11, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 406  words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's gene therapy brings hope: May have potential to halt or
even reverse disease

BYLINE: Jim Ritter, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   A new gene therapy tested at Rush University Medical Center reduced
Parkinson's disease symptoms by a remarkable 40 percent, researchers announced
Tuesday.

   Researchers cautioned that the study at Rush and another center involved only
12 patients, and was potentially biased by the placebo effect.

   However, if the preliminary results hold up, gene therapy could become the
first treatment with the potential to slow, halt or even reverse the course of
the progressive disease. Existing treatments relieve symptoms, but do not
prevent the disease from getting worse.

   Results were announced at a meeting in Chicago of the American Neurological
Association. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research is
encouraged enough to donate $1.9 million for a follow-up study.

   CELLS PRODUCE DOPAMINE

   Between 500,000 and 1.5 million Americans have Parkinson's disease, which is
characterized by rigid and slow movements and tremors.

   The disease results from the death of brain cells that produce a critical
brain chemical called dopamine. Symptoms worsen as more cells die.

   In the new therapy, a brain surgeon drills two nickel-size holes in the top
of the head. The surgeon inserts a needle deep into the brain and injects a
harmless virus containing the desired gene. (Following surgery, the skull holes
are plugged with plastic caps.)

   The virus delivers the gene to brain cells. The gene then instructs the cells
to produce a protein that protects and regenerates cells that make dopamine,
said Rush neurologist Dr. Leo Verhagen.

   RISK OF HEMORRHAGE, STROKE

   The developer, Ceregene Inc., is testing similar gene therapies for
Alzheimer's disease and Lou Gehrig's disease.

   The surgery involves a slight risk of hemorrhage and stroke, but that didn't
happen to any patient in the study.

   The operation and two-day hospital stay costs $40,000 to $50,000, said Rush
brain surgeon Dr. Roy Bakay. This doesn't count the gene injection, which also
will be costly, Bakay said.

   Four patients at Rush, and eight at the University of California, San
Francisco, had the surgery.

   Parkinson patient Robert Lee of Orland Park said that before his surgery last
February, he couldn't walk more than a block or two without excruciating nerve
pain in his leg. Now, he can walk three miles. He also has been able to cut back
on his Parkinson meds.

   "This gives you some promise and some hope," said Lee, 59. "The situation I
was in was pretty hopeless."

   jritter@suntimes.com

GRAPHIC:
Photo: John J. Kim/Sun-Times; Dr. Roy Bakay (left) and Dr. Leo Verhagen of Rush
University Medical Center have worked on a gene therapy procedure that has
decreased patients' symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2006


                              603 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                           October 11, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 07

LENGTH: 164  words

HEADLINE: Some patients to just get holes in head

BYLINE: Jim Ritter, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   The placebo effect frequently complicates medical research: A patient who has
faith in an experimental treatment will improve, even if the treatment is
worthless.

   In drug studies, therefore, researchers typically give an experimental drug
to some volunteers and an inactive placebo pill to others.

   The drug is deemed effective only if it works better than the placebo.

   Researchers will use a similar approach in a planned study on a new gene
therapy surgery for Parkinson's disease.

   Researchers are enrolling 51 patients at Rush University Medical Center and
seven other centers. Thirty-four patients will receive the gene therapy. The
other 17 patients will have holes drilled in their skulls, but won't receive the
genes.

   To prevent bias, neither the patients nor the researchers who evaluate them
will know who received the fake surgery and who got the real thing.

   If the procedure proves effective, patients who received the fake surgery
will later be offered the real surgery for free.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2006


                              604 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           October 11, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 949 words

HEADLINE: Israel Bars New Palestinian Students From Its Universities, Citing
Concern Over Security

BYLINE: By DINA KRAFT

DATELINE: ANATA, West Bank, Oct. 9

BODY:

   Sawsan Salameh, a Palestinian from the West Bank, was thrilled to get a full
scholarship from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem to begin a doctorate in
theoretical chemistry.

     But a recent move by the Israeli Army to ban new Palestinian students from
Israeli universities for security reasons is keeping her from studying at the
campus, just two miles from her home.

    ''The first time I applied for a permit I was rejected,'' said Ms. Salameh,
29, a Muslim wearing a firmly fastened head scarf and a black denim skirt that
skimmed the floor. ''I was shocked, because I thought there must be some kind of
mistake, so I kept trying. I kept hoping.''

     Her situation is familiar to many Palestinians whose freedom of movement
has been limited in recent years because of the continuing Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

     Ms. Salameh said that after she appealed six times to the Israeli
government agency that handles Palestinian affairs, she decided to turn to the
Supreme Court. On Tuesday, Gisha, an Israeli group that is an advocate for
Palestinian rights, submitted a petition on her behalf to the court, calling the
ban illegal.

     ''Gisha calls upon Israel not to prevent Palestinian students from studying
just because they are Palestinian,'' said the group's director, Sari Bashi. ''No
one should be denied access to education based on his or her national
identity.''

     The practice of reviewing student permits has been in effect since 2001,
the last time any new Palestinian student was granted a permit, officials said.
But before the outright ban began this summer, the army reviewed requests case
by case, something it says it will not do now. Gisha is asking that individual
reviews be restored.

     The official ban comes before the beginning of the Israeli academic year at
the end of October. But in effect it dates from the Palestinian uprising that
began in the fall of 2000, when the security situation began to deteriorate,
said Lt. Adam Avidan, a spokesman for civil administration in the West Bank.

     Hebrew University was the scene of a suicide bombing in July 2002, when a
Palestinian blew himself up in a student cafeteria, killing seven people.

     The Defense Ministry said it was giving the student permit matter special
attention, and Israeli officials said they needed to balance the country's
security needs with what they described as the understandable desire of
Palestinians to receive an education.

     Currently 14 Palestinians, all of whom received permits during or before
2001, are students at Israeli universities, Lieutenant Avidan said. They will be
allowed to continue their studies. And university records suggest that a small
number of students may have been allowed to trickle in beyond that number, Ms.
Bashi said.

     Like Ms. Salameh, most of the students came to Israel seeking doctorates
because there are no doctoral programs at Palestinian universities.

     Palestinians who have money or receive fellowships tend to study abroad for
doctorates. But for those without financial support it is an impossible dream,
and women who come from traditional Muslim homes are often forbidden by their
families to live abroad alone.

     No figures are available for how many Palestinians studied in Israel in
past years, but Israeli officials and Palestinian rights advocates say there
appear to have been a higher number before the mid-1990's, when travel
restrictions began to be imposed.

     Dr. Suheil Ayesh, 43, from the Gaza Strip is among the Palestinians who
received a master's degree and a Ph.D. at Hebrew University. He is now a
visiting professor of molecular biology and gene therapy there and divides his
time between Jerusalem and Gaza.

     He is authorized to enter Israel only by permit, which he must renew every
month.

     He is the only Palestinian professor teaching at an Israeli university, he
said. Like many other Israeli and Palestinian academics, he is disheartened by
the ban, which will make it difficult for future generations of Palestinians to
do what he has been able to accomplish: get a quality education, forge ties with
Israelis and contribute to a future Palestinian state.

     ''It's difficult and confusing,'' Dr. Ayesh said. ''The physical distance
between us is a very small one, and cooperation can be so helpful.''

     Dr. Raphael Levine, the Hebrew University chemistry professor who accepted
Ms. Salameh as his student, said he understood Israel's security concerns but
was baffled by the ban. ''I think it is in Israel's interest to strengthen the
Palestinian middle class, and strengthening academic institutions in Palestinian
areas is one sure way of achieving that,'' he said.

     ''There is a Jewish tradition in which value is put on learning; Mr.
Ben-Gurion said he wanted Israel to be a shining light to all nations,'' he
said, referring to Israel's first prime minister. ''You have to deliver on these
things.''

     ''Both by sentiment and cold practicality, it is not in our interest to act
like this,'' Dr. Levine said in a telephone interview from Los Angeles, where he
is teaching at the University of California.

     Meanwhile, Ms. Salameh, a high school science teacher, continues her life
in Anata. She attends meetings as an elected member of the municipal council and
is working to set up the village's first women's center.

     She longs to begin work on her doctorate and one day become a role model
for other Palestinian women and girls as the first woman to be a Palestinian
professor of chemistry in the West Bank.

     She compared her quest to chemistry. ''You have to look for a long time to
get answers,'' she said. ''It is not a direct process. You have to be patient,
and therefore I will be patient. I won't give up.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sawsan Salameh in the municipal council office in Anata. She
hopes to earn a doctorate in chemistry at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
(Photo by Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2006


                              605 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 11, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1082 words

HEADLINE: A brain trust forms in La Jolla;
Four institutions win a $12.7 million grant for neurological work

BYLINE: Bruce Lieberman, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Building on their world-class reputations for brain research, four La Jolla
institutions have landed a $12.7 million federal grant to join forces in their
quest for ways to treat neurological disorders and diseases such as Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's and Lou Gehrig's.

   "San Diego is a mecca for the neurosciences," said Eliezer Masliah, a
researcher at UCSD and one of the project's leaders. "When you really want to
understand what goes on in the brain, this is the place to be."

   The five-year partnership, announced yesterday, consists of the University of
California San Diego, the Burnham Institute for Medical Research, the Salk
Institute for Biological Studies and The Scripps Research Institute. More than
100 neuroscientists will participate in the initiative, which they hope to
enhance with local philanthropy.

   Four of about 60 contenders nationwide received funding from the National
Institutes of Health through its Blueprint for Neuroscience Research initiative.
The agency is increasingly encouraging scientists to work together so they can
more effectively learn how the brain functions and how to treat it when things
go wrong.

   Its focus on neuroscience comes as diseases of the nervous system account for
six of the top 10 causes of disability in the United States, according to the
World Health Organization. Globally, an estimated 450 million people suffer from
mental and neurological disorders.

   Scientists in San Diego have pioneered many studies in neuroscience, a
relatively young discipline with a multitude of unanswered questions.

   For instance, Salk researcher Fred Gage discovered that some parts of the
brain can renew themselves throughout life. The finding upended widely held
assumptions that the brain could not grow new cells in adulthood. It someday may
point the way toward novel approaches for treating diseases that cause brain
degeneration.

   Informal collaboration has been a tradition on the Torrey Pines mesa, where
UCSD, Burnham, Salk, Scripps and other research labs, small biotechnology
companies and large pharmaceutical firms are within walking distance of one
another.

   The grant formalizes the links among the research hub's four most prominent
institutions.

   Stuart Lipton, a researcher at Burnham and the grant's chief architect, said
he has envisioned this kind of project since moving from Harvard University to
San Diego seven years ago.

   "They really view La Jolla as maybe the best place to do this kind of
(collaborative) work," said Lipton, the project's director. "I think it really
fits the model of what the NIH wants."

   Before Lipton and several of his colleagues submitted their 500-page grant
application in January, they recruited key labs from each of the four
institutions to participate in the initiative.

   The San Diego team will use the agency's grant for resources needed to
broaden and deepen collaboration. That may include hiring more technicians to
run sophisticated computer analyses, advanced microscopes and other high-tech
instruments.

   UCSD, Salk, Burnham and Scripps each have their own areas of neuroscience
expertise, including equipment unique to a particular institution. The goal is
to share that specialized knowledge among all members of the partnership.

   At Scripps, some neuroscientists are studying the biology of alcohol abuse
and other chemical addictions.

   At Salk, researchers Inder Verma and Ed Callaway are focusing on gene therapy
-- engineering viruses so they will carry certain genes into diseased nerve
cells and fix their DNA.

   Meanwhile, Burnham's researchers will contribute their strengths in screening
compounds for new drugs, rapidly screening cells and examining proteins, the
building blocks of cells whose instructions are encoded in DNA.

   Other Burnham scientists will share their techniques for scrutinizing genes
and imaging the interior of cells.

   A team from Burnham and Salk will spearhead stem cell work as it relates to
neuroscience.

   Researchers at UCSD, including Masliah, will bring to the table their
knowledge of how Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and HIV-related
dementia alter brain physiology. The university's medical school will offer
tissue samples from deceased patients to participating scientists from Salk,
Burnham and Scripps.

   "This allows us to go faster, to use technology that we wouldn't ordinarily
have in our own lab, and to ask questions that we couldn't ordinarily ask," said
Salk researcher Stephen Heinemann, a project leader and president of the
national Society for Neuroscience.

   Because the grant won't cover the full cost of individual studies, Lipton and
other researchers emphasized the need for private donations to cover the
additional expenses. Lipton said he has spoken to some of the labs' trustees
about seeking philanthropic support but hasn't created a formal plan.

   "I'm hopeful that a lot of people will get involved who haven't gotten
involved, or don't know where to get involved," he said.

   Besides its aim of increasing collaboration, the project is designed to offer
young scientists a chance to join studies that they would have a hard time
funding on their own.

   After strong budget years in the 1990s, funding from the National Institutes
of Health has declined in recent years after accounting for inflation. This and
other changes within the agency have made it tougher for less established
researchers to compete for federal dollars.

   The neuroscience project isn't the first case of a formal partnership among
UCSD, Scripps, Salk and Burnham.

   In March, the four institutions said they would form the San Diego Consortium
for Regenerative Medicine. The initiative is being crafted to make La Jolla a
major center for stem cell research as labs throughout California compete for
tax dollars designated for Proposition 71, the $3 billion ballot measure that
voters approved in 2004.

   The proposition created the California Institute for Regenerative Medicine to
disburse the funds, but lawsuits have prevented that process from taking place.
Instead, the institute has relied on a $150 million loan from the state's
general fund to begin offering research grants.

   WHAT IT MEANS

   The federal government has awarded $12.7 million for a brain research project
that combines the talents of scientists from UCSD, Burnham, Salk and The Scripps
Research Institute.

   The idea is that through collaboration, researchers can speed up their
discoveries about the brain. Leaders of the partnership want to raise more money
through private donors so they can expand their studies.

GRAPHIC: 6 PHOTOS; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. Stuart Lipton, a researcher at the
Burnham Institute for Medical Research and the grant's chief architect, said he
has envisioned such a project since he came here seven years ago. 2. UCSD --
Neuroscience expertise: Knowledge of how Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's
disease and HIV-related dementia change brain functions. 3. THE SCRIPPS RESEARCH
INSTITUTE -- Neuroscience expertise: Research into the biology of alcohol abuse
and other chemical addictions. 4. BURNHAM INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL RESEARCH --
Neuroscience expertise: Strengths in stem cell biology, the screening of
compounds for new drugs and the examination of protein structures. 5. SALK
INSTITUTE FOR BIOLOGICAL STUDIES -- Neuroscience expertise: Leadership in stem
cell research and development of gene therapy techniques to treat brain
diseases. 6. WHAT IT MEANS 7. Postdoctoral researcher Bo Yang worked yesterday
at the Del E. Webb Center for Neurosciences and Aging at the Burnham Institute
for Medical Research.; PHOTOBY: 1,7. John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune 2,3,4,5. K.C.
Alfred / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2006


                              606 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 The Buffalo News
                              All Rights Reserved
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            October 10, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: YOUR HEALTH; Pg. C5

LENGTH: 911 words

HEADLINE: CHEATING DEATH;
Gene therapy frees test subject from grips of cancer

BYLINE: By Patricia Anstett - DETROIT FREE PRESS

BODY:

   An Allen Park, Mich., man is free of his advanced-stage skin cancer, 15
months after his diagnosis, proof -- at least in principle -- that gene therapy
may be effective in stopping tumor growth for good.

   Thomas May, a 41-year-old engineer with Ford Motor Co., was one of 17
melanoma patients in the United States to receive the experimental therapy in
2005. May and a Wisconsin man responded to the treatment and now show no signs
of cancer.

   When results of the study were announced in the journal Science in late
August, the news created worldwide media attention.

   May's test results in August provided initial, but not conclusive, proof that
scientists can take a person's cells, grow and enhance them in a laboratory,
splice them with another patient's cells that contain just the right stuff and
turn the concoction into an immunological SWAT team that wipes out cancer.

   The big question remains: Will May be rid of his cancer for years, even a
lifetime?

   "We're trying to develop new approaches to treating cancer," said Dr. Steven
Rosenberg, head of the tumor immunology section at the National Cancer Institute
in Bethesda, Md., and leader of the gene therapy study. "We've had minor
improvements, but 600,000 Americans still die each year of cancer. The whole
field of gene therapy is very exciting because it provides the opportunity to
manipulate human cells that don't have the mechanisms to stop cancer. This
represents an important proof of principle."

   May said he thought of his cancer as a terrorist invading his body. "You've
got to pick your weapon and get going," he told himself last year, as he
searched for answers.

   One doctor, who told May he'd probably die of the disease, gave him only one
option: removal of his left lung, where the melanoma had spread.

   Another offered additional chemotherapy, and added, "The rest is up to a
higher power," May recalled.

   He told both doctors, "No thanks."

   "What kind of game plan is that?" he asked one. "This doesn't sound like
fighting the good fight to me."

   Melanoma accounts for only 4 percent of all skin cancers but is considered
the most aggressive of three types. When caught early, the prognosis for
melanoma patients is very good.

   But if it spreads, as May's did, only 5 percent of patients survive after
five years, Rosenberg said. An estimated 62,190 new cases of melanoma will be
diagnosed this year in the United States, and 7,910 people will die of it,
according to the American Cancer Society.

   May, who is single and a devout fundamental Baptist with a master's degree in
divinity, called the nation's top doctors in melanoma and got right to the
point, asking: "What have you got? How does it work?"

   "I thought there had to be some Thomas Edison-type of doctor working in his
lab thinking he's got something worthwhile," May said.

   He also called Dr. David Nathanson, a cancer surgeon at Detroit's Henry Ford
Hospital and one of May's cancer doctors to whom he turns for a second opinion.
Nathanson pointed May to Rosenberg.

   Compared with what he had been through with cancer surgery, chemotherapy and
other drugs to boost his immune system, gene therapy was quick and simple, May
said.

   Other treatments left his body shaking uncontrollably, caused chills and
fevers, persistent skin rashes, severe fatigue 10 times worse than the flu,
near-total loss of appetite and constant pain that felt like a bolt of
electricity running through his legs, he said.

   He took medical leaves from Ford, where he is a quality control engineer, but
he eventually went back to work and finished seminary school.

   On Jan. 4, 2005, with members of Community Baptist Church near Brownstown
Township praying for him, May flew to Bethesda, Md., to begin his new
treatments. As is all enrollment in National Cancer Institute clinical studies,
the therapy was free, even the round-trip transportation. First came five days
of chemotherapy, then the gene therapy delivered through a port, or opening, in
his chest, followed by four doses of Interleukin 2 -- a drug to jump-start his
immune system. He was discharged Jan. 26, 2005.

   By March 10, 2005, May got the news he was waiting for. His latest
computerized tomography (CT) scan showed the tumors had shrunk by half. By
August, doctors said, "Mr. May, we can't see any evidence of this thing. You
have responded completely," May said.

   He plans to return to Bethesda on Dec. 7 for another CT scan. He's back to a
healthy weight of 210, has regained his appetite, particularly for his mother's
German dishes, and exercises faithfully.

   How gene therapy may fight cancer: Gene therapy uses a person's own genetic
material to fight cancer and other diseases.

   Genes can't be directly inserted into cells, so scientists use viruses, or
carriers, to deliver the genes. Viruses are unique because they recognize
certain cells and can insert genetic material into them. There are many
different approaches, and new studies using gene therapy for other forms of
cancer are expected to begin in the next few months at the National Cancer
Institute.

   In this study of 17 patients with advanced-stage melanoma, patient blood
samples were drawn and mixed with genes from a person only known as Patient No.
9, who had a type of white-blood cell, known as lymphocytes, or T-cells, that
naturally targets tumor cells. Most melanoma patients lack this type of T-cell.
The cells were grown in a lab, enhanced and multiplied into the billions, until
they could be given back to patients through intravenous infusion.

GRAPHIC: McClatchy Photos Thomas May, 41, of Allen Park, Mich., underwent
experimental gene therapy for melanoma, the most aggressive form of skin
cancers.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2006


                              607 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             October 8, 2006 Sunday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 1513 words

HEADLINE: Taking timeouts for special fans;
Falcons' Mora has reached out to two ill girls

BYLINE: MICHELLE HISKEY; Staff

BODY:

   When the Atlanta Falcons' season turned for the worse last season, teenage
fans Savannah and Jennifer Prince watched young head coach Jim Mora get
frustrated on the sidelines.

   Could this be their same idol, they wondered, who had given them the game
ball from his first Atlanta win back in 2004? The same Jim Mora who stayed in
touch with them with such nice e-mails, asking about their fragile health and
seeing if he could help them in any way?

   The emotional roller coaster he's on --- they know what that's like. Battling
a rare degenerative illness requires stamina and passion, and a thick skin for
the mean things people sometimes say. So does coaching in the NFL, even this
year when his Falcons have already won three times.

   Both reach for role models. Mora finds strength in these two girls from
Lilburn who will never grow taller than 5 feet and who need delicate, major
surgeries every year. The Prince girls, now 13 and 17, weren't supposed to live
past age 10.

   Beyond their physical weakness, Mora sees the same type of inner strength
possessed by many of his players. They are big guys who overcame personal and
family obstacles, such as losing both parents (running back Warrick Dunn and
defensive lineman Grady Jackson) or growing up around illegal drugs (several
players).

   "A lot of players we work with come from very interesting and tough
situations growing up. As a coach, you get a unique compassion for people to
struggle to attain what they do in life, however small or big," Mora said
earlier this week as his team relaxed a bit because they don't play Sunday.

   "It's a compassion for those who fight, to those who struggle and don't give
up, who fight and keep battling and breathing and every day, they are getting up
and saying, 'I'm going to do my best.' That is what I want to be surrounded by
every day, and the thing is, I don't necessarily have to say that to my players.
They recognize kids like this as examples to them, because so many have overcome
many things themselves that are life-threatening in other ways."

   The genetic roll of the dice can give freakish size and speed to pro
athletes. In the case of the Prince sisters, the DNA roulette came up a rare
disorder.

   Their parents Sharon and Billy Prince were sweethearts at Stone Mountain High
School before marrying. Even if the couple had worried about carrying the same
recessive gene for their children's disorder, no tests can detect it.

   Billy, an auto mechanic, loves sports and would take his daughters,
especially tomboy Jennifer, to pro events. The girls tired easily and he would
carry them. Fatigue was one of the first signs that something was wrong.

   Tests reveal rare disorder

   The Princes ended up at Emory University's Department of Human Genetics in
September 1998, where they learned that the girls, then 5 and 8, lacked an
enzyme critical for digesting carbohydrates. The carbs create a snow of
particles that damage cells and clog every body part, Sharon Prince said.

   This disease, called mucopolysaccharidosis, would make their joints hurt,
their tongues and necks thicken, their spines and other bones curve. No cure
exists.

   The girls' father had kept a TV in their garage to watch pro football while
he tinkered with cars. After the diagnosis, the couple retreated to the garage
every night so the girls wouldn't hear them cry.

   "It was such a roller coaster," Sharon Prince, now 43, said. "They were so
little. I couldn't control anything. All we could do was cry for a long time."

   In a recent speech to Emory medical students, she called the family's journey
"Devastation, Desperation and Drive."

   "We took many deep breaths, and we still take it one day at a time," she
said. "When I think of the future, it's still scary."

   Without cutting-edge enzyme-replacement therapy approved in 2003, the girls
would have likely died before puberty.

   Amid the uncertainty, the Princes found some refuge in watching pro football.

   The girls let off anger by yelling at a referee's call. Jennifer and Billy
Prince made up a secret handshake to celebrate good plays. They threw a rubber
brick at the TV after a bad play.

   "Sports makes better memories to outweigh the bad memories, like the
surgeries," said Jennifer Prince. "On the Falcons, seeing how fast they run ---
Michael Vick, Keith Brooking --- it's amazing how they move so quickly, with
such great mobility. I wish I could have that."

   Girls get a wish

   The Make a Wish Foundation helped get them into Mora's first Falcons
preseason training camp in August 2004.

   "They were just special girls, very appreciative, very sweet-natured," Mora
recalled. "There was no anger in them. I just got a positive feel from them."

   It was team picture day, so Mora invited them to sit next to their favorite
players as cameras clicked. The family hung the photo at home and treasured it
as their main memory.

   Then Mora's e-mails in red and black fonts started arriving.

   He was always upbeat no matter how the team played.

   Oct. 11, 2004, after his first loss as a head coach: "WE were lucky to have
you come out and meet us. ... If you every need anything please know you've got
a friend and fan right here! Jim."

   Sept. 15, 2005, after beating Philadelphia in the opener: "Are you going to
come out to practice sometime? You are always welcome. ... Good game
huh!!!!!!!!! Jim."

   Dec. 21, 2005, with an 8-6 record: "Come out to practice on Friday, I know
that is Christmas Eve but ... it is not a very long practice. ... Let me know if
this works. Jim (yes, you should call me Jim, Mr. Mora makes me sound too old!)"

   March 30, 2006, offseason, before Savannah Prince's cornea transplant: "I
need to tell Savannah that I am thinking about her. If she has an e-mail address
can you have her send it to me so I can write her a note of encouragement?"

   Sept. 28, 2006, after losing to New Orleans: "Just checking in to see how you
and your sis are doing. ... If you can make it out to practice some time we
would all love to see you. ... Jim."

   The correspondence stunned the Princes, partly because of how mellow and kind
Mora came off in his e-mails.

   "It was a total 180 from the person we would see on the sideline," Jennifer
Prince said. "I couldn't believe it. ... I could see that he is not all that
stern, what people see on TV. He is in a zone during the game, but in real life
he is a 180-degree person from that."

   Mora says he's intense about whatever he commits himself to, and he's
befriended other kids, too.

   "If you are a passionate person, you're typically passionate about
everything," Mora said. "If I'm interested in something, I give all I've got to
it, whether it's family or job or friends, or now, my foundation. If there are
people I can reach out and touch, that's what I can and will do."

   Treatment is a regimen

   The family is grateful the Falcons have a bye today, for fans like themselves
to chill out. Savannah undergoes major surgeries this week to repair her spine
and put a shunt in her head to drain spinal fluid.

   Every Friday afternoon, as the Falcons prepare for their weekend game, the
Prince sisters hunker down for the four-hour intravenous drip of critical
enzymes.

   They are among 30 people, mostly children, who come weekly to a windowless
room in Decatur for genetic therapy.

   This nook of Emory's Lysosomal Storage Disease Center is similar in size and
feel to a football training room. Everyone tries to keep smiling despite the
inevitable pain.

   "See, no tracks," Sharon Prince says, showing off her oldest daughter's arm.
"Thank God these girls have great veins. And I pump you full of fluids all the
time, don't I?"

   Here, time drips by slowly. Entertainment and comfort are coming soon, thanks
to a $7,500 grant from Mora's Count on Me Foundation. The money came mostly from
a charity golf tournament with Falcons players, and will buy entertainment
systems and furnishings.

   Another 20 children's charities received roughly $260,000 recently from the
foundation's first round of grants, said executive director Terri Hickman
Grunduski.

   The critical enzyme flows as Jennifer Prince usually snuggles under a
red-and-black Falcons fleece blanket. She a 4-foot-11 senior at Central Gwinnett
High, with a goal of college and career as a sports publicist.

   Her sister sleeps through yet another showing of "Spiderman," bored by the
story of a superhero with a genetic mutation.

   Savannah Prince, a 4-foot-9 eight grader at Richards Middle School, wants to
teach special-needs kids. First, though, she must journey through the painful
valleys of middle school.

   "You're weird. You walk funny. You look like you're pregnant because your
belly pokes out," she said other children say.

   She notices football coaches get a lot of criticism, too. She sympathizes
with Mora's mood swings, especially last season when the Falcons went 8-8. The
team is 3-1 this season.

   "I've seen him get mad on TV, and thought, 'Wow, that's different. He was
really nice to us,' " she said.

   She paused.

   "Sometimes these treatments make me ornery. Other times, I am sweet," she
said. "I have different sides, too."

   NEXT FOR FALCONS

   * Who: vs. Giants

   * When: 1 p.m. Oct. 15

   * TV; radio: Fox; 92.9 FM

GRAPHIC: Photo: Family photoSavannah (left) and Jennifer flanked Mora for a
photo this September, some two years after they first met him through the
Make-A-Wish Foundation during his first preseason camp./ImageData* ImageData*
Photo: BRANT SANDERLIN / StaffA game football from Jim Mora's home debut in 2004
is signed by Mora and linebacker Keith Brooking and dedicated to the Prince
sisters./ImageData* ImageData*
Photo: BRANT SANDERLIN / StaffFalcons fans Savannah (left) and Jennifer Prince
(in Falcons blanket) receive their weekly treatment at an Emory lab for their
genetic disorder./ImageData*

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2006


                              608 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            October 5, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: ALGIERS PICAYUNE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: N.O. recovering, town hall audience told

BYLINE: By Brian Friedman, Contributing writer

BODY:

   While trash, blighted properties and crime remain issues for residents of New
Orleans City Councilman James Carter's District C, a recent town hall meeting at
Our Lady of Holy Cross College in Algiers produced many reasons for optimism
that the district and the city as a whole are turning a corner.

   While those in attendance at the Sept. 28 meeting were pleased to hear that
street repairs will begin shortly, starting with the reconstruction of Kabel
Drive between Gen. Meyer Avenue and Gen. de Gaulle Drive, and that Algiers would
be one of the first sections of the city to receive free wireless Internet
through Earthlink, the biggest applause came when Carter announced that
twice-weekly trash pickup would resume in January.

   Carter also touted the Bioinnovation Center, a technology business incubator
that also will house the Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium, being
developed on Canal Street, and the recent groundbreaking at Armstrong Park on a
performance hall/business center, part of the planned New Orleans Jazz National
Historic Park, as signs that the city is making a comeback.

   Carter also promoted the new Courtwatchers program as a sign that
accountability will be the watchword in post-Katrina New Orleans. The program,
Carter said, seeks to make sure that "as cases go through the court system, that
they're handled in a professional way and that we watch the judges' actions and
produce a report card."

   Also on hand to help answer constituents' questions were: Anthony Faciane,
deputy director of the mayor's office of housing; Mike Centineo, director of
safety and permits; Tim Lavelle, of Parks and Parkways; Wes Taylor, director of
environmental health; and Capt. David Kirsch of the New Orleans Police
Department's 4th District.

   Carter said next month's District C town hall meeting will again be at Our
Lady of Holy Cross College, but that the following meeting will be at another
location in Algiers, the idea being to create as direct a democracy as possible,
Carter said.

   "Everybody will have representation in District C," he said.

   For more information on any of the above projects, visit the City of New
Orleans Web site at www.cityofno.com.

   For any complaints regarding blighted property, pests, road conditions or any
other non-emergency, dial 311.

   . . . . . . .

   Brian Friedman can be reached at 615-4306.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2006


                              609 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            October 3, 2006 Tuesday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A03

LENGTH: 991 words

HEADLINE: 2 U.S. Scientists Share Nobel;
Discovery of Gene-Regulating Mechanism Wins Medicine Prize

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Two American scientists  --  one of whom graduated from Fairfax High School
--  awakened early yesterday to learn they will share a Nobel Prize for their
discovery of a gene-regulating mechanism inside cells, an advance that in just
eight years has revolutionized genetics and led to several experimental
treatments for diseases.

    Craig C. Mello of the University of Massachusetts Medical School in
Worcester  --  whose father, a paleontologist, served for years as an associate
director of the National Museum of Natural History  --  and Andrew Z. Fire of
Stanford University's School of Medicine will share the $1.36 million Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their serendipitous discovery of RNA
interference, or "RNAi."

    In a series of experiments on nearly microscopic soil-dwelling worms,
conducted at the Carnegie Institution of Washington's laboratories in Baltimore,
the team stumbled upon a naturally occurring mechanism that allows cells to shut
down individual genes.

    That mechanism, RNAi, appears to have first evolved more than a billion
years ago, helping plants and fungi defend themselves against invading viruses.
But in more complex organisms, including humans, that molecular machinery has
taken on new and more complicated functions. Chief among them is the delicate
job of shutting down a cell's own genes once those genes have completed a task.

    After discovering the mechanism, Fire, Mello and others quickly figured out
how to harness it. Today RNAi is an essential tool for scientists trying to
understand the functions of various genes  --  just turn one off and see what
happens. And it is at the core of several young biotechnology companies
developing therapies that work by turning off troublesome genes.

    "One of the exciting things about this work is that even though it's only
eight years since their paper was published, it already has obvious therapeutic
potential," said Jeremy M. Berg, director of the National Institute of General
Medical Sciences, the branch of the National Institutes of Health that funded
much of the work.

    Mello said he missed the 4:30 a.m. call from Sweden because his wife picked
up the phone and quickly hung up, believing it was a prank. When it rang a
second time a few minutes later, she called out "Don't answer it  --  it's a
crank call!" Mello said in an interview.

    Cautiously optimistic, but fearing it was a friend with a bad sense of
humor, he picked up the phone anyway. Before long, he was putting in an early
wake-up call to his parents, who now run an organic farm in Rixeyville, Va.

    It was Mello's Fairfax High School biology teacher, since retired, who set
him on his path as a scientist, his mother, Sally, said later in an interview.

    The work that won Mello, 45, and Fire, 47, the coveted prize began in the
mid-1990s, when they and others were experimenting with "antisense RNA," a
then-promising method for modulating the activity of genes inside cells.

    Genes are stretches of DNA, each one bearing a molecular code that directs
the production of a particular protein such as a hormone or enzyme. But for a
gene  --  which is made of DNA  --  to make a protein, it must work through an
intermediary molecule called messenger RNA.

    Antisense RNA technology used synthetic strands of RNA to deactivate
messenger RNA, effectively blocking a gene's activity and preventing production
of a particular protein. But that process never worked as well as scientists had
predicted.

    In experiments on millimeter-long worms, Mello and Fire found that
injections of paired strands of RNA  --  which they included as "controls"
because pairs would be expected to cancel each other out and have no effect  --
inhibited genes far more efficiently than single strands of antisense RNA.

    That made no sense, said Thomas R. Cech, who won a Nobel prize in 1989 for
his work on RNA and is now president of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
which funds Mello's work.

    " 'Who mixed up these tubes, anyway?' That must have been what they were
saying," Cech said. "The whole thing was so damned surprising."

    Further experiments revealed that cells of virtually all organisms are
endowed with a mechanism that detects double-stranded RNA and breaks it into
little pieces. At first it was probably a way of defending against viruses, most
of which use RNA rather than DNA as their genetic material.

    Later, it appears, evolution helped organisms use elements of that system to
turn off their own genes. The system involves the production of "short
interfering RNAs" and "microRNAs," short pieces of RNA that can attach to
messenger RNA, thus making double-stranded RNA.

    Some of the RNAs interact with one or both of a pair of proteins  --  dubbed
"dicer" and "slicer" by scientists who apparently spent too much time watching
late-night advertisements for food processors. From there, a chain reaction of
events ends up destroying the targeted messenger RNA and snuffing that gene's
impact on the body.

    Several companies have begun to design therapies that take advantage of
RNAi.

    Acuity Pharmaceuticals of Philadelphia has completed phase two efficacy
studies of an RNAi that shuts down a gene responsible for new blood vessel
growth. Injected into the eyes of patients with age-related macular degeneration
(AMD), a common cause of blindness in older adults, it blocked the overgrowth of
blood vessels that is the cause of that disease.

    Sirna Therapeutics Inc. of San Francisco has completed safety studies for
AMD and is developing RNAi against hepatitis C virus. And Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals of Cambridge, Mass., has been testing an RNAi against
respiratory syncytial virus, which is especially deadly in infants.

    The approach is not without challenges, though. Interfering RNA molecules
are about 50 times the size of conventional drug molecules, posing difficulties
getting them to where they are needed in the body. Some have also proven toxic
in animal tests.

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2006


                              610 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                          September 30, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04

LENGTH: 693  words

HEADLINE: 'Our goal is to wipe it out': Cubs star joins fight to cure eye
disease afflicting daughter

BYLINE: Toni Ginnetti, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   There were no tears Friday. Derrek Lee's desperate sadness over his daughter
Jada's incurable genetic eye disease has inspired an upbeat determination in the
Cubs first baseman to help find a cure.

   At a Wrigley Field news conference, Lee announced his mission: starting a
foundation aimed at finding a cure for Leber's Congenital Amaurosis (LCA).

   LCA is an inherited form of blindness that usually is manifested soon after
birth. Lee's 3-year-old daughter manifested the symptoms within the last month,
but only in one eye.

   "She's still seeing very well out of one eye," Lee said. "We view that as a
positive, and in that sense we continue to ask for prayers that she continues to
have vision in that eye. We still believe that can happen."

   3,000 PEOPLE SAID TO BE AFFLICTED

   The same rare disease afflicts one of the children of Boston Celtics owner
Wycliffe Grousbeck, whom Lee met after specialists told him of their shared
situation.

   They have teamed to form a foundation called Project 3000 aimed at getting
the estimated 3,000 people in the United States who are afflicted by LCA to
undergo genetic testing to further research to find a cure.

   "It's something that's devastating initially when you're told something is
wrong with your child," Lee said. "It's hard to explain unless you're a parent.
You do anything for your child, and you're told there's nothing you can do, it's
a tough pill to swallow.

   "As parents, we want to raise awareness and help other families out, and if
there's a cure, we want to find it."

   LINKED TO A RECESSIVE GENE

   Lee's demeanor was much different than it was Sept. 17, when he choked back
tears and announced he would miss the rest of the season to tend to Jada.

   The defending National League batting champion donned his Cubs uniform and
took batting practice Friday for the first time since that announcement, and he
even joked a bit with teammates. Lee may play today or in the season finale
Sunday.

   In the past decade, research has linked the cause of the retina-damaging
disease to a recessive gene that both parents must possess to pass on to a
child. The hope is that identifying as many LCA-afflicted patients as possible
will broaden the genetic profile of the disease and aid in finding a cure.

   The foundation will work with the John and Marcia Carver Nonprofit Genetic
Testing Laboratory at the University of Iowa. That's where the Lee family was
sent to meet Dr. Ed Stone, considered one of the foremost experts on LCA.

   "Dr. Stone is one of the best," Lee said. Stone put Lee in touch with
Grousbeck, who has a child similarly afflicted. Grousbeck already is active in
charitable causes in the Boston area, including Children's Hospital of Boston,
Perkins School for the Blind and the National Braille Press, among others.

   The foundation has established a Web site for information at
www.carverlab.org/project3000.

   "We want everyone who was diagnosed with this in your life to go get tested,"
Lee said, adding the new foundation will provide financial aid for the effort.
"It's very important. Ten years ago if you had this, they told you there was
basically nothing you could do. You just go home. There was no genetic testing.
They didn't know the gene responsible for this disease."

   ONLY 500 TESTED SO FAR, LEE SAYS

   "Now there's something you can do, so we want people to get tested. It's such
a rare disease that if we can get all 3,000 people tested, patients down the
road will have better information. So we think it's something important. Our
goal is to wipe it out. We want to get rid of it and find a cure. That's what
we're here to do."

   Lee said only 500 afflicted people have undergone genetic testing. "We need
to get everyone with this disease tested to find the genes responsible and find
a cure," he said. "There are clinical trials going on, and we're close to
finding a cure." He said dogs and chickens with a similar condition have had
vision restored through gene therapy.

   "Obviously, it's not humans, but it's progress," Lee said.

   Lee expressed thanks for the outpouring of support his family has received in
the weeks since his daughter's condition developed. "It means a lot to us," he
said.

   tginnetti@suntimes.com

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Cubs first baseman Derrek Lee is shown Sept. 17, when he announced he
would sit out the rest of the season because of his daughter's illness. "If
there's a cure, we want to find it," Lee said Friday.

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2006


                              611 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                           September 26, 2006 Tuesday
                              METRO FINAL Edition

SECTION: NWS; NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1303 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FREES HIM FROM GRIPS OF CANCER;
ALLEN PARK MAN TAKES RISK AS TEST SUBJECT AND WINS

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT

BODY:

   An Allen Park man is free of his advanced-stage skin cancer, 15 months after
his diagnosis, proof - at least in principle - that gene therapy may be
effective in stopping tumor growth for good.

   Thomas May, a 41-year-old engineer with Ford Motor Co., was one of 17
melanoma patients in the United States to receive the experimental therapy in
2005. May and a Wisconsin man responded to the treatment and now show no signs
of cancer.

   When results of the study were announced in the journal Science in late
August, the news created worldwide media attention.

   May's test results in August provided initial, but not conclusive, proof that
scientists can take a person's cells, grow and enhance them in a laboratory,
splice them with another patient's cells that contain just the right stuff and
turn the concoction into an immunological SWAT team that wipes out cancer.

   The big question remains: Will May be rid of his cancer for years, even a
lifetime?

   "We're trying to develop new approaches to treating cancer," said Dr. Steven
Rosenberg, head of the tumor immunology section at the National Cancer Institute
in Bethesda, Md., and leader of the gene therapy study. "We've had minor
improvements, but 600,000 Americans still die each year of cancer. The whole
field of gene therapy is very exciting because it provides the opportunity to
manipulate human cells that don't have the mechanisms to stop cancer. This
represents an important proof of principle."

   May said he thought of his cancer as a terrorist invading his body. "You've
got to pick your weapon and get going," he told himself last year, as he
searched for answers.

   Telling doctors, 'No thanks'

   One doctor, who told May he'd probably die of the disease, gave him only one
option: removal of his left lung, where the melanoma had spread.

   Another offered additional chemotherapy, and added, "The rest is up to a
higher power," May recalled.

   He told both doctors, "No thanks."

   "What kind of game plan is that?" he asked one. "This doesn't sound like
fighting the good fight to me."

   Twenty years ago, May's mother developed melanoma, a disease that can run in
families. It was caught early and hasn't returned.

   Melanoma accounts for only 4% of all skin cancers but is considered the most
aggressive of three types. When caught early, the prognosis for melanoma
patients is very good.

   But if it spreads, as May's did, only 5% of patients survive after five
years, Rosenberg said. An estimated 62,190 new cases of melanoma will be
diagnosed this year in the United States, and 7,910 people will die of it,
according to the American Cancer Society.

   In Michigan, 1,776 people were diagnosed with melanoma in 2002, and 230 died,
the latest year for which figures were available from the Michigan Department of
Community Health.

   May, who is single and a devout fundamental Baptist with a master's degree in
divinity, called the nation's top doctors in melanoma and got right to the
point, asking: "What have you got? How does it work?"

   "I thought there had to be some Thomas Edison-type of doctor working in his
lab thinking he's got something worthwhile," May said.

   He also called Dr. David Nathanson, a cancer surgeon at Detroit's Henry Ford
Hospital and one of May's cancer doctors to whom he turns for a second opinion.
Nathanson pointed May to Rosenberg.

   'I owe him my skin'

   When May asked Nathanson for his personal opinion, Nathanson said, he told
him: "I think I'd go for broke. I'd find a good research program with a good
hypothesis that made a lot of sense. That's what he did, and fortunately he is
where he is now. It's not magical, but it helped a few patients and that's why
I'm so excited."

   In return, May says of Nathanson: "That man is a godsend. I owe him my skin."

   May was fortunate for another reason. Only 17 people were accepted for the
study.

   For once, his type of cancer was a good thing.

   Compared with what he had been through with cancer surgery, chemotherapy and
other drugs to boost his immune system, gene therapy was quick and simple, May
said.

   Other treatments left his body shaking uncontrollably, caused chills and
fevers, persistent skin rashes, severe fatigue 10 times worse than the flu,
near-total loss of appetite and constant pain that felt like a bolt of
electricity running through his legs, he said.

   He took medical leaves from Ford, where he is a quality control engineer, but
he eventually went back to work and finished seminary school.

   On Jan. 4, 2005, with members of Community Baptist Church near Brownstown
Township praying for him, May flew to Bethesda, Md., to begin his new
treatments. As is all enrollment in National Cancer Institute clinical studies,
the therapy was free, even the round-trip transportation. First came five days
of chemotherapy, then the gene therapy delivered through an opening in his
chest, followed by four doses of Interleukin 2 - a drug to jump-start his immune
system. He was discharged Jan. 26, 2005.

   Neither May nor the 16 others in the study had any toxic side effects from
the gene therapy, Rosenberg's team said, though the other two parts of the
treatment brought side effects like fatigue and nausea.

   By March 10, 2005, he got the news he was waiting for. His latest
computerized tomography (CT) scan showed the tumors had shrunk by half.

   "It was like one of those battles in the war; everything turned on that," May
said.

   He returned to work while returning to Bethesda every month, then every two
months, then every three. Each time, the tumors kept getting smaller. In May of
this year, there was only a little smudge that doctors said might be scar tissue
but nothing to worry about.

   By August, doctors said, "Mr. May, we can't see any evidence of this thing.
You have responded completely," May said.

   He plans to return to Bethesda on Dec. 7 for another CT scan. He's back to a
healthy weight of 210, has regained his appetite, particularly for his mother's
German dishes, and exercises faithfully.

   His religion is his mainstay. "I don't like to take my religion and poke it
down anybody's throat," he said.

   But he added: "I want people to know how the Lord has worked in my life. This
is a gift from God. This is the way I want to glorify the Lord."

   (SIDEBAR)

   How gene therapy may fight cancer

   Gene therapy is an experimental approach that uses a person's own genetic
material to fight cancer and other diseases.

   Genes can't be directly inserted into cells, so scientists use viruses, or
carriers, to deliver the genes. Viruses are unique because they recognize
certain cells and can insert genetic material into them. There are many
different approaches, and new studies using gene therapy for other forms of
cancer are expected to begin in the next few months at the National Cancer
Institute.

   In this study of 17 patients with advanced-stage melanoma, a type of skin
cancer, patient blood samples were drawn and mixed with genes from a person only
known as Patient No. 9, who had a type of white-blood cell, known as
lymphocytes, or T-cells, that naturally targets tumor cells. Most melanoma
patients lack this type of T-cell.

   The cells were grown in a lab, enhanced and multiplied into the billions,
until they could be given back to patients through intravenous infusion.

   *More information: www.cancer.gov, or call NCI's cancer information service,
800-422-6237. MELANOMA

   Melanoma is primarily a disease that affects white people, particularly those
with a family history of the disease. Others at risk sunburn easily; have
difficulty tanning; have a history of excessive sun exposure, including from
tanning booths; have a past history of other skin cancers, or have been exposed
to coal tar, pitch, arsenic or other toxic compounds. Its warning signs are
moles that change in color and size.

   Contact PATRICIA ANSTETT at 313-222-5021 or anstett@freepress.com.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo KATHLEEN GALLIGAN Detroit Free Press

GRAPHIC: Thomas May, 41, of Allen Park is now cancer-free 15 months after
undergoing experimental gene therapy for melanoma.
In the midst of his illness, Thomas May called the nation's top doctors in
melanoma and got right to the point. "I thought there had to be some Thomas
Edison-type of doctor working in his lab thinking he's got something
worthwhile," he said, reflecting on his journey to good health.
CAPTIONWRITER: KATHLEEN GALLIGAN/Detroit Free Press
MEMO: SIDEBAR ATTACHED
DISCLAIMER: THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION MAY DIFFER SLIGHTLY FROM THE PRINTED ARTICLE

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              612 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 N.Y.P. Holdings, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The New York Post

                           September 26, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: All Editions; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: FEATURED HARVARD MEN TO FORGET

BODY:

   THE new magazine for Harvard grads is biting the hand that feeds it with a
feature on the Ivy League institution's most embarrassing alumni. The mag,
titled 02138, names Goldman Sachs analyst Eugene Plotkin (Class of 2000) who,
along with a stripper, allegedly uncovered the minutes of a secret grand jury
probing corporate malfeasance and used the info to trade in company stock just
before indictments were announced. Next up is former Enron CEO Jeffrey Skilling
(Class of 1979), who faces up to 30 years in prison for fraud and conspiracy.
Then there's William "Dollar Bill" Jefferson (Class of 1972), the Louisiana
congressman found with $90,000 in alleged bribe money in his freezer. Rounding
out the list is Kirk Wright (Class of '95), who claimed to run a hedge fund and
allegedly cheated investors out of $150 million; and W. French Anderson (Class
of 1963), the "father of gene therapy," convicted of molesting the daughter of
one of his employees. "It's not all good," says the mag, which also chronicles
Harvard's best alums. Editorial director Caroline Miller will toast 02138 at a
launch party tonight at the Core Club.

GRAPHIC: JULIA ROBERTS HOLDS ONTO HER DAUGHTER, HAZEL, AS THEY VISIT A FRIEND'S
BEACH HOUSE IN MALIBU. (Flynet)

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2006


                              613 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           September 22, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; BALTIMORE COUNTY DIGEST; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: BALTIMORE COUNTY DIGEST

BODY:

   Dundalk woman charged with attempted murder

   A 53-year-old Dundalk woman has been charged with attempted murder. She is
accused of helping arrange a robbery at a restaurant where she worked, police
said yesterday.

   Deborah Delores Burton, 53, of the 2900 block of Cornwall Road was indicted
this week on charges stemming from the Aug. 14 robbery of a manager at a Denny's
restaurant in Fullerton, police said. Her 28-year-old son, David Burton, and his
girlfriend, Sarah Lynn Higgins, 20, are also charged in the robbery, Baltimore
County police said.

   David Burton is accused of stabbing and robbing Michael Frederick, a
51-year-old manager at the Denny's restaurant in the 8000 block of Belair Road.
Frederick had intended to deposit the money at a bank, county police said.

   An investigation revealed that Deborah Burton was a Denny's employee at the
time of the incident and helped arrange the robbery, police said. A Baltimore
County grand jury indicted Deborah Burton on Tuesday on charges of attempted
first-degree murder, first-degree assault and armed robbery, police said.

   All three suspects were being held at the Baltimore County Detention Center,
police said.

   Nick Shields

   Essex

   Officer involved in crash

   A county police cruiser hit another car early yesterday morning in the Essex
area, and both drivers were taken to hospitals, officials said.

   Lola Fitzgerald, 52, of the first block of Cutlass Court in Essex was driving
a 1988 Chevrolet Celebrity in the 8800 block of Kelso Drive about 5:45 a.m. when
she stopped to make a left turn into a driveway, county police said.

   A marked Ford Crown Victoria police cruiser driven by Officer Tammy Campbell
rear-ended Fitzgerald's car, police said.

   Campbell's emergency lights were not on, and she was not responding to a call
at the time of the accident, police said.

   Fitzgerald was taken to Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, and Campbell
was taken to the Maryland Shock Trauma Center, county police said. The women's
injuries were not considered life-threatening, they said.

   The cause of the crash is being investigated, police said.

   Nick Shields

   Owings Mills

   Shire wins county award

   Shire Pharmaceuticals, which has more than doubled the work force at its
Owings Mills facility since 2002, will receive Baltimore County's New Direction
Award, officials said yesterday.

   The company, which is adding jobs through its recently completed, $6 million
Pharmaceutical Technology Center, is to receive the award at the Baltimore
County Chamber of Commerce Business Hall of Fame Awards Dinner on Nov. 9 in
Towson.

   Shire Pharmaceuticals is the primary manufacturing facility for a United
Kingdom-based company that focuses on attention hyperactivity disorder and
gastrointestinal, renal and human genetic therapies, officials said.

   At the awards dinner, Robert W. Cannon, a partner in Saul Ewing LLP, and
Robert L. Caret, president of Towson University, will be inducted into the
Chamber's Business Hall of Fame.

   Towson

   Fallen firefighters to be honored

   A memorial service honoring members of Baltimore County fire services who
have died during the past year is scheduled for Sunday in Towson.

   The annual service honors all career and volunteer firefighters, emergency
medical personnel, ladies' auxiliary members and other fire service members.

   The ceremony is scheduled for 6:30 p.m. at Towson United Methodist Church,
501 Hampton Lane.

   Schools

   Community forums Monday

   Community forums have been scheduled for Monday at three locations to give
parents and other members of the public an opportunity to comment on the county
school system's special education staffing plan for this school year.

   The feedback will be used to refine and revise the current staffing plan in
preparation for drafting the staffing plan for the next school year. The meeting
is also designed to be a forum for parents to share opinions and viewpoints on
other special education topics.

   All meetings are scheduled for 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. The locations are: Dogwood
Elementary, 7215 Dogwood Road, Woodlawn; Essex Elementary, 100 Mace Ave., Essex;
and Ridge Ruxton School, 6916 N. Charles St., Towson.

   Parents who cannot attend the community forums can provide input by sending
an e-mail to staffingplan@bcps.org, or by mailing their written comments to
Staffing Plan, Office of Special Education, 6901 N. Charles St., Towson 21204.

   Events or news items for the Baltimore County Digest may be submitted to
baltco.news@baltsun.com. Information should be sent at least 10 days in advance
of the event.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2006


                              614 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                          September 21, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1385 words

HEADLINE: DOCTOR A RESEARCHER AND A CAREGIVER, TOO;
SUN PROFILE;
DR. D. HOLMES MORTON

BYLINE: Douglas Birch, Sun reporter

BODY:

   A lot of prominent scientists have dreamed of using the genetics revolution
to cure or prevent disease. Few have done as much to make that dream a reality
as has a gray-haired 55-year-old pediatrician in Strasburg, Pa.

   Dr. D. Holmes Morton, with his Harry Potter glasses and walrus mustache, has
helped find the altered genes that cause a dozen rare disorders through studies
of the traditional Amish and Mennonite communities of Lancaster County, Pa.

   At the same time, the country doctor has developed methods for treating or
preventing some of these devastating illnesses in the children who ride up to
his clapboard clinic in horse-drawn buggies. He has also struggled, meanwhile,
to provide treatment at prices that his patients can afford.

   This week, Morton, a high school dropout from West Virginia who wound up
graduating from Harvard Medical School, was one of 25 recipients of a $500,000
MacArthur Foundation fellowship. The unrestricted grants are awarded each year
to innovators in a variety of fields, including science, medicine and the arts.

   In between fielding congratulatory phone calls, Morton said that medical
research sometimes loses sight of its ultimate aim, curing the suffering of
individuals.

   "Our goal is to understand the genetic and biochemical basis of these
diseases, and use that understanding to better take care of these children," he
said. "That should happen all the time in pediatrics and genetics. But it often
doesn't happen."

   Morton and his wife, Caroline Morton, run the nonprofit Clinic for Special
Children in Strasburg, built by volunteer labor on donated land. They treat more
than 700 children who suffer from more than 80 genetic disorders. The clinic is
supported by modest patient fees, grants and strong support from the Old Order
Amish and Old Order Mennonite, collectively called "the Plain People" of
Lancaster County.

   On Saturday, for example, a crowd estimated at 10,000 people showed up for an
auction staged by the Amish on the clinic's behalf. It was one of three similar
annual benefit auctions, where items such as handcrafted horse-drawn buggies and
quilts go on the auction block. The nine-member clinic staff routinely diagnoses
and treats such rare diseases as pretzel syndrome, a malformation of the limbs;
maple syrup urine syndrome, an enzyme deficiency that can inflict brain damage;
and Crigler-Najjar syndrome, which can cause a fatal concentration of bilirubin
in the blood.

   Among the genes Morton has helped discover are those that cause
McKusick-Kaufman syndrome, which results in the malformation of the heart and
limbs, and Amish microcephaly, a fatal condition that causes underdevelopment of
the head and brain.

   In addition to conducting the routine X-rays and blood tests offered by most
physicians, the clinic employs a Ph.D. geneticist who conducts advanced
biochemical tests and sequences genes.

   Remarkably, the Mortons have employed these sophisticated new tools to treat
people who shun telephones and automobiles.

   "It has to be regarded as a stunning achievement to take the highest
technology available in health care and medical research and apply it to people
who are averse to technology," said Dr. Leslie G. Biesecker, a senior
investigator with the National Human Genome Research Institute.

   Some colleagues say that Morton's greatest achievement has been his success
at combining the role as a researcher on the frontier of science with that of a
pediatrician striving to help his patients.

   Dr. Alan R. Shuldiner, a professor of medicine at the University of
Maryland's medical school and a medical school classmate of Morton's, said the
MacArthur fellow isn't content to discover new genes.

   "He's really passionate about making sure those discoveries translate into
improved patient care," Shuldiner said.

   A lot of recent research has focused on broadly applicable techniques like
gene therapy to repair malfunctioning genes and stem cells to regrow diseased
tissues.

   Morton has concentrated on disease-specific available treatment strategies.
He has used diets, drug or enzyme treatments and surgery, such as liver and bone
marrow transplants, to help patients who can't wait for medical breakthroughs.

   He discovered, for example, that if children born with the rare genetic
disorder glutaric aciduria are treated with glucose and insulin during their
first five years, they can escape brain injury.

   This sort of retail medicine, he acknowledged, doesn't provide "the magic
bullet that everyone wants" to cure genetically linked diseases.

   But, he added, "there simply isn't going to be one magic bullet. There will
be many, many effective therapies. And in most cases, you won't have to change
the genes at all. You just have to intervene to change the disease process."

   That doesn't mean that basic lab research hasn't contributed to Morton's
work.

   Caroline Morton, who serves as the clinic's executive director, said the
Human Genome Project to map all of human DNA, completed in 2003, has
"revolutionized" the treatment the clinic offers.

   "Many disorders that were previously unrecognized and undiagnosed, now can be
diagnosed through gene sequencing," she said. "And that was all made possible by
the Human Genone Project."

   Dr. Morton said that the public databases assembled from the genome project
are "extraordinary" tools. "We use them literally every working hour of every
day."

   When researchers began mapping the genome in the late 1980s, Morton said, "I
wasn't sure that the payoff would be as immediate and as direct as many people
were selling it as. I have to say, I think I was wrong."

   While the clinic treats only children with genetic disorders, it provides
them with general care as well - mending broken bones and treating sore throats.

   Among the clinic's biggest challenges, Caroline Morton said, is paying for
the sophisticated care that children with rare diseases require. The Plain
People generally shun government-provided health services.

   "These are people who desperately need a fairly advanced level of care but do
not have health insurance and are not wealthy people," she said.

   Dr. Morton became interested in studying genetic disorders among the Amish
and Mennonites in 1988 as a researcher at the Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia.

   One day, a 6-year-old Amish boy showed up with a mysterious ailment. Tests
showed he had glutaric aciduria, a condition diagnosed only seven or eight times
previously.

   Intrigued, the pediatrician drove to the boy's home in rural Lancaster
County. He realized that the condition might be caused by a genetic disorder.
So, as The New York Times Magazine reported last year, he started looking for
that disorder among the Amish. By the end of the summer, he found had 20 more
cases.

   Dr. Morton is only one of many researchers to study genetics among the Plain
People. But he was one of the few to live and work among them and make a
long-term commitment to their care.

   Geneticists have long studied isolated human populations, where marriage to
outsiders is uncommon. It's easier to trace the spread of genes through these
communities, which also tend to have a higher incidence of inherited disorders.

   Genetic testing could tell Amish or Mennonite couples their risk of having
children with many genetic disorders. Prenatal testing could predict whether a
specific child would develop these illnesses.

   But those familiar with the Plain People say that the whole concept of
genetic counseling conflicts with their beliefs.

   "They believe that these children are literally special children, sent from
God to test their belief and conviction in God," said Shuldiner, of the
University of Maryland, who studies diabetes and heart disease among the Amish
and Mennonites.

   "There is no stigma whatever attached to these children or the families of
these children," Shuldiner said. "They're revered in this community."

   Morton hasn't decided what to do with his prize money, although he has some
general goals.

   He would like to expand clinic services, and ensure the clinic's financial
survival. He also wants to find the time to publish more of the results of his
research.

   The physician, though, has no plans to do what a number of MacArthur
recipients have done, using their grants to take a sabbatical. "I have a lot of
work as a pediatrician, and that can't go away," he said.

   douglas.birch@baltsun.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. Dr. D. Holmes Morton is one of 25 MacArthur grant recipients. 2. Dr. D.
Holmes Morton, who with his wife runs the nonprofit Clinic for Special Children,
said that medical research sometimes loses sight of its ultimate aim of curing
the suffering of individuals.
 Photos of Barbara Haddock Tayor : Sun photographer

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              615 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                           September 18, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL -- METRO & STATE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: Prof: Voles evolve 'remarkably fast'

BYLINE: REBECCA NEAL REBECCA.NEAL@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   The genetic traits of the mouselike vole could help unlock some of the
mysteries of evolution, according to a Purdue University professor.

   The vole evolves faster than any other animal ever studied, associate
genetics professor J. Andrew DeWoody says in an article this month in the
journal Genetica.

   The vole has evolved to include more than 60 different species in the past
500,000 to 2 million years, he said.

   "We knew before starting this that speciation appeared to be vast, but only
after doing extensive gene sequencing could we conclude that its DNA evolution
is remarkably fast," he said.

   DeWoody said that perhaps additional study of the vole's rapidly evolving DNA
could lead to a better understanding of gene therapy for humans.

   Instead of researching to discover a particular application for humans,
DeWoody said his vole research was "science for the sake of science."

   "It's just like, why are people interested that the cheetah is the fastest or
that whales are the biggest? It falls into that category -- it's an animal
extreme," he said.

   Voles are small rodents often confused with mice. They have shorter tails and
beady eyes and are considered a threat to agriculture because they eat
vegetation. The animals live throughout the Northern Hemisphere

   DeWoody and a former graduate student, Deb Triant, spent about five years
researching the vole, discovering a number of differences among species.

   The number of chromosomes in various species ranges from 17 to 64, which is
highly unusual. Typically, species within a genus often have the same number of
chromosomes.

   In addition, all voles at first appear to look alike despite their genetic
differences, he said. In one case, DeWoody and Triant could differentiate
between two species only after conducting genetic testing.

   But voles can tell.

   "I have seen absolutely no evidence of mating between different species,"
Triant said in a statement released by the university. "We don't know how they
do this, but scent and behavior probably play a role."

   Many of the tissue samples used in their research came from university labs
and museums across the country, though Triant's cat captured a few voles in the
Lafayette area.

   DeWoody, who has been fascinated with voles since studying them in the 1990s
for his doctorate dissertation at Texas Tech University, said he hopes to
continue his research and reveal more mysteries of evolution.

   "Rodents in general evolve faster than most mammals, thanks to their high
metabolism, short generation times and small body sizes, which all play into
their rate of molecular evolution," DeWoody said. "But really, voles are the tip
of the spear for rodents and all other evolutionary rates."

   Call Star reporter Rebecca Neal at (317) 444-2710.

   ______________________

   Common critters

   Voles (above) are rodents commonly found in North America, Asia and Africa.
They can range in size from 4 to 7 inches and can live for up to four years.
They can be found in wide varieties of habitats and have gray or brown coats,
small ears and short tails. They eat mainly leaves, bark and grasses.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              616 of 783 DOCUMENTS


           Copyright 2006 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                           September 18, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 767 words

HEADLINE: A Sound Idea

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, The Tampa Tribune

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:

   RESEARCHERS HOPE TO USE AN OLD TOOL IN A NEW WAY TO DELIVER MEDICINES AND
DESTROY TUMORS.

   By KURT LOFT

   The Tampa Tribune

   TAMPA - People with cancer often lose the battle with chemotherapy before
treatment can kill the disease itself. Drugs that harm cancer cells also can
attack healthy cells, making such systemic approaches a gamble.

   So oncologists - the people who study cancer - always look for better ways to
tackle the disease, and researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology are
testing a new use for an old tool: ultrasound.

   Their study reveals how ultrasound energy can open a door in the membranes of
living cells, creating a hole through which drugs can enter. They hope
ultrasound might be useful for new gene therapies, more focused forms of
chemotherapy and drugs that don't easily pass through cells.

   It also is a more agreeable complement, and possible alternative, to taxing
chemotherapies, says Mark Prausnitz, a professor in the school of chemical and
biomolecular engineering.

   "One of the great benefits of ultrasound is that it is noninvasive," he says.
"You could give a chemotherapy drug locally or throughout the body, then focus
the ultrasound only on areas where tumors exist."

   The approach isn't just for cancer. The ultrasound technique is merely a way
to deliver a drug to cells; the drug itself is what does the dirty work.

   "Ultrasound just makes the cell membrane more permeable," Prausnitz says by
telephone. "The advance we've made is the mechanism: You're making a hole in a
cell. You open up the cells in way that doesn't damage them and so you can
simultaneously deliver a chemotherapy."

   Ultrasound is sound with a frequency above the upper limit of the range of
what people can hear, or about 20,000 hertz. Its medical uses are many.
Ultrasound waves directed into a person's body bounce off organs and are
reflected back to a detector, where a doctor can see healthy and unhealthy
tissue.

   Because ultrasound waves have very short wavelengths, they interact with very
small objects and can be focused to attack, breaking up kidney stones or tumors.

   In the Georgia Tech study, researchers apply multiple layers of intense
ultrasound energy into tiny "space spots," such as cancer tumors or healthy
cells that need protection from the enemy.

   To help the healthy cells, they blast tiny holes in their protective
membranes. Although the cells repair the damage in a matter of minutes, the
technique buys enough time for researchers to insert therapeutic drugs into the
belly of the cell.

   The idea is akin to a vitamin shot. By injecting healthy cells with special
drugs that make them impervious to the surrounding cancer, doctors can zap the
bad cells with chemotherapy without hurting the good cells.

   Prausnitz used only prostate cancer cells in his study, but he hopes other
classes of cells might benefit from the technique. However, not all types of
cells are equally affected, and researchers need to better understand the safety
concerns of exposing different kinds of cells to ultrasound. A big question,
Prausnitz says, is how much exposure a cell can take.

   "We want just enough impact to allow transport into the cell, but not so much
that the cell would be stressed beyond its ability to repair the injury."

   Prausnitz has been involved in other drug-delivering projects. His work at
Georgia Tech led to a device called the micro-needle, a dime-size disc
containing nearly a thousand tiny needles that imprint the skin just deep enough
for drugs to be absorbed. The micro-needle isn't designed to replace the
conventional hypodermic, but to make it easier for people to take certain
medicines and nutrients.

   The new study appeared in the journal Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology,
with support from the National Institutes of Health and the National Science
Foundation.


   Reporter Kurt Loft can be reached at (813) 259-7570 or kloft@tampatrib.com.

   Photos from Robyn Schlicher, Robert Apkarian and Mark Baran

   Exposure to ultrasound has removed an area of the protective membrane, left,
in a prostate cancer cell. The cells repair the damage in a matter of minutes,
but the hole remains long enough to insert therapeutic drugs into the belly of
the cell. The technique may offer an alternative to taxing chemotherapies.


   Photo by GARY MEEK

   Robyn Schlicher and Mark Prausnitz study cells whose membranes have been
breached by ultrasound. Prausnitz's studies have used only prostate cancer
cells, above, but he hopes other classes of cells might benefit from the
technique.

   Copyright © 2006, The Tampa Tribune and may not be republished without
permission. E-mail library@tampatrib.com

NOTES: SCIENCE

GRAPHIC: PHOTO 3
.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2006


                              617 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                          September 16, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Style; C01

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: 'Frankenstein': Synetic Creates A Monster To Remember

BYLINE: Peter Marks, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

    In the moments after a bolt from the blue jump-starts him into
consciousness, the hulking Creature in Synetic Theater's new adaptation of
"Frankenstein" seems more child than killing machine. He's fixated, like a
duckling, on the being who has brought him into this world, and when his creator
disappears from the stage, his whimpers prompt sympathetic moans all over the
theater.

     He will never be quite this adorable again, though, in the beautiful if
somewhat listless production in the Kennedy Center's Terrace Theater. The
adapters of Mary Shelley's groundbreaking gothic novel, Paata Tsikurishvili and
Nathan Weinberger, develop a portrait of a Creature of impulse, whose response
to any frustration or opposition appears to be of a type that reflects our own
do-it-if-it-feels-good times: He simply snaps the nearest neck.

     As is frequently the case with the highly inventive leaders of Synetic,
Paata and his choreographer-wife Irina Tsikurishvili, the story here unfolds in
methodical fashion to a bravura climax: the Creature (Irakli Kavsadze) dancing
in macabre style with the broken-necked corpse of his creator's bride, as
tormented Dr. Frankenstein (Dan Istrate) is forced to watch.

     The buildup to this startling moment, however, at times feels like a test
of one's patience. The stolid dialogue, trying to replicate the formal dictates
of the early 19th century, sometimes sounds as if it's from the stilted age when
horror-movie talkies were born. More surprisingly, the company skimps on
choreography, usually a Synetic signature.

     Even with those problems, the Tsikurishvilis  --  in this inaugural
offering of their annual residency at the Kennedy Center  --  admirably
demonstrate a continuing growth in the maturity of their ability to tell a story
seamlessly, and an ever more confident handling of technical elements. This
mastery ranges from the arresting music by Konstantine Lortkipanidze and Aaron
Forbes underscoring the action, to the moody eloquence of Anastasia R. Simes's
set and costumes.

     Synetic broke away from the Stanislavski Theater Studio several years ago,
and since then has been based mostly at Rosslyn Spectrum, an airless space
across the Potomac better suited to PowerPoint presentations than spectacle.
Seeing Synetic at work in the Terrace, you begin to grasp how much this ensemble
stands to gain on a more sophisticated playing field. The Kennedy Center
deserves abundant credit for providing at least a part-time foster home to a
deserving local company, one with a potential still to be tapped for dramatic
new directions.

     Paata Tsikurishvili doesn't go in much for elaborate sets, and yet, in
consultation with Simes, he's made shrewd and striking use of the Terrace. The
color palette here is an absence of color  --  black and white  --  and the
starkness seems the right match for the material. Speaking of materials, Simes
has created for "Frankenstein" a weird and wonderful curtain that hangs
midstage: It's an intricate web of wiring or tubing, randomly interwoven and
looking like the unraveling of a circulatory system. (The pattern is repeated in
the female characters' period gowns.)

     My seatmate thought that the set resembled what might happen if a human
being tried to construct a spider's web  --  an interpretation that provides an
even surer gateway to a basic tenet of this classic cautionary tale, the story
of a scientist who plays God.

     In the confrontation between an older, more traditional academic and the
ambitious Dr. Victor Frankenstein  --  who wants to "push our knowledge beyond
what anyone has dreamed of before"  --  there is a warning for Shelley's time,
the burgeoning Industrial Age. And, of course, for our own. Cloning, stem-cell
research, gene therapy, artificial intelligence  --  they all seem to be
foreshadowed in the story of one man and his efforts to defy biological destiny.

     Although "Frankenstein" was long ago defanged and subsumed by
Halloween-type consumerism  --  the popular misconception prevails that the
Creature is called by that name  --  Synetic attempts to reclaim it as pure
morality tale. This adaptation alters a few minor details of Shelley's plot,
presumably for compression's sake and perhaps keeping the cast to a manageable
size. The gist here is that the Creature, reanimated by Victor after being
hanged in a public square, is tormented not only by a repulsed society but also
by his own violent inclinations  --  impulses he cannot control or understand.

     The relationship between the Creature and his Creator, however, feels a bit
underdeveloped in Paata Tsikurishvili's staging; the psychic impact on Victor of
this doomed experiment is never satisfyingly dramatized, for example. The scenes
in which the Creature wreaks his vengeance on Victor's bride (Meghan Grady),
father (Armand Sindoni) and family retainer (Katherine E. Hill) are better
staged than they are explained. The effect is to dull the power of the
characters, many of whom come across as relatively bland.

     It's the beast who gets the best of it. Kavsadze does a swell job of
straddling the fence between humanity and monstrosity. Circling the stage in a
bald cap striped with scars, the massive actor looks vaguely here as if he's
emerged from the pages of a graphic novel. It's an impressive physical
performance, down to the tremors he manufactures both when he's being put to
death on the gallows and brought to life in an electric chair.

     It's not a character with a lot of subtlety, so there's a bit of a charge
any time irony is allowed to show through.

    At one point, the Creature happens upon a public execution. So enraged by
the event is he that he intervenes and, in the process, scares the wits out of
everyone, including the condemned. Who knew a ghoul would have such strong
feelings about the death penalty?

     Frankenstein, adapted by Nathan Weinberger and Paata Tsikurishvili, from
the novel by Mary Shelley. Directed by Paata Tsikurishvili. Choreography, Irina
Tsikurishvili; lighting, Colin K. Bills; sound, Irakli Kavsadze and Paata
Tsikurishvili. With John Milosich, Andrew Zox, Philip Fletcher, Matthew
Eisenberg, Geoff Nelson. Through Oct. 1 at the Kennedy Center Terrace Theater.
Call 202-467-4600 or visit www.kennedy-center.org.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2006


                              618 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                          September 14, 2006 Thursday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 817 words

HEADLINE: VALLEY WINS KEY CANCER PROJECT

BYLINE: Max Jarman, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Phoenix bioscience centers will play a pivotal role in an ambitious national
cancer research program that could lead to faster diagnoses and cures for many
forms of the devastating disease.

   The International Genomics Consortium in Phoenix, with support from the
Translational Genomics Research Institute, has received a $6.6 million federal
grant to set up and manage a national repository of tumor specimens.

   The tissue bank will form the core of the Cancer Genome Atlas Project, an
effort that aims to map the genomes of most forms of cancer to determine what
triggers them and how they can be prevented.

   The grant is the largest to date for the IGC, a non-profit medical research
foundation.

   It is part of a $100 million, three-year pilot project that will map the
genomes of three well-known cancers -- brain, lung and ovarian -- to determine
the feasibility of mapping the more than 235 forms of the disease.

   The National Cancer Institute and the National Human Genome Research
Institute, both parts of the National Institutes of Health, will formally
announce the grant today.

   "It shows the world that Arizona has the capacity to do large-scale national
and international research projects," added Jeffrey Trent, president and
scientific director of the Translational Genomics Research Institute, or TGen.

   If the program is successful, funding for the Arizona tissue bank could
increase tenfold.

   "The pilot involves 4,000 patients, while the larger-scale project is for
40,000," said Robert Penny, president of the genomics consortium who will serve
as the principal investigator for the project.

   Initially, the grant will create six jobs. More importantly, the location of
a national repository of cancer tissue specimens in Phoenix enhances the area's
growing reputation as a center for bioscience research and could draw other
research organizations and pharmaceutical companies to the area.

   "They would want to be near a source of tissue samples," said Richard
Mallery, IGC's chairman and chief executive officer.

   The two organizations were selected from a field of 370 applicants and four
finalists that included some of the country's top universities.

   The IGC already is managing a cancer tissue bank of thousands of specimens,
collected through its Expression Project for Oncology.

   "They are obviously very good," said Ann Barker, deputy director of the
National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. "It was a rigorous selection process
and very competitive."

   "They have been doing this for a while, and we were impressed by what they
have accomplished," Barker said.

   She said that IGC's management and emphasis on quality also impressed those
making the selection.

   "We are very pleased that they are part of the project," Barker added.

   Penny said, "Our selection validates our ability to collect and curate cancer
biospecimens and, importantly, link them with the clinical outcomes and gene
expression."

   Trent says the tissue bank could grow into a global repository for tumor
specimens that could fuel research around the world.

   The Cancer Genome Atlas Project is being called the next phase of the Human
Genome Project, a 13-year effort that identified the approximately 20,000 genes
in human DNA. Trent was the scientific director of the Human Genome Project.

   Mallery said, "This is where we put what we learned in the Human Genome
Project to practical use."

   Bert Vogelstein, director of the Ludwig Center for Cancer Genetics and
Therapeutics at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, says
IGC's expertise in cancer specimen management is crucial to the project's
success.

   "The faculty of IGC and TGen are uniquely qualified to direct this component
of the project," Vogelstein said, adding that the Cancer Genome Atlas Project
will change the way scientists view cancer and move research in new, productive
directions.

   The tissue repository to be managed by the IGC, called the human cancer
biospecimen core resource, will be one of four components to the Cancer Genome
Atlas Project.

   It will acquire, store and distribute tissue samples to a network of cancer
genome characterization centers and genome sequencing centers.

   The sequencing centers will sequence, or map, the tumors' DNA, and the
characterization centers will look for genomic change in human tumors to
determine, among other things, what causes them and what could cause them to
stop growing.

   The information then will be forwarded to the project's data management,
bioinformatics and computational analysis center. The center will manage the
information and make it available to scientists through a public database.

   Although the location of the sequencing and characterization centers have not
yet been announced, it is thought that TGen is a likely candidate to perform the
gene characterization work.

   \

   See sidebar: "Center to be project's 'Grand Central' "

   \

   Reach the reporter at max.jarman@arizonarepublic.com or (602) 444-7351.

GRAPHIC: Phoenix bioscience centers at heart of effort to understand how cancer
genes function.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              619 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 14, 2006 Thursday
                                 ESSEX EDITION

SECTION: TOWNS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 630 words

HEADLINE: Walk to aid stem cell research

BYLINE: ELIZABETH MOORE, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Women from the Sisterhood of Temple B'nai Abraham and the Livingston Chapter
of Hadassah are putting their best feet forward for a walk on Sunday to benefit
the Hadassah University Medical Center in Jerusalem.

   There is a 5K run and a 3K walk taking place at the Livingston High School
track starting at 8 a.m. There is a $20 fee for adults, a $10 fee for teenagers
and a $5 fee for children to participate. In addition, those taking part in the
walk or run are asked to get pledges.

   This year's event will raise money specifically for the Hadassah Research
Center for Human Embryonic Stem Cells, which was established in 2004 at the
Goldyne Savad Institute for Gene Therapy at the medical center in Israel.

   Co-chairwoman  Jane Eisenstat  of Short Hills explained that each year the
temple's sisterhood picks a fundraising project to benefit a program in Israel
and this year threw its support behind the research center.

    "There are so many diseases that could benefit from the research," she said.
"It helps so many."

   Last year's run/walk raised $15,000 for the Women's International Zionist
Organization, to help pay for camps for children whose families have been
affected by terrorism.

   Though the event is sponsored by the two women's organizations, the public is
welcome to participate. Pre-registration may be done through the temple at (973)
994-2290 or participants may register the day of the race. Besides the run and
walk, there will be goodie bags and T-shirts for participants, refreshments and
a deejay for children.

   "We hope that many people will come, rain or shine," said  Debbie Mau
rer-Hollaender  of Livingston, the event's other co-chairwoman.

     2 EVENTS FOR 2 KIDS

   Two fundraisers are planned for October to help two West Essex children with
debilitating health problems.

   On Oct. 12, Notre Dame Catholic Church in North Caldwell is hosting a gala
evening to benefit  Juliet Tufano  , a 7-year-old West Caldwell resident who is
fighting Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia.

   "It's not just a parish, it's a family," said  Carol Macken  , one of the
gala organizers. "We would do anything we could to help a family member in this
situation."

   Actor and comedian  Joe Piscopo  is serving as the master of ceremonies for
the evening known as "Juliet's Gala" which will take place from 7 to 11 p.m. at
the Pleasantdale Chateau, 757 Eagle Rock Ave. in West Orange. Piscopo formerly
lived in North Caldwell.

   The evening will feature cocktails, hors d'oeurves and desserts, a silent and
a live auction along with a 50/50 raffle. A band known as Reeds, Rhythm and All
That Brass will provide the music. Money raised during the evening will be
donated to the Tufano family, who are members of the Notre Dame parish, to
offset medical and child-care expenses.

   Tickets for Juliet's Gala cost $125 per person and are available to the
general public. To buy tickets from  Anne Kunzier  or  Geraldine   Miele  ,
e-mail the church at: NDparish@aol.com.

   On Oct. 18, the second annual Hunter Morris Charity Golf Tournament will be
held at the Skyview Golf Club in Sparta. The tournament was started last year by
Brad Paxson  and  Michael Monteleone  , salesmen at a printing and packaging
company in Fairfield, who know young Hunter Morris' father,  Joe Morris.

     Hunter Morris  , 3, has a rare digestive order called eosinophilic
enteropathy and his diet is limited to a special liquid formula that is
available only by prescription. The golf tournament raises money to offset his
family's medical expenses.

   The tournament starts with an 11 a.m. barbecue lunch and wraps up with a
dinner and awards ceremony at 6 p.m. The cost for an individual player is $185.
For more information, contact Paxson or Monteleone at (800) 610-6210.

     Elizabeth Moore may be reached at (973) 392-1852 or emoore@starledger.com

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              620 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 14, 2006 Thursday
                                 UNION EDITION

SECTION: IN THE TOWNS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: Walk at Livingston High School to aid stem cell research

BYLINE: ELIZABETH MOORE, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Women from the Sisterhood of Temple B'nai Abraham and the Livingston Chapter
of Hadassah are putting their best feet forward for a walk on Sunday to benefit
the Hadassah University Medical Center in Jerusalem.

   There is a 5K run and a 3K walk taking place at the Livingston High School
track starting at 8 a.m. There is a $20 fee for adults, a $10 fee for teenagers
and a $5 fee for children to participate. In addition, those taking part in the
walk or run are asked to get pledges.

   This year's event will raise money specifically for the Hadassah Research
Center for Human Embryonic Stem Cells, which was established in 2004 at the
Goldyne Savad Institute for Gene Therapy at the medical center in Israel.

    Co-chairwoman Jane Eisenstat of Short Hills explained that each year the
temple's sisterhood picks a fundraising project to benefit a program in Israel
and this year threw its support behind the research center.

   "There are so many diseases that could benefit from the research," she said.
"It helps so many."

   Last year's run/walk raised $15,000 for the Women's International Zionist
Organization to help pay for camps for children whose families have been
affected by terrorism.

   Though the event is sponsored by the two women's organizations, the public is
welcome to participate. Pre-registration may be done through the temple at (973)
994-2290 or participants may register the day of the race. Besides the run and
walk, there will be goodie bags and T-shirts for participants, refreshments and
a deejay for children.

   "We hope that many people will come, rain or shine," said Debbie
Maurer-Hollaender of Livingston, the event's other co-chairwoman. TWO EVENTS FOR
TWO KIDSTwo fundraisers are planned for October to help two West Essex children
with debilitating health problems.

   On Oct. 12, Notre Dame Catholic Church in North Caldwell is hosting a gala
evening to benefit Juliet Tufano, a 7-year-old West Caldwell resident who is
fighting Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia.

   "It's not just a parish, it's a family," said Carol Macken, one of the gala
organizers. "We would do anything we could to help a family member in this
situation."

   Actor and comedian Joe Piscopo is serving as the master of ceremonies for the
evening known as "Juliet's Gala" which will take place from 7 to 11 p.m. at the
Pleasantdale Chateau, 757 Eagle Rock Ave. in West Orange. Piscopo formerly lived
in North Caldwell.

   The evening will feature cocktails, hors d'oeurves and desserts, a silent and
a live auction along with a 50/50 raffle. A band known as Reeds, Rhythm and All
That Brass will provide the music. Money raised during the evening will be
donated to the Tufano family, who are members of the Notre Dame parish, to
offset medical and child-care expenses.

   Tickets for Juliet's Gala are $125 per person and are available to the
public. To buy tickets from Anne Kunzier or Geraldine Miele, e-mail the church
at NDparish@aol.com.

   On Oct. 18, the second annual Hunter Morris Charity Golf Tournament will be
held at the Skyview Golf Club in Sparta. The tournament was started last year by
Brad Paxson and Michael Monteleone, salesmen at a printing and packaging company
in Fairfield. The men got to know Hunter Morris's father, Joe Morris, through
their jobs. Joe Morris works at Cole Printing in Roseland and is a Roseland
resident.

   Hunter Morris, who is 3 years old, has a rare digestive disorder called
eosinophilic enteropathy and his diet is limited to a special liquid formula
that is available only by prescription. The golf tournament raises money to
offset his family's medical expenses.

   The tournament starts with an 11 a.m. barbecue lunch and wraps up with a
dinner and awards ceremony at 6 p.m. The cost for an individual player is $185.
For more information, call (800) 610-6210.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              621 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                           September 11, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD  EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 90 words

HEADLINE: OPENING THE WAY

BODY:

   Researchers used ultrasound energy to create temporary holes in the
protective outer membranes of living cells - a technique that one day may make
it easier for chemotherapy, gene therapy, and large-molecule drugs to get into
cells. The work, by scientists at Georgia Tech and Emory University in Atlanta,
was reported in the journal of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. The ruptures
in prostate cancer cells immediately after exposure to ultrasounds are seen in
these electorn micrograph images (at left, above, and bald spots, at right).

NOTES: DISCOVERIES ; STORY IN CAPTION

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2006


                              622 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                           September 10, 2006 Sunday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY NOW; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 2046 words

HEADLINE: EVERYTHING TO GAIN. Seven New Yorkers and the clinical trials that
changed their lives

BYLINE: BY JULIAN KESNER

BODY:

   Talk about being in the right place at the right time.

   Countless lives have been saved or dramatically improved thanks to a medical
practice that requires you to simply show up - and it's completely free.

   Clinical trials, funded by the federal government, pharmaceutical companies
or both, test the safety and efficacy of drugs, medical devices and operating
procedures before they hit the market, and tens of thousands of them are taking
place in the United States now. But Dr. John Leonard can sum up Americans'
attitudes toward such studies in one simple statistic.

   "Only 1% or 2% of cancer patients enter clinical trials here, whereas in
other parts of the world - such as Germany, with Hodgkin's disease - it's over
80% of patients," says Leonard, clinical director of the Center for Lymphoma and
Myeloma at New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell.

   Despite the lack of subjects that has plagued researchers for decades, such
trials continue to save lives. New York hospitals have long led the way;
according to the National Institutes of Health, clinical studies are taking
place at 2,098 locations in the state now, second only to California (learn more
at www.clinicaltrials.gov).

   Best of all for patients, however, is that clinical trials often provide free
medical care for those who otherwise couldn't afford costly therapies or who
have exhausted all other options and are down to their last resort. More often
than not, the studies come with extra-special attention and care. "Patients
often enjoy and appreciate the process of participating," says Dr. Pamela
Rosenthal, a rheumatologist at the NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases. "It's a
different doctor-patient interaction, in part because it's such a structured
format."

   Here are the stories of seven New Yorkers whose lives have been profoundly
changed by taking advantage of this opportunity - and receiving the right
treatment before anyone else.

   DIAGNOSIS: HIV

   Patient: VINCENT PARRILLO, restaurateur & real estate investor, 54, Manhattan

   Trial treatment: The ACTG 384

   trial; various drugs approved by the FDA in the late 1980s and 1990s

   HIV-positive since the early '80s, Parrillo long ignored his condition, even
after his lover died of AIDS in 1992. But this changed when Parrillo ended up in
the hospital with pneumonia in 1999.

   "My T-cell count had always been pretty high, around 1,700 or 1,800," he
says, "but when I got pneumonia in '99, my T-cell count was eight - that's
right, eight."

   Beth Israel Medical Center infectious diseases physician Ronald D'Amico
diagnosed Parrillo and got him enrolled in one of the landmark HIV drug trials
of the late '90s.

   "At that time, like today, the best treatment we had for HIV was a
combination of anti-

   retroviral therapies," says Dr. D'Amico. "Clinical trials really helped
determine which combination of drugs work best."

   "I had no insurance then and had to get AIDS pills right away," says
Parrillo, "so Dr. D'Amico suggested I join the clinical trials so I could get on
the meds and not have to worry about the payments."

   The ACTG 384 trial helped show that a three-drug combo actually works better
than four, and Parrillo today still takes Sustiva and the two-drug Combivir. He
also remains chairman of the Beth Israel AIDS/HIV Clinical Trials Unit community
advisory board.

   "I never feel like a guinea pig," says

   Parrillo. "It's all very confidential and discreet, but they know my life,
and I can say what's on my mind.

   "Clinical trials saved my life. And they still do."

   DIAGNOSIS: CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE

   Patient: BRUCE HOLLOWAY, former insurance underwriter, 56, Bedford
Stuyvesant, Broooklyn

   Trial treatment: Clenbuterol, not yet FDA approved

   Approved as an asthma drug in Europe, clen-buterol is banned in the U.S. but
still used illegally by some bodybuilders. "It's not an anabolic steroid, but
it's a drug that bulks up skeletal muscle and improves strength," says Dr. Simon
Maybaum, medical director at Montefiore's Center for Advanced Cardiac Therapy in
the Bronx.

   Maybaum was intrigued by a recent British study using clenbuterol in
heart-failure patients; with high doses, "half to two-thirds of patients
completely recovered their heart function," says Maybaum.

   The doctor designed a preliminary U.S. safety trial using lower clenbuterol
doses just after Bruce Holloway, diagnosed with congestive heart failure four
years ago, tracked down Maybaum.

   Holloway had been using a cane and was even wheelchair-bound for a while. "I
was ready for anything at that point," says Holloway.

   He faithfully followed protocol, quit smoking and overhauled his lifestyle.

   Holloway's heart function is now over 50% (it was once at 16%). He works out
three days a week and is getting married this fall.

   Maybaum is planning a larger multi-center U.S. study on clenbuterol.

   "I was blessed to get with Dr. Maybaum and this test study," says Holloway.
"He popped this on me when I was hoping for a heart transplant. Now, I want to
keep my own. I want to live."

   DIAGNOSIS: NON-HEALING

   BROKEN LEG

   Patient: CHI WAI LAM, electrical salesman, 44, Brooklyn

   Trial treatment: AASTROM Repli-cell TRC, not yet FDA-approved

   In the winter of 2005, Lam shattered his lower left leg during a snowstorm.
"My car got stuck, and I put a wooden board under the wheel," he says. "My wife
stepped on the gas and the board slid back and hit my leg."

   "We picked pieces of wood out of his leg for hours," says Dr. Thomas Lyon,
chief of orthopedic trauma at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn. Lam wore an
external frame with pins in his legs for months and then a cast, but half a year
later, the bone still wasn't healed.

   Lyon happened to be involved in a clinical trial for a stem cell gel made
from a person's own bone marrow. Cells are removed from the hip in an outpatient
setting and sent to a lab, where amino acids, glucose and oxygen are added to
boost cellular concentration.

   Two weeks later, the resulting paste is mixed with cadaver bone meal and
inserted between the non-healing bone union. Of a half dozen trial patients,
"everyone has healed their fractures," notes Lyon.

   "My muscles are still a little tight, but right now I'm pretty good - about
95% recovered," says a grateful Lam.

   DIAGNOSIS: LYMPHOMA

   Patient: ROSALIE CALLAHAN, retired book publishing executive, 82, Manhattan

   Trial treatment: IBRITUMOMAB TIUXETAN (marketed as Zevalin), approved by the
FDA in February 2002

   'I am the cancer queen," says the spunky Callahan, her voice full of pride.
She owes this self-dubbed title to bouts with lymphoma (and two recurrences),
breast cancer and bladder cancer.

   But Callahan's prognosis is bright after participating in a clinical trial to
test the already-approved Zevalin on her recurrence. "She has had a type of
lymphoma that has transformed to a more aggressive form," says Dr. John Leonard,
clinical director of the Center for Lymphoma and Myeloma at New
York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell.

   "This is basically the FDA saying: How well does it work in this special
subtype?" Leonard adds, as the drug has already been approved for other lymphoma
types. "We want to see if we can get away with not using toxic chemotherapy."

   Callahan received intravenous treatments of the drug last November; thus far,
she's doing well. "An older patient in a clinical trial is an unusual thing,"
says Leonard. "Older patients tend to be more afraid; it's more effort for them.
But this offered her an opportunity to avoid chemotherapy."

   The drug is "injected into the bloodstream, specifically targets the tumor
cells, activates an immune response, and then internally delivers a radioactive
particle," says Leonard.

   "I have a good attitude about medicine, and the treatment was very simple,"
says Callahan.

   "I'm free of lymphoma again."

   DIAGNOSIS: RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS

   Patient: GERALDINE CANTELLO, mother of two, 62, Bayonne, N.J.

   Trial treatment: Abatacept (marketed as Orencia), approved by the FDA in
December 2005

   Geraldine Cantello has been on the cutting edge of arthritis treatments for
21 years - and she's far from pleased about it.

   "I've had injections, infusions, pills, everything," she says. "I have had
all the top drugs as they came out, and they did nothing."

   Cantello's symptoms were unbelievably debilitating, even confining her to a
wheelchair for some time.

   "I was crying and moaning in my sleep. It was brutal," she says. "There was a
time where I couldn't hold a cup. My kids and husband would have to come home at
lunchtime if I was stuck on the toilet."

   Cantello's rheumatologist, Dr. Elliot Rosenstein of Livingston, N.J.,
aggressively researched new options for his patient year after year. In May
2003, he sent her to rheumatologist and clinical researcher Dr. Pamela Rosenthal
at the NYU Hospital for Joint Diseases to try abatacept, a once-a-month infusion
drug that inhibits T-cell activation.

   "It's a very novel biologic therapy," says Rosenthal. "It really brings a
whole new set of tools to modifying immune responses in rheumatoid arthritis
patients."

   A year later, Cantello's pain and physical disabilities had entirely
vanished. "It's unbelievable," she says. "I have absolutely no limitations at
all. It's really a miracle."

   DIAGNOSIS: CANAVAN DISEASE

   Patient: JACOB HOLOVACH, elementary school student, 10, Rye, N.Y.

   Trial treatment: Viral gene therapy

   Jacob Holovach celebrated his 10th birthday on Feb. 24. That's astounding,
considering most Canavan patients don't live past the age of 6.

   "We've been celebrating all year," says his mother, Jordana Holovach, 36.

   Canavan is a genetic disease that runs in Ashkenazi Jewish families. Levels
of a brain acid called N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) grow abnormally high, resulting
in the destruction of myelin, the "white matter" protecting neural pathways.
That means Jacob cannot walk, talk or even sit up without help.

   Holovach has spent years raising funds and awareness (visit
www.jacobscure.org for more) so that Paola Leone, Ph.D., can continue her
research on Canavan disease. Leone, director of the Cell and Gene Therapy Center
at Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Jersey, completed the first-ever
viral gene therapy trial nearly five years ago, where 13 Canavan patients had
healthy genes injected into their brains via a non-pathogenic virus.

   "We've seen stabilization of NAA levels and neurological growth, including
myelin," beams Leone. "We've also learned quite a lot on the pathology of the
disease."

   Leone is testing nonembryonic stem cells in Canavan rodents, and hopes to
conduct the first-ever stem cell trial for a brain disorder on Jacob within 18
months.

   Meanwhile, the gene therapy trial's success is "potentially holding off death
for Jacob," says Jordana Holovach. "We've now got him in a good place where we
can hopefully inject him with stem cells and reverse this disease. Without the
gene therapy trial, we couldn't have done that."

   DIAGNOSIS: KIDNEY CANCER

   Patient: JULIA BARCHITA, RN, EDS, dean at Wagner College, 60s, Staten Island

   Trial treatment: SUNITINIB (marketed as Sutent), approved by the FDA in
January

   Barchita was first diagnosed with kidney cancer in June 2002 and had one of
the two organs removed a month later. "I was told it was encapsulated and that
I'd be fine," she says.

   Sadly, Barchita's encounters with cancer were just beginning. Her husband was
diagnosed with lung cancer two months later and soon succumbed to the disease -
right when Barchita learned her own cancer had metastasized to her lungs.

   Barchita met Dr. Robert Motzer, attending oncologist at Memorial Sloane-

   Kettering Cancer Center, in January 2003, "one week after my husband passed
away," she says.

   Barchita's lung later collapsed, and a course of interferon helped only
briefly. Serving as lead investigator, Motzer got Barchita enrolled in a
clinical trial for a drug called sunitinib, taken in pill form.

   "I was very anxious to go on it," says Barchita. "I didn't have many
choices."

   Two years later, Barchita is completely free of cancer. Motzer says it's the
best response to sunitinib he's ever seen. "That doesn't mean I'm cured, but so
long as they don't see anything, I'm very happy," says Barchita.

   Says Motzer: "I've studied 30 to 50 new drugs for kidney cancer over the last
20 years and I've never found anything that's an improvement like Sunitinib.
It's now the standard first-line treatment for metastatic kidney cancer."

GRAPHIC: FRANCES ROBERTS DAVID HANDSCHUH DAILY NEWS DAVID HANDSCHUH DAILY NEWS
FRANCES ROBERTS JULIA XANTHOS CHET GORDON DAILY NEWS CHET GORDON DAILY NEWS

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2006


                              623 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           September 9, 2006 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 113 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
IN BRIEF;
Ultrasound Found to Help Drugs Enter Cells

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:

   Ultrasound energy can briefly open a door into cells to let drugs and other
compounds inside, researchers reported Tuesday in a study that could lead to
improvements in medical care.

   Ultrasound causes the violent collapse of bubbles, which in turn creates
enough force to open holes in the outer membranes of cells, the team at the
Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University in Atlanta reported. The
holes, which close quickly, allow the entry of molecules as large as 50
nanometers in diameter -- larger than most oral drugs and many proteins, and
similar in size to the DNA used in gene therapy, the researchers reported in the
journal Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2006


                              624 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           September 9, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: Letters | Letters

BODY:


When will we learn?

   Reading The Inquirer's "Those Who Gave All" section on your Web site
(go.philly.com/Iraq) puts a deep sense of tragedy through me. The names and
faces of the war dead should keep our leaders and commentators up at night. But
they won't. This war isn't about winning peace; it's about winning arguments and
political positions.

   Some commentators will call the majority of Americans traitors until the last
helicopter leaves Iraq for good. Those who protested this illegal war will be
blamed for its failure. The ones who said we had no business in Iraq will be
called communists until we come up with a better insult for liberals.

   When the Operation Iraqi Freedom Memorial is put in the shadow of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington, is it then that we'll understand what happened
to our country? Then will we never again march toward an unwinnable war? If our
president could think with his heart and his brain instead of his ego, perhaps I
could read the "Those Who Gave All" section knowing that those thousands of
brave and admirable Americans died to bring about peace, rather than more war.
For shame, Mr. Bush.

   Randy LoBasso

   Philadelphiarandylo2003@yahoo.com

Raising false hopes

   I must echo Len Lichtenfeld of the American Cancer Society: "We have to be
very cautious about not raising hopes too much." I am a melanoma survivor who
works with melanoma patients daily who call our hotline. I know the desperation
that sets in looking for a viable treatment for metastatic melanoma. A headline
such as "Gene-therapy success seen on melanoma" (Sept. 1) is just enough to
elicit false hope if you don't read further. In this scientific field, numbers
count, and two patients out of 17 just doesn't cut it. We need to revisit the
results after many melanoma patients have received this therapy, in a strict
clinical trial setting. If this gene therapy bears fruit, then the real hope can
begin.

   Catherine M. PoolePresident and founderMelanoma International
FoundationGlenmooreinfo@melanomaintl.org

Katrina recovery

   Regarding your recent coverage of Katrina and the recovery efforts:

   I don't know if those stranded in New Orleans were treated so badly because
they were black and poor, but I know they would have been treated differently if
they were white and middle class;

   Federal money will end up rebuilding golf courses before homes for poor
people;

   If you want help from this administration in a natural disaster, you better
be in a swing state in an election year where the president's brother is the
governor;

   It is imperative that we rebuild New Orleans with the diverse incomes and
cultures that existed before Katrina. New Orleans - like Philadelphia, Chicago
and Los Angeles - is what makes America America.

   Louis Agre

   Philadelphia

The real nuisance

   Re: "Food cheap, not dreams," Sept. 6:

   Although I did not know him, Zong Xiang Wang's murder is a blight against our
city, and particularly against immigrants who wish nothing more than to make an
honest living and be part of the American dream. With limited education and
English skills, he sold takeout Chinese food in North Philadelphia. In broad
daylight, he was murdered - despite giving the robbers his money.

   I am appalled that Officer Jeff Smith calls Chinese takeouts in rough
neighborhoods "a total nuisance," that "give drug dealers a reason to hang on
the corner." Smith should take note that it is not the drug dealers who were
killed, but a hardworking family man. Through hard work and sacrifice, long
hours and family involvement, immigrants have built once-abandoned neighborhoods
into thriving communities. Perhaps the police need greater training in
recognizing and protecting the victims and not excusing the victimizers.

   Elaine R. Fox

   Philadelphia

'Wicker Man' fans

   Re: " 'Wicker Man' must appease classic's fans," Aug. 31:

   I haven't seen or heard any reference to the original Wicker Man since...
well, a long time ago. I loved it, and it made me ponder (much as it evidently
did the article's writer) what I thought - and later would learn during my years
at Holy Family University - of various things having to do with religion. All
students had to take either two religion courses or two philosophy courses. I
chose one on world religions and one on the history of the Old Testament.

   The film floats back into my mind every once in a while for some of the same
reasons you outlined - including actress Britt Ekland! I have no idea if the
remake will be any good and I guess I'll at least rent it, but I can't wait to
get the DVD of the original. Thanks!

   Cletus McBride

   Bensalem

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2006


                              625 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           September 7, 2006 Thursday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 00

LENGTH: 1079 words

HEADLINE: Medical & Science Weblog

BYLINE: Medical and Science Staff, The Plain Dealer

BODY:

   This material originally appeared on www.cleveland.com/weblogs/medical

   Thursday, September 07, 2006

   Case researchers help crack genetic code for colon, breast cancer

   2:23 p.m.

   For the past seven years, Dr. Sanford Markowitz and a half dozen colleagues
from Case Medical Center have been dismantling colon tumors from about 100
Cleveland patients in hopes of discovering the cancer's lethal playbook. Teams
from Texas and South Carolina did the same for breast cancer.

   Their biological quest paid off this week with a discovery that could
transform how cancer patients are diagnosed and treated.

   In painstaking fashion, the scientists identified nearly 200 mutant genes
mapped by a separate team from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. Some are mere
voyeurs in the uncontrollable growth of cancer cells, but a handful are lethal
players that work together in disastrous ways.

   The findings, published online Thursday in the journal Science, culminates an
effort that began in Cleveland.

   "I think we have discovered the Rosetta Stone of cancer," said Markowitz, a
cancer geneticist at Case who played a key role in acquiring and growing the
colon cancer tumors used to crack the genetic code. "This is it. This is the
dictionary."

   Like the massive Human Genome Project during the 1990s, creating a genetic
blueprint for cancer has been a long-term fishing expedition that some contend
has siphoned away much-needed dollars from clinical research.

   But believers like Markowitz say the genetic maps have given scientist a
glimpse of a landscape that until now they could only imagine. The knowledge
could lead to more targeted therapies capable of taking down a colon cancer for
good, Markowitz said. They could also lead to better screening tools, he said.

   "We've given the research community the enemy's blueprint," said Markowitz.
"We know now what's important and not important. At the end of the day, you can
put down a short list of less than 200 genes and say these are the genes that
are causing cancer. We are exhausted and excited."

   Dr. James Willson, director of the Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer
Center at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, said the DNA
sequencing yielded a number of surprises.

   Both solid tumors erupt from an unfortunate collision of genetic and
environmental forces, but the research clearly showed breast and colon cancer to
be dramatically different diseases controlled by different genes with different
triggers.

   "So the way we develop new diagnostic tests and new therapeutics are going to
be different," said Willson, previously director of the Ireland Cancer Center at
Case Medical Center.

   By Regina McEnery, rmcenery@plaind.com

   Brain surgery for depression makes "Primetime"

   9:14 a.m.

   Cindy Warren, a Cleveland Clinic patient featured in an April 2006 Plain
Dealer article, will appear on ABC's "Primetime" tonight at 10 p.m.

   Warren, of Michigan, turned to experimental brain surgery in 2005 after years
of taking antidepressants, participating in weekly therapy sessions and
undergoing more than 100 treatments with electroconvulsive therapy. She was part
of a small clinical trial to assess deep brain stimulation, or DBS, as a
treatment for depression.

   Warren will be joined on the broadcast by Dr. Ali Rezai, the Clinic
neurosurgeon who performed her DBS procedure, and Dr. Donald Malone Jr., her
Clinic psychiatrist.

   By Sarah Treffinger, streffinger@plaind.com

   Wednesday, September 06, 2006

   No new Hepatitis A at Kent State

   5:25 p.m.

   A female Kent State University student tested for hepatitis A does not have
the virus, officials said Wednesday, four days after announcing that a male
student who works in food services had been diagnosed with it.

   The female student was tested Friday after she was shown to have inflammation
of the liver, even though she had no evident link to the male student.

   No other cases have been reported or suspected, but more than 460 people have
received immunizations since Friday.

   By Sarah Treffinger, streffinger@plaind.com

   Medical innovation summit to spotlight trends

   4:36 p.m.

   The Cleveland Clinic is gearing up to host its fourth-annual Medical
Innovation Summit, which is expected to attract 800 executives, entrepreneurs,
venture capitalists and clinicians.

   The event, which is scheduled for Nov. 6-8, will focus on trends in
innovation and neurosciences. The roster of speakers and panelists includes the
chief executives of such companies as General Electric and Boston Scientific, a
retired senator and a Nobel laureate. Registration costs $799.

   Dr. Sanjay Gupta, a neurosurgeon and senior medical correspondent for CNN;
Robert Bazell, chief health and science correspondent for NBC; and Thomas
Stewart, editor of the Harvard Business Review, will be on hand to introduce
speakers and moderate some of the discussions.

   "We think it will make for a very lively exchange between the audience and
the speakers," said Chris Coburn, executive director of CCF Innovations, which
organizes the summit.

   The agenda includes two minimally-invasive brain surgeries, which will be
broadcast live in the InterContinental Hotel & Conference Center Cleveland,
located on the Clinic campus.

   New this year: The announcement and discussion of the "Top 10" medical
innovations that a group of Clinic experts believes will have a significant
impact in 2007.

   For the first time, attendees also will have a chance to win prizes - a free
executive physical from the Clinic and an all-expenses-paid trip for two to
Ireland from Enterprise Ireland, one of the summit's sponsors.

   By Sarah Treffinger, streffinger@plaind.com

   Friday, September 01, 2006

   Case names interim medical school dean

   4:11 p.m.

   One of the country's top cystic fibrosis researchers will lead Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine until a permanent replacement can be
found.

   Dr. Pamela Davis, chief of the pediatric pulmonary division at Rainbow Babies
& Childrens' Hospital, will step into the role now held by Dr. Ralph Horwitz,
who accepted a position as chief of medicine at Stanford University.

   A 1974 graduate of Duke University School of Medicine, Davis joined the Case
faculty in 1981. She directs the Willard A. Bernbaum Cystic Fibrosis Research
Center and is one of the most heavily funded National Institutes of Health
researchers working at Case. She has published more than 120 articles, holds
seven U.S. patents and serves on a number of scientific advisory panels.

   Davis will assume her new duties Sept. 15.

   By Regina McEnery, rmcenery@plaind.com

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2006


                              626 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                           September 7, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 812 words

HEADLINE: Tumor-suppressing gene also found to contribute to aging;
When body boosts defenses to fight cancer, system stops restoring cells,
researchers say

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

   Researchers have uncovered a fundamental new link between stem cells and
aging: a genetic system in the body that seems to fight cancer but also
regulates the restorative cells that keep aging at bay.

   Three research teams, each looking at a different organ system, found
evidence that a tumor-suppressing gene called p16 also regulates the powers of
stem cells to renew themselves.

   But it's a balancing act.

   When the body beefs up its cancer-fighting defenses, the researchers found a
shift away from the gene's ability to restore cells of the blood, pancreas and
brain, and aging results.

   Stem cells are best known for their all-important starting role in embryonic
development. They also serve throughout life as agents of tissue regeneration --
templates that can be copied into fresh new cells as needed.

   That ability of stem cells to proliferate indefinitely also can give rise to
cancer.

   Scientists at the University of Michigan and colleagues said aging is not a
matter of a body simply wearing out but actually is an active process, in which
the genetic machinery that keeps organs young essentially shifts gears.

   The machinery clamps down on the proliferative capacity of adult stem cells,
and p16 plays the central role.

   The increased activity of the cancer-suppression system helps to lessen the
risk of tumors, despite the accumulation of molecular defects -- such as errors
in the DNA caused by exposure to sunlight, perhaps, or toxic chemicals -- that
otherwise would allow cancers to form unchecked.

   That's necessary for survival, "yet with it you get the unfortunate downside
of having this induced aging," said David Scadden at the Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, who looked at stem cells in the bone marrow and blood supply.

   The research, which appears in the latest issue of Nature, was done using
multiple generations of genetically engineered mice, but is thought to apply to
virtually all mammals, humans included.

   Independent experts who also have been studying the p16 system said the new
research was a major step forward -- the first time p16 was shown to play a
critical regulatory role not only in cancer, but also in stem cells and tissue
repair.

   "It's a very fundamental finding," said Thea Tlsty, a molecular pathologist
at UCSF's Comprehensive Cancer Center, who is looking at how the p16 system
might offer a way to rate someone's cancer risk before serious symptoms appear.

   Stem cell biologists have long realized that cancer cells and stem cells have
much in common.

   In many ways, cancer can be thought of as "stem cells that have lost
control," said Dr. Evan Snyder, head of a stem cell research effort at the
Burnham Institute in San Diego.

   Snyder said the latest results signal "a new wave of research" uncovering
some of the precise mechanisms of stem cell regulation and their links to
cancer.

   "Stem cells divide a lot but know when to stop. Tumor cells do not -- so why
does that happen?" he said, suggesting that if the differences between normal
and cancer-causing stem cells can be identified, it would be possible to tailor
cancer therapies to spare the healthy function of stem cells.

   It might also be possible to use p16 to either turn up the activity of stem
cells, to retard aging, or turn it down, to reduce cancer. But scientists said
neither seems a very promising avenue because of the risks involved in upsetting
the delicate balance between cancer and senescence.

   Efforts to treat cancer by administering tumor-suppression gene therapy have
generally not produced favorable results, partly because of the difficulties
administering therapeutic genes in advanced cases.

   At the other extreme, cranking up stem cell activity to slow or reverse aging
might work for a time but also could be "very risky -- strongly
cancer-promoting," said Dr. Norman Sharpless, a cancer specialist and assistant
professor of medicine and genetics at the University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, whose laboratory looked at p16's function in pancreatic cells.

   One of the most promising upshots of the research may be development of what
Sharpless called "a molecular odometer of aging" -- a way to tell at the
cellular level how biologically aged a person is, which often differs from
chronological age.

   Tlsty, for instance, is looking at ways of distinguishing different stages of
cellular changes that can lead to certain cancers. By examining the status of
p16 in cells, she said, "you get a baby picture of cancer" before it matures
into clinical problems.

   That could allow doctors to predict early on which people actually need
treatment and which don't. Also, physicians might be able to track chemotherapy,
which also ages cells.

   "We're trying to understand how p16 controls both the good and the bad,"
Tlsty said. "We can start to look at people with high risk and talk about which
of those people will go forward and develop cancer and which will not."

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2006


                              627 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                           September 2, 2006 Saturday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1712 words

HEADLINE: RECAP OF THE WEEK'S NEWS

BYLINE: Compiled by Dan Kincaid from reports by Republic writers John Stanley,
Shaun McKinnon, John Faherty and Jon Kamman and the wire services.

BODY:

   SKY NOTES: Summer may be ebbing, but its constellations still ride high in
September's evening sky.

   Prominent above all others is the unofficial constellation known as the
Summer Triangle, made up of the bright stars Vega, Altair and Deneb. Each is the
brightest star in its respective constellation: Lyra the Lyre, Aquila the Eagle
and Cygnus the Swan, also known as the Northern Cross.

   The giant triangle is easy to find. Just go outside an hour or so after
sunset and look up. The bright star nearly overhead is Vega, in the
constellation Lyra.

   The almost equally bright star approximately 35 degrees to the
south-southeast is Altair, and the bright (but not quite as bright as Vega and
Altair) star about 20 degrees northeast of Vega is Deneb.

   If you're observing from an area free from the urban glaze of light
pollution, you'll see the ghostly band of the Milky Way, our own galaxy, running
through the Summer Triangle.

   In the northeastern sky, you'll find another old friend: Cassiopeia the
Queen. The constellation forms a big "W" or "M," depending on its position.

   A recap of recent science and health news:

   DROUGHT NOT OVER: Arizona's rivers and reservoirs have swollen with runoff
from monsoon thunderstorms, turning on its head the article of water faith that
the state benefits more from winter snow than summer rain, the Republic reported
Sunday.

   Water levels in key reservoirs across the state have climbed by about 4
percent since Aug. 1. In a typical year, storage during August declines by 5
percent or more. Monsoon-fed runoff into Salt River Project's six reservoirs has
exceeded winter runoff for only the ninth time in more than a century of
record-keeping.

   Summer rains improved conditions on the state's parched rangelands, a badly
needed boost for wildlife and ranchers who graze cattle in forests and on
grasslands. The wetter weather also reduced wildfire danger significantly.

   What the monsoon hasn't done is end the drought that has gripped Arizona for
more than a decade. Still, the monsoon will leave a far greater impact than it
usually does.

   IMPLANTS GIVE HEARING: Sherri Collins was using sign language to talk to her
husband Tuesday afternoon when she suddenly stopped.

   "Oh, I can hear him signing," she said with a look of amazement. "His hands
make noise. I didn't know that."

   Collins, 42, executive director of the Arizona Commission for the Deaf and
Hard of Hearing, was hearing for the first time because her cochlear implant had
just been activated.

   Born profoundly deaf, she had spent her life using sign language, reading
lips and using two hearing aids to bring her a modicum of normal sound. Cochlear
implants, which bring sound to the deaf by using electronic pulses to activate
nerves in the inner ear, have become increasingly popular over the past 20
years, but opting for the surgery is not an easy decision for the deaf.

   Initially there were deep concerns in the deaf community about the surgery.
Some feared it would further define deafness as something broken that needed to
be fixed.

   Some feared people with the implants would leave the deaf community and start
identifying themselves as part of the hearing world.

   "Since the initial controversy in the deaf community years ago, we have found
that deaf people who become implanted don't leave the deaf community," Collins
said. "They become deaf people with cochlear implants."

   HEALTH INSURANCE: Arizonans are hurting for health insurance, census figures
indicated Tuesday.

   As many as 1.2 million residents, or 1 in 5 people, had no health insurance
last year, a level not seen since 1999, the Census Bureau reported.

   The estimate represented an increase of up to 225,000 people from 2004 to
2005.

   According to the figures, 20.2 percent of Arizonans were uninsured in 2005.

   Authorities questioned the accuracy of such an extreme jump but said that
whatever the figure, it reflects a worsening of Arizonans' ability to cope with
higher health care costs and insurance premiums.

   MELANOMA SUCCESS: Government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumor
attackers that wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma.
The striking finding, unveiled Thursday, marks an important step in the quest
for gene therapy for cancer.

   But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the shots.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first real
success in cancer gene therapy because it fought cancer's worst stage, when it
has spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted single
tumors.

   And the government hopes to soon begin testing the gene therapy in small
numbers of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced breast or
colon cancer.

   The hope is that one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumor
suppression.

   The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years after
infusions of tumor fighters made from their own blood. Doctors can't predict how
the men will fare long term. Melanoma, the most aggressive skin cancer and
killer of almost 8,000 Americans a year, is notorious for returning years after
patients think they've subdued it.

   GREENHOUSE-GAS FIRST: California's legislature approved the broadest
restrictions on carbon dioxide emissions in the nation Thursday, marking a new
stage in the accelerating drive for a more aggressive national response to
global warming.

   The California bill requires a 25 percent cut in carbon dioxide pollution
produced within its borders by 2020 in order to bring the total down to 1990
levels. In at least eight other states, political momentum is building to take
similar steps to limit emissions of "greenhouse gases" linked to climate change,
a trend that could increase the pressure for a national system despite the Bush
administration's consistent opposition to mandatory caps.

   The California law also provides a statewide market system designed to make
it easier for heavily polluting industries to meet the new limits. They would be
able to buy "credits" from companies that emit fewer emissions than the caps
allow, rather than having to invest in less polluting new technologies.

   The measure cleared the California Senate Wednesday night. The Assembly, on a
46-31 vote, sent it on to Republican Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, who pledged to
sign it.

   NICOTINE CONTENT UP: Even as measures to discourage smoking grew more
stringent in recent years, a new report indicates that the nicotine content of
cigarettes rose, making it tougher for smokers to quit.

   From 1998 to 2004, the amount of nicotine that could be inhaled from
cigarettes increased an average of 10 percent, the study by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health found. Nicotine is the chemical that causes
cigarettes to be addictive, and the study, released Tuesday, found higher levels
in all classes of cigarettes, including those branded "light."

   STEM-CELL UPDATE: The California biotech company that grabbed headlines last
week for sparing human embryos while creating precious stem cells in fact
destroyed all 16 embryos used in the experiments.

   Advanced Cell Technology vice president Robert Lanza, senior author of the
research, was widely quoted as saying he hoped the new embryo-sparing approach
to making stem cells would overcome ethical objections and expand federal
funding for the research.

   Supplemental data submitted with the paper revealed that Lanza's team did not
fully use the approach, it just extrapolated from less ambitious experiments.

   But the lay media weren't the only ones who misunderstood. Nature, the
prestigious international journal that published the paper, initially issued a
news release that declared Lanza's team had made embryonic stem-cell colonies
"while leaving the embryo intact." The journal has since issued two
"clarifications" and published online the supplemental data showing the embryos
were destroyed.

   SUNSCREEN WARNING: California researchers report that sunscreens are
beneficial, but the lotion itself can actually generate compounds that damage
the skin if they are not reapplied often enough to maintain a constant
protective sun shield.

   When skin is exposed to sunlight, ultraviolet radiation is absorbed naturally
by skin molecules that then can generate harmful compounds called reactive
oxygen species, or ROS molecules, according to lead researcher Kerry Hanson, a
senior research scientist in the department of chemistry at the University of
California-Riverside.

   Sunscreen blocks ultraviolet radiation from penetrating the surface of the
skin, inhibiting sunburn. But the sunscreen compound seeps into the skin as it
wears off and itself generates ROS molecules. The problem, Hanson said, is that
people often apply sunscreen once and don't reapply.

   OBESITY NATION: The United States continues to get fatter, with Mississippi
and other Southern states leading the way, according to a report issued Tuesday
by the advocacy group Trust for America's Health.

   The report found 29.5 percent of Mississippi residents were obese. Nine of
the 10 states with the highest rates of obesity were in the South, according to
the report.

   At the other end of the spectrum, Colorado was the leanest state, with only
16.9 percent of its residents obese, still above federal guidelines which call
for a maximum obesity rate of 15 percent.

   Arizona is among the most lean. The state ranks 44th on the obesity list with
20.8 percent of its residents obese.

   NEW VACCINE HARD TO FIND: Many parents hoping to get their daughters a new
cervical cancer vaccine at their back-to-school checkups are winding up
disappointed: The expensive shots, although recommended by a panel of experts,
are often hard to find or not yet covered by insurance.

   The vaccine, Merck & Co.'s Gardasil, has been hailed by many doctors as a
breakthrough in cancer prevention. It prevents infections from four strains of
the sexually transmitted human papilloma virus, or HPV, which can cause cervical
cancer, other genital lesions and genital warts.

   \

   Lowell Observatory's Star Tales

   Members of a team using the Subaru Telescope in Hawaii recently reported the
discovery of nine more satelites obrbiting Saturn; 12 were discovered by the
same team the year before. The discovery is part of the Hawaii Irregular
Satelites Survey.

GRAPHIC: 1) Sherri Collins reacts to hearing for the first time. CAPTION: 2)
Lowell Observatory's Star Tales

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              628 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Arizona Republic
                              All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                              Final Chaser Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: MORE TRIALS ARE NEEDED, CANCER RESEARCHERS SAY

BYLINE: Connie Cone Sexton, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Arizonans involved in cancer or gene-therapy research are optimistic about
the National Cancer Institute's findings on treating advanced melanoma.

   But they caution that further clinical trials are needed. One of the big
questions is whether the treatment will be toxic to any parts of the body.

   The Translational Genomics Research Institute, Mayo Clinic Cancer Center,
Arizona State University and University of Arizona have joined in a project to
study the deadly disease. Here is reaction from some of those corners:

   Jeffrey Trent

   Title: President, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix.

   Thoughts: "It has to be one of most encouraging clinical studies of melanoma
in the past decade. I'm guardedly optimistic that this could be something of
significance for a disease that desperately needs a hope for these patients. The
problem of melanoma remains an exceedingly difficult one, especially for those
with advanced disease metastasis. The survival is measured in months, and that
has not changed in the last 30 years."

   Dr. Michael Gornet

   Title: Melanoma specialist and assistant professor for the Mayo Clinic in
Scottsdale.

   Thoughts: "This does sound very promising. Melanoma is one of toughest tumors
to treat. But this is not quite ready for prime time. What will happen is that
Mayo and the UA (University of Arizona) will get a million phone calls from
people wanting to know when they can start the new drug. But the only place to
get this is the National Cancer Institute and very few people will qualify."

   Katrina Trevor

   Title: Research associate professor, UA's Arizona Cancer Center in Tucson,
who has had experience in T-cell modification.

   Thoughts: "I think it's very promising, but no therapy is a stand-alone
therapy. This is a very early-stage study with limited responses, but it is
promising for the field of gene therapy. When you look at the number of people
who die with melanoma, you do get optimistic. Hopefully, they can trick the
T-cells to be memory cells, and they will reside in the body (for continued
attacks on cancer cells)."

GRAPHIC: Jeffrey Trent CAPTION: Dr. Michael Gornet CAPTION: Katrina Trevor

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              629 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 867 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy used for cancer;
Melanoma remedy a limited success

BYLINE: JEFF NESMITH; Cox Washington Bureau

BODY:

   Washington --- Government scientists revealed Thursday that they had
successfully used genetic engineering to "train" the white blood cells of two
melanoma patients to attack and destroy the cancer.

   The experiment failed to help 15 other melanoma patients.

   However, it represents a "proof of principle" that gene therapy can be used
to successfully treat cancer, other scientists said.

   Plans are under way to expand the experiment with efforts to treat breast and
lung cancer, said Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the National Cancer Institute researcher
who directed the melanoma experiment.

   By inserting a gene that enabled the white cells to recognize melanoma, the
NCI scientists caused the cells, known as lymphocytes, to swarm through the
bodies of two men, finding cancer cells and destroying them.

   The two patients have been cancer-free for nearly two years, even though the
cancer had metastasized throughout their bodies when the treatments were begun.

   The experiment represents a personal victory for Rosenberg, a surgeon and
biophysicist who has spent nearly two decades at NCI searching for a way to turn
the human immune system against cancer.

   If the success rate can be increased and applied to other types of cancer,
the use of genetically modified lymphocytes would be an entirely new approach to
treating the disease.

   "This may be the most important paper I have ever written," said Rosenberg,
whose team describes the new treatment Friday in the journal Science.

   He said lymphocytes --- sometimes called "killer cells" because they attach
themselves to diseased cells and destroy them --- normally do not attack cancer
because the body does not program them to recognize cancer cells.

   His team implanted a gene that does recognize melanoma into white cells taken
from the patients' own blood, grew billions of the genetically changed cells in
a laboratory, then reinjected them into the patients.

   "These results represent the first time gene therapy has been used
successfully to treat cancer," said Dr. Elias Zerhouni, director of NCI's parent
agency, the National Institutes of Health.

   "Moreover, we hope it will be applicable not only to melanoma but also for a
broad range of common cancers, such as breast and lung cancer," he added.

   Rosenberg said he is awaiting Food and Drug Administration approval to
attempt the treatment on lung and breast cancer patients with lymphocytes that
have been changed to recognize those forms of cancer.

   The melanoma experiment caused Mark Origer, the 53-year-old postmaster of
Watertown, Mass., to become one of NCI's most ardent supporters.

   "I am so thankful that place is there and that there are brilliant minds
working on these problems," Origer, one of the two patients in whom the
treatment succeeded, said in a telephone interview.

   He said his frightening struggle with melanoma began in 1999, when his wife
noticed a small dark mole between his shoulder blades.

   After the mole was removed, a biopsy showed it contained melanoma cells.
Despite repeated operations and chemotherapy treatments, the cancer continued to
spread, he said.

   "It's an emotional roller coaster," he said. "You fight it and you feel
you've done all you can do, and sometimes you get your hopes up and think you've
finally defeated it. And then it shows you who's boss."

   Origer said doctors finally told him they could not stop the cancer's spread.

   "They told me there are some treatments that would buy me a year, but that's
all," he said.

   He said he and his wife "went to the Internet" in search of clinical trials
and learned of the NCI research.

   After he was accepted to participate in Rosenberg's research, blood was drawn
from his arm, and the white cells were separated out.

   Rosenberg said in an interview that some melanoma patients produce white
cells that are capable of recognizing telltale "knobs" on the cancer cells. When
these cells encounter a melanoma cell, they "clomp onto [the knob] and inject
molecules called perforins that cause the cell to burst open," he said.

   But most melanoma victims and all the victims of other forms of cancer do not
produce white cells that can recognize cancer cells, Rosenberg said.

   After his lab located the gene that allows some lymphocytes to recognize and
home in on melanomas, they spliced it into a retrovirus. Lymphocytes from Origer
and the other 16 melanoma patients were then infected with the retrovirus.

   Billions of the altered lymphocytes were grown in the laboratory and were
then injected back into the patients from which they came.

   For Origer and the other patient for whom the treatment succeeded, it was
only a few months before scans showed their cancers beginning to shrink.

   Finally, they disappeared altogether.

   "I was sitting in Dr. Rosenberg's office, waiting to hear the results, and he
walked in with a smile on his face," Origer recalled.

   Rosenberg said he believes the reason the treatment failed in the 15 other
patients was because the implanted gene did not cause their cells to readily
recognize melanoma.

   "I now have genes that are from 10 to 100 times more effective at finding the
melanoma marker," he said.

   He said he also has genes that can cause lymphocytes to recognize breast
cancer, lung cancer and many other tumors.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Origer familyMark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis., had end-stage
melanoma and feared he would die before his daughter Katie's wedding last fall.
He underwent experimental gene therapy in December 2004 and appears
disease-free. However, 15 patients did not benefit.
Photo: Dr. Steven Rosenberg said a theory was proved though much work remains.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              630 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1169 words

HEADLINE: ENGINEERED CELLS BEAT CANCER IN HUMAN TEST;
IN EXPERIMENT, 2 OF 17 PATIENTS SAW KILLER TUMORS VANISH

BYLINE: Michael Stroh, Sun reporter

BODY:

   In a small study of patients with terminal skin cancer, Maryland scientists
have demonstrated for the first time that genetically engineered immune cells
can kill off large tumors.

   The research, conducted by a team at the National Cancer Institute in
Bethesda, remains highly experimental, and it worked on just two of the 17
patients in the study.

   But excited government scientists said it is the first time gene therapy has
vanquished an advanced cancer. More important, the technique could serve as a
potent new assault weapon against breast, lung and other, more common cancers,
researchers said.

   "It's a very important study and potentially a major breakthrough in cancer
treatment," said Dr. Ephraim Fuchs, an expert on cancer immunology at the Johns
Hopkins Kimmel Cancer Center who did not participate in the research.

   Beyond its direct therapeutic potential, scientists said, the NCI study is a
big shot in the arm for the 16-year-old field of gene therapy - the effort to
cure or control disease by introducing new DNA into the body, typically using a
harmless virus as a delivery vehicle.

   Once seen as a potential miracle cure for a wide range of ailments, the
technique was criticized for not living up to its initial promise and suffered
several high-profile setbacks that brought work in the United States nearly to a
halt.

   A 1999 gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania led to the death
of an 18-year-old research subject, causing government regulators to step up
oversight of the field.

   A few years later, three children enrolled in a successful French gene
therapy trial developed leukemia. One later died. The Food and Drug
Administration responded by briefly shutting down more than two dozen gene
therapy experiments in the U.S.

   But in recent years, gene therapy researchers have quietly been making
headway. Today nearly 130 U.S. gene therapy trials are actively recruiting
patients for diseases as diverse as AIDS, arthritis, cystic fibrosis and heart
disease.

   "The general mood in the field is more realistically upbeat than it was in
the past," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, president of the American Society of
Gene Therapy. "We now have some very striking results."

   One application showing the most promise is gene therapy for cancer, says
Friedmann.

   Deadly skin cancer

   In the latest study, published yesterday in the online edition of Science,
researchers removed white blood cells, lymphocytes, from 17 people with
melanoma, the deadliest form of skin cancer. The volunteers had all stopped
responding to other treatments and were believed to have six months or less to
live.

   In the lab, scientists inserted genes into each patient's lymphocytes to make
them capable of recognizing the tumor cells. The genes essentially acted as a
mug shot of melanoma.

   "It gives the cells a new property that they've never had before," said Dr.
Steven Rosenberg, who headed the research team.

   Finally, scientists coaxed the engineered lymphocytes to reproduce and then
injected this new billion-cell army back into each patient's body.

   Mark Origer, 53, was one of two volunteers in the study who learned that
their tumors were melting away after the experimental treatment.

   Origer first received a diagnosis of melanoma in 1999 after noticing a small
mole on his back. The tumors spread to his lymph nodes and liver; by summer
2004, doctors said he had less than a year to live. About the same time, his
oldest daughter announced she was planning to marry in the fall of 2005.

   "I wanted to be there to walk her down the aisle," said the Watertown, Wis.,
postmaster.

   He enrolled in the NCI gene therapy study and received his genetically
altered white cells a few weeks before Christmas 2004.

   Much to learn

   He remembers that, at his first follow-up appointment two months later,
Rosenberg was beaming as he and colleagues walked into the hospital room to
break the good news.

   "Dr. Rosenberg said, `We're going to learn so much from you,'" he recalled.

   Both Origer and the other volunteer who responded to the therapy remain
cancer-free today, more than 19 months after the trial. Just as important, none
of the patients in the study showed signs of side effects from the engineered
cells.

   Rosenberg, a Johns Hopkins University-trained surgeon, has spent more than
two decades trying to harness the body's built-in disease-fighting cells against
cancerous tumors, an approach called immunotherapy.

   The body's immune system is designed to repel invaders, and cancer typically
doesn't raise an alert because the proliferating cells within each tumor are the
body's own. Melanoma, responsible for 8,000 American deaths a year, is a rare
exception.

   By 2002, Rosenberg and his team had made a breakthrough. They discovered a
small population of immune cells that can pounce on melanoma tumors. There are
too few, however, to make a dent in the disease.

   So Rosenberg devised a technique to pinpoint these cancer-sensitive cells,
remove them from the body and boost their numbers in a lab dish. Later, he
reintroduced these tumor-fighters into patients. The technique is known as
"adoptive cell transfer" therapy.

   The technique was a success, shrinking tumors in half of the patients. But
Rosenberg says not all melanoma patients naturally produce cancer-fighting
immune cells. The technique is also useless against more common cancers of the
breast and lung.

   So Rosenberg and his colleagues set out to genetically engineer cancer
killers from scratch, making the technique potentially more widely applicable.

   He and others stress that significant work remains to be done before the new
gene therapy technique is ready for wider use. One big question: Why did only a
small percentage of patients in the new study respond to the treatment?

   "Clearly, we want to do better than this," says Dr. Patrick Hwu, a melanoma
specialist at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston.

   One clue Rosenberg and his team are examining is that only Origer and his
fellow survivor had high levels of genetically altered immune cells in their
blood. Moreover, their levels remained high for more than a year.

   In other patients, the tumor-fighting cells persisted for only a few months.
Scientists don't know why.

   Rosenberg says the genes used in the experiment could also be to blame. The
implanted gene was an old one and might have provided immune cells with a murky
mug shot of tumor cells.

   Rosenberg said he and his team have since identified genes that could be up
to 100 times more effective at spotting melanoma than the one used in the
current study.

   "There are a dozen different modifications that we're now studying," said
Rosenberg.

   He and his lab have also found genes that could be used to attack other
cancers. Rosenberg has applied for FDA approval to treat lung and breast cancer
patients with genetically engineered immune cells.

   Mark Origer, meanwhile, who returns to Bethesda every three months for
monitoring, said he plans to celebrate his daughter's first wedding anniversary
in a few weeks.

   michael.stroh@baltsun.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              631 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03

LENGTH: 350  words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy turns cells into cancer fighters: Patients' own blood
used to purge melanoma

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- Government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumor
attackers that wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma.
The striking finding, unveiled Thursday, marks an important step in the quest
for gene therapy for cancer.

   But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the shots.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first real
success in cancer gene therapy -- because it fought cancer's worst stage, when
it has spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted single
tumors.

   And the government hopes to soon begin testing the gene therapy in small
numbers of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced breast or
colon cancer.

   The hope is that one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumor
suppression.

   ''It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done,'' said lead researcher Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the NCI's surgery
chief. ''We're giving living cells which continue to grow and function in the
body.''

   'CURED FOR NOW'

   The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years after
infusions of tumor fighters made from their own blood. Doctors can't predict how
the men will fare long-term. Melanoma, the most aggressive skin cancer and
killer of almost 8,000 Americans a year, is notorious for returning years after
patients think they've subdued it.

   ''I'm cured for now,'' is how a grateful Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis.,
put it after a checkup from NCI doctors this week. ''I know how fortunate I am
to have gone through this and responded to this. Not everybody's that lucky.''

   Cancer specialists praised the work, published Thursday by the journal
Science, but warned that years of additional research are needed.

   ''Clearly this is a first step,'' cautioned Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the
American Cancer Society. ''We have to be very cautious about not raising hopes
too much.''

   But, ''it is exciting,'' he added. ''It certainly is a proof of concept that
this approach will work.''

GRAPHIC:
Photo: Melanoma survivor Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis., attends his
daughter Katie's wedding last fall after successfully battling the disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              632 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES - LIFE; Pg. 01B

LENGTH: 1075 words

HEADLINE: TELEVISION;
Lancaster boy to appear on Jerry Lewis telethon

BYLINE: Dennis Fiely , THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   A boy of few words, 9-year-old Andrew Kilbarger found one to describe his
national-TV debut this holiday weekend.

   "Fun," he said.

   The third-grader from Lancaster is characteristically undaunted by the
prospect of millions of viewers watching him on the 41st annual Jerry Lewis MDA
Telethon.

   "Andrew is so laid-back," said his father, Michael. "The only things that
bother him are his brother and sister. His attitude is that whatever happens,
happens."

   Andrew has become a medical celebrity as the first person to receive
experimental gene therapy for a degenerative and incurable form of muscular
dystrophy known as Duchenne.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association visited Children's Hospital in March to
tape a story about Andrew for the telethon.

   The young pioneer saw the piece for the first time last month, when the
association whisked him -- and his family -- to Las Vegas for a telethon-related
pep rally.

   The five-minute feature emphasizes the terminal nature of his illness:
Patients with his type of muscular dystrophy typically don't live past age 20.

   The tape left his mother, Julie, in tears, but Andrew consoled her.

   "It's OK if I die," he told her, "because I am going to heaven."

   In conjunction with the segment, Andrew will appear live on the telethon with
Lewis -- the event founder and host.

   The Kilbargers briefly met the comedian and filmmaker during the preview last
month.

   "Do you know who I am?" Lewis asked Andrew.

   "Yes," the boy confidently replied.

   His family had prepared him for the meeting by renting a copy of the 1964
movie The Disorderly Orderly.

   "I wanted him to see who Jerry Lewis was before he went out there," his
mother said.

   His parents, who own Pleasant Valley Golf Course in Lancaster, recall
watching the telethon as youngsters.

   "Who knew then that someday we would appear on it with a son who has this
disease?" Mrs. Kilbarger said.

   Jerry Mendell, the Children's Hospital neurologist who is spearheading the
gene-

   therapy replacement trial, will accompany the family to Las Vegas and also
make a TV appearance.

   "Everybody in the MD community knows about this trial, but the Kilbargers
attach a face and name to it for the public," Mendell said. "They are genuine,
credible and articulate, and they help this program a great deal."

   Money raised by Lewis through his telethon has supported Mendell.

   "Without him, we would not be where we are today," the doctor said. "He has
enriched all the families with this disease and given them hope."

   Although he never thought about phoning in a pledge during his youth, Mr.
Kilbarger has more than made up for the lack.

   The parents have raised more than $100,000 for Mendell's research with
outings at their golf course and fundraisers through their Lancaster parish.

   They are hopeful but realistic about their son's therapy.

   "This may not be in time for Andrew, but this is important for all the kids
who are going to be born with Duchenne's (muscular dystrophy)," Mrs. Kilbarger
said.

   As devout Roman Catholics, they have raised Andrew with a comforting faith in
God.

   They recently returned from a Special Wish Foundation trip to the Sequoia
National Forest in California.

   Said his mother: "Andrew wanted to see trees that were older than Jesus."

   dfiely@dispatch.com

   A boy of few words, 9-year-old Andrew Kilbarger found one to describe his
national-TV debut this holiday weekend.

   "Fun," he said.

   The third-grader from Lancaster is characteristically undaunted by the
prospect of millions of viewers watching him on the 41st annual Jerry Lewis MDA
Telethon.

   "Andrew is so laid-back," said his father, Michael. "The only things that
bother him are his brother and sister. His attitude is that whatever happens,
happens."

   Andrew has become a medical celebrity as the first person to receive
experimental gene therapy for a degenerative and incurable form of muscular
dystrophy known as Duchenne.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association visited Columbus in March to tape a story
about Andrew at Children's Hospital for the telethon.

   The young pioneer saw the piece for the first time last month, when the
association whisked him -- and his family -- to Las Vegas for a telethon-related
pep rally.

   The five-minute feature emphasizes the terminal nature of his illness:
Patients with his type of muscular dystrophy typically don't live past age 20.

   The tape left his mother, Julie, in tears, but Andrew consoled her.

   "It's OK if I die," he told her, "because I am going to heaven."

   In conjunction with the segment, Andrew will appear live on the telethon with
Lewis -- the event founder and host.

   The Kilbargers briefly met the comedian and filmmaker during the preview last
month.

   "Do you know who I am?" Lewis asked Andrew.

   "Yes," the boy confidently replied.

   His family had prepared him for the meeting by renting a copy of the 1964
movie The Disorderly Orderly.

   "I wanted him to see who Jerry Lewis was before he went out there," his
mother said.

   His parents, who own Pleasant Valley Golf Course in Lancaster, recall
watching the telethon as youngsters.

   "Who knew then that someday we would appear on it with a son who has this
disease?" Mrs. Kilbarger said.

   Jerry Mendell, the Children's Hospital neurologist who is spearheading the
gene-

   therapy replacement trial, will accompany the family to Las Vegas and also
make a TV appearance.

   "Everybody in the MD community knows about this trial, but the Kilbargers
attach a face and name to it for the public," Mendell said. "They are genuine,
credible and articulate, and they help this program a great deal."

   Money raised by Lewis through his telethon has supported Mendell.

   "Without him, we would not be where we are today," the doctor said. "He has
enriched all the families with this disease and given them hope."

   Although he never thought about phoning in a pledge during his youth, Mr.
Kilbarger has more than made up for the lack.

   The parents have raised more than $100,000 for Mendell's research with
outings at their golf course and fundraisers through their Lancaster parish.

   They are hopeful but realistic about their son's therapy.

   "This may not be in time for Andrew, but this is important for all the kids
who are going to be born with Duchenne's (muscular dystrophy)," Mrs. Kilbarger
said.

   As devout Roman Catholics, they have raised Andrew with a comforting faith in
God.

   They recently returned from a Special Wish Foundation trip to the Sequoia
National Forest in California.

   Said his mother: "Andrew wanted to see trees that were older than Jesus."

   dfiely@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Photo, RENEE SAUERDISPATCH, Anderew Kilbarger with his mom, Julie

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              633 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                              RACING FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 352 words

HEADLINE: CANCER-FIGHTING GENE THERAPY IS PROMISING

BYLINE: BY JORDAN LITE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   DOCTORS WIPED OUT melanoma by reengineering patients' own cells, marking the
first time gene therapy has worked successfully against a cancer and raising
hopes that the treatment can eradicate other forms of the disease.

   Government scientists took healthy immune cells from patients with advanced
forms of the skin cancer and taught the cells to recognize and destroy the
cancer cells. Doctors then fed patients the tailor-made fighter cells
intravenously, and their tumors gradually shrank.

   Just two of the 17 patients in the study are still disease-free a year and a
half after the treatment. But doctors said the research proved that the
technique could help patients battling many forms of cancer.

   "We can now convert normal lymphocytes into cells that can recognize very
common cancers like breast, lung, ovary, prostate and so on. We haven't treated
those patients yet, but this represents proof that this kind of approach can
work," said study author Dr. Steven Rosenberg, chief of surgery at the National
Cancer Institute.

   The other 15 patients in the study, published in today's issue of the journal
Science, grew low levels of the reengineered immune cells for at least two
months. Since the trial began in December 2004, scientists have developed more
advanced gene therapy techniques that could improve the results, Rosenberg said.

   "It is totally intriguing," said Dr. Anna Pavlick, director of the NYU Cancer
Institute's melanoma program.

   But it's too soon to call the therapy a cure, she said.

   "They didn't look at survival and they wouldn't be able to in this small
group of patients. That's why it's a little bit premature to know how effective
this is going to be, but nonetheless it is a treatment that needs to be studied
in a larger number of patients," said Dr. Howard Kaufman, director of the tumor
immunotherapy program at New York Presbyterian Hospital Columbia.

   Melanoma is one of the deadliest and fastest-growing cancers in the United
States. An estimated 62,190 people will develop the disease this year, and 7,910
will die of it, according to the American Cancer Society.

   jlite@nydailynews.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              634 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 Detroit Free Press
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Detroit Free Press (Michigan)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                              METRO FINAL Edition

SECTION: NWS; NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: SMALL GENE THERAPY SUCCESS COULD BE BIG IN CANCER FIGHT

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD , Associated Press

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Government scientists turned regular blood cells into tumor
attackers that wiped out all signs of cancer in two men with advanced melanoma.
The striking finding, unveiled Thursday, marks an important step in the quest
for gene therapy for cancer.

   But the genetically altered cells didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So
scientists are trying to strengthen the treatment.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment the first real
success in cancer gene therapy - because it fought cancer's worst stage, when it
has spread through the body, unlike earlier attempts that targeted single
tumors.

   The government hopes to begin testing the gene therapy soon in small numbers
of patients dying from more common cancers, such as advanced breast or colon
cancer.

   The hope is that one day, such treatment might provide long-lasting tumor
suppression.

   The first two successful patients appear melanoma-free almost two years after
infusions of tumor fighters made from their own blood. Doctors can't predict how
the men will fare long-term.

   Melanoma, the most-aggressive skin cancer, which kills almost 8,000 Americans
a year, is notorious for returning years after patients think they've subdued
it.

   "I'm cured for now," is how a grateful Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis.,
put it after a checkup this week. "I know how fortunate I am to have ...
responded to this. Not everybody's that lucky."

   Cancer specialists praised the work, published Thursday by the journal
Science, but warned that years of additional research are needed.

   Why did the genetically altered cells flourish in only two people?

   "That's the critical question," said Dr. Patrick Hwu, melanoma chairman at
the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, who once worked with the
cancer institute team.

   But "these are all solvable issues," he stressed, calling the study "one of
the first documented, effective cases of cancer gene therapy working."

   MEMO: NATION & WORLD

   DISCLAIMER: THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION MAY DIFFER SLIGHTLY FROM THE PRINTED
ARTICLE

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              635 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Scientists use immune cells in successful cancer fights;
Altering them to fight tumors works in 2 with advanced cases of melanoma

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, TODD ACKERMAN, Associated Press, Staff

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Mark Origer entered the last-ditch experiment hoping to beat
back his melanoma for a few months, long enough to walk his daughter down the
aisle. He got far luckier: Almost two years later, his body shows no signs of
the aggressive skin cancer.

   Government scientists rescued Origer and one other man with advanced melanoma
by genetically altering their own white blood cells to turn them into tumor
fighters.

   The treatment didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So scientists are trying
to strengthen it to work better.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment, unveiled
Thursday, the first real success in the quest for gene therapy for cancer -
because it fought the disease's worst stage, when it had spread through the
body, not just single tumors.

   And it did so in a way far different than today's standard options, by
harnessing patients' immune systems to continually search out and kill tumors.

   "It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done," said Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the NCI's surgery chief who led the
research published Thursday by the journal Science. "We're giving (patients)
living cells, which continue to grow and function in the body."

   Doctors can't predict how the therapy's first two successful patients will
fare in the long term. Melanoma, which kills almost 8,000 Americans annually, is
notorious for returning years after patients think they've subdued it.

   "I'm cured for now" is how a grateful Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis., puts
it.

   He recalls his doctors' wide grins when, just a month after his December 2004
treatment, his tumors started to shrink. By his daughter's wedding last fall,
just one small cancerous spot remained, on his liver. Surgeons later cut it out.
A checkup from NCI doctors this week confirmed he is still cancer-free.

   "I know how fortunate I am to have gone through this and responded to this.
Not everybody's that lucky," he said.

   More work to do

   University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researcher Dr. Patrick Hwu
called the study "a landmark case," the first time gene therapy has proved
effective against cancer. He said it provides "an important proof of principle."

   But Hwu said a lot more work remains before the breakthrough is ready for
widespread application. He said he hopes to do a mouse study building on the
research in which he adds genes to the mix that sniff out "a tumor's special
perfume."

   "The question is why those other 15 patients didn't survive," said Hwu, head
of M.D. Anderson's melanoma department and a former member of Rosenberg's team
with the NCI.

   In a few months, NCI hopes to study the approach in small numbers of patients
with advanced breast, colon and other cancers.

   White blood cells called T-lymphocytes hunt down germs and other foreign
tissue. But cancerous cells look a lot like healthy cells, making it hard for
those T-cells to spot a problem.

   By 2002, Rosenberg had made a breakthrough. He found small numbers of
cancer-fighting T-cells inside some patients with advanced melanoma. He pulled
those cells out of their blood and grew billions more of them in laboratory
dishes, enough to have a chance at overwhelming a tumor when they're pumped back
into patients. About half significantly improve after this so-called
"cell-transfer therapy."

   But few melanoma patients make enough cancer-fighting T-cells naturally, so
Rosenberg and colleagues set out to create the tumor fighters from scratch.

   The scientists took normal lymphocytes - ones that don't recognize cancer -
out of patients with advanced melanoma. They infected those cells with a virus
carrying genes that create T-cell receptors, essentially homing devices for, in
this case, melanoma.

   "We can take a normal cell from you or me or any patient and ... convert that
cell into a cell that recognizes the cancer," Rosenberg said.

   Here's the key: Only Origer and his fellow survivor maintained super-high
levels for more than a year - and only their tumors gradually faded.

   . . .

   USING GENE THERAPY TO REMOVE TUMORS

   Government scientists are experimenting with techniques that use gene therapy
to remove melanoma tumors.

   Blood is drawn from a melanoma cancer patient, and the white blood cells are
isolated.

   New genes are inserted into the cells, creating T-receptors that can
recognize and destroy the cancer once they are reinjected into the body.

NOTES: Chronicle reporter Todd Ackerman contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, Graph: USING GENE THERAPY TO REMOVE TUMORS (TEXT)
ASSOCIATED PRESS, Source: National Cancer Institute

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006


                              636 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 420 words

HEADLINE: Altering immune cells proves successful in fighting skin cancer;
Method tackles tumors in two with advanced cases

BYLINE: DAVID BROWN, TODD ACKERMAN, Washington Post, Staff

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A team of researchers from the National Cancer Institute
reported Thursday that it has successfully treated two cancer patients using "
gene therapy," the introduction of genes into the human body for medical
purposes.

   Two men, both with advanced cases of the rapidly growing skin cancer
melanoma, were given immune system cells taken from their own blood and
engineered to attack their tumors. They are alive, with no evidence of cancer,
18 months later. Fifteen other patients who got the same treatment died.

   The report, published online by the journal Science, is the latest in a
three-decade effort by surgeon Steven Rosenberg to find ways to manipulate the
immune system to fight cancer.

   Four years ago, Rosenberg and his colleagues treated a group of melanoma
patients with naturally occurring anti-cancer cells extracted from their tumors,
and some of those patients also have had long-term disappearance of their
cancers. The new report, however, is thought to be the first time that
genetically engineered immune system cells - specifically, T lymphocytes - have
produced the same effect.

   Neither Rosenberg nor others would describe the two patients as "cured." At
least five years would need to pass before such a declaration would be
considered. And cancer sometimes returns even after that much time has lapsed.

   Gene therapy was once viewed as the hope for treating, or even curing, many
dreaded diseases. But tests since the late 1980s have been disappointing.

   "I do consider this a proof of the principle that it can work," Rosenberg
said Thursday.

   University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center researcher Dr. Patrick Hwu
called the study "a landmark case," the first time gene therapy has proved
effective against cancer.

   But Hwu said a lot more work remains before the breakthrough is ready for
widespread application. He said he hopes to do a mouse study building on the
research in which he adds genes to the mix that sniff out "a tumor's special
perfume."

   "The question is why those other 15 patients didn't survive," said Hwu, head
of M.D. Anderson's melanoma department and a former member of Rosenberg's team
with the NCI.

   . . .

   USING GENE THERAPY TO REMOVE TUMORS

   Government scientists are experimenting with techniques that use gene therapy
to remove melanoma tumors.

   Blood is drawn from a melanoma cancer patient, and the white blood cells are
isolated.

   New genes are inserted into the cells, creating T-receptors that can
recognize and destroy the cancer once they are reinjected into the body.

NOTES: Chronicle reporter Todd Ackerman contributed to this report.

GRAPHIC: Drawing, Graph: USING GENE THERAPY TO REMOVE TUMORS (TEXT)
ASSOCIATED PRESS, Source: National Cancer Institute

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006


                              637 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 22 words

HEADLINE: Using genes to beat cancer

BYLINE: STAFF

BODY:

   Scientists hope to build on the survival of two melanoma victims to improve
gene therapy in the fight against cancer.

   STORY ON PAGE A6

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2006


                              638 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1189 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Hail Cancer Study;
A gene therapy method used to cure melanoma with patients' immune cells needs
work. But it promises a new way of fighting tumors.

BYLINE: Karen Kaplan, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have genetically modified tumor-fighting immune
cells, allowing patients to rid themselves of an aggressive form of cancer,
according to a study released Thursday.

   The technique, used to cure two patients with advanced melanoma, paves the
way for a new approach to fighting cancer by harnessing -- and boosting -- the
body's own immune system instead of relying on toxic chemotherapy and radiation
treatments to kill out-of-control tumors.

   The researchers from the National Cancer Institute, whose findings were
published online by the journal Science, say the strategy could be adapted to
treat breast, prostate, lung, colorectal and other common cancers.

   "It's obviously very exciting," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief
medical officer of the American Cancer Society, who was not involved in the
research. "It's a proof of concept of being able to develop a technique where
they can use a patient's own blood cells to fight cancer."

   Dr. Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of the National Cancer Institute's surgery
branch and senior author of the study, said the results reaffirm the promise of
gene therapy after several high-profile setbacks.

   Rosenberg and others cautioned that it would take several years to translate
this initial success into a practical therapy.

   They added that there is still more failure than success with the technique.
Fifteen other melanoma patients enrolled in the study failed to show sustained
improvement from the modified immune cells. Twelve of those patients have died,
and the other three are near death, Rosenberg said.

   But the success with two patients, who are cancer-free more than a year and a
half after their treatment, was enough to demonstrate the possibility of a new
front in the war against cancer.

   "The important thing is this approach worked," said Dr. Margaret Kemeny,
director of the Queens Cancer Center of Queens Hospital in New York. "Can they
make this approach work more often? That is the question."

   Melanoma accounts for only 4% of skin cancer cases, but it is the most lethal
type. More than 62,000 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma this year, and
7,910 people will die from it, according to estimates from the American Cancer
Society.

   Rosenberg had previously discovered that some melanoma patients are able to
generate a type of immune cell, called a T cell, that recognizes the tumor cells
as unwanted intruders and attacks them.

   T cells work by attaching to antigens, distinctive proteins that reside on
the surface of tumor cells. Once they lock on, the T cells secrete
tumor-destroying hormones. Melanoma cells are coated with an antigen called
MART-1.

   In an earlier experiment, Rosenberg's team removed white blood cells from
patients with metastatic melanoma and isolated the most aggressive
tumor-fighting T cells. Those cells were multiplied in the lab and reinjected
into patients after their immune systems were cleared using chemotherapy drugs.

   The experiments showed promise, but about half the patients didn't have any T
cells that were able to target melanoma, Rosenberg said. So he decided to give
ordinary T cells the genes they would need to recognize MART-1.

   The researchers spliced the genes for making the anti-MART-1 receptor into a
disabled retrovirus. Then the retrovirus was let loose on a few million white
blood cells that had been removed from each melanoma patient.

   As the virus infected the cells, the new gene was transferred into the T
cells. When the cells multiplied, the subsequent generations also had the
anti-MART-1 receptor, Rosenberg said.

   The team used chemotherapy to wipe out the patients' existing immune cells,
then replaced them with the genetically modified cells.

   Some patients showed hardly any uptake of the new genes, but half the
patients wound up with the new gene in at least 20% of their T cells.

   After three months, eight patients still had detectable levels of the
genetically modified T cells in their systems.

   In one patient, the engineered T cells grew to make up about two-thirds of
his immune system. Though previous treatments with powerful drugs and surgery
had failed to stem his cancer, the gene therapy shrank an enlarging tumor on his
lung until it disappeared altogether.

   Another patient, 53-year-old Mark Origer, had tried drugs, surgery and an
experimental vaccine before enrolling in the gene therapy trial. By the time he
had his first checkup about a month after getting the souped-up T cells, his
tumors had shrunk in half.

   "It was euphoric," said Origer, who was diagnosed with melanoma in 1999. "I
had waited so many years to find something that was working."

   The T cells eradicated the tumor under his arm and shriveled another tumor in
his liver by 89%. He has been cancer-free since the remaining mass was
surgically removed in October.

   The researchers are trying to figure out why the technique worked so well for
two patients but not the others. As the experiment went on, the researchers got
better at inserting the modified genes at a time when they were multiplying
rapidly. That almost certainly helped some patients boost the proportion of
modified genes in their systems, Rosenberg said.

   Now he and his colleagues are working on a more powerful T cell receptor that
does a better job of recognizing melanoma tumors. They are also trying to come
up with new retroviruses that can insert genes into immune cells with greater
efficiency.

   Antigens have been identified for several other cancers, and Rosenberg's team
has isolated the genes for some of the corresponding T cell receptors.

   "We're most excited about the possibility to use it in general for other
kinds of cancers," Rosenberg said. "We hope to start treating patients with
other cancers within the next several months."

   Other attempts to fight cancer with gene therapy have shown more modest
results.

   Some researchers have inserted new genes directly into tumors to replace ones
that are no longer able to prevent dangerous cells from multiplying. Another
approach involves embedding genes into tumor cells so they are easier for immune
cells to find. Neither approach has worked as a stand-alone treatment.

   The results of Rosenberg's study should give a boost to the field of gene
therapy, said Dr. Ted Friedmann, president of the American Society of Gene
Therapy and director of the gene therapy program at UC San Diego.

   In the 1990s, gene therapy was considered the next revolution in medicine.
But a pair of high-profile deaths in clinical trials tainted the field.

   Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old with a rare genetic disorder called ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency, died in 1999, four days after researchers injected
him with a virus containing modified genes.

   A few years later, European scientists treated 11 boys with X-SCID, popularly
known as "bubble boy" disease, which leaves victims without an immune system.
The gene transfer worked, but three French boys developed leukemia as a result
of the treatment, and one of them died.

   "We've been hyping gene therapy for a long time," Rosenberg said. "This is
the first example of where we can actually use it to treat a cancer patient."

   *

   karen.kaplan@latimes.com

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Using genes to fight cancer  CREDIT: Doug Stevens Los Angeles
Times PHOTO: (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              639 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 905 words

HEADLINE: News Summary

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL A3-10

Bush Says Iraq Withdrawal Would Threaten U.S. Cities
President Bush said withdrawing now from Iraq would leave Americans at risk of
terrorist attacks ''in the streets of our own cities,'' and he cast the struggle
against Islamic extremists as the costly but necessary successor to the battles
against Nazism and communism.  A1

A series of explosions ripped through predominantly Shiite neighborhoods in
eastern Baghdad, killing at least 43 people and pushing the death toll for the
day to 53, Iraqi officials said.

   Nearly 200 people were wounded in the attacks.  A6

China Revising History Books
China, in an effort to promote a more stable view of Chinese history that serves
present economic and political goals, is abandoning the Marxist templates that
has dominated the nation's high school history textbooks since the 1950's. The
reaction to the changes has been mixed.  A1

A Suspicious Find in Iran
The global nuclear monitoring agency deepened suspicions about Iran's nuclear
program, reporting that inspectors had discovered new traces of highly enriched
uranium at an Iranian facility.  A10

Standoff at Embassy in Tel Aviv
A Palestinian carrying a fake gun scaled a wall into the parking lot of the
British Embassy in Tel Aviv and demanded political asylum, engaging the Israeli
police in a six-hour standoff before he was arrested.  A8

Annan to Press Syria on Arms
Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, plans to confront the Syrian
president, Bashar al-Assad, with reports that Syria is permitting arms to cross
its border illegally into Lebanon and to demand an end to the traffic when the
two meet in Damascus, United Nations officials said.  A8

U.N. Votes for a Force in Darfur
The United Nations Security Council passed a resolution authorizing the creation
of a United Nations peacekeeping force for the Darfur region of Sudan, but the
resolution calls for the consent of the Sudanese government before troops can be
deployed. Sudanese officials immediately rejected the resolution.  A3

Canada to Arm Border Guards
The Canadian government, responding to a demand from border guards for weapons
to defend themselves and to combat criminals, said it would begin arming guards
in September 2007.  A8

OBITUARIES C10-11

Rocco A. Petrone
The engineer who directed the countdown for launching the first Apollo mission
to land astronauts on the Moon in 1969 and later headed the entire program, he
was 80.  C10

Leonard W. Levy
An exacting, prolific and combative constitutional historian whose work was
frequently cited by the United States Supreme Court and won him a Pulitzer
Prize, he was 83.  C11

NATIONAL A11-14

Department of Education Shared Personal Loan Data
The federal Education Department shared personal information on hundreds of
student loan applicants with the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Under a
program called ProjectStrikeback, the Education Department received names from
the F.B.I. and checked them against its student aid database.  A11

Chicago Mayor Has Challenger
Dorothy Brown, the clerk of Cook County Circuit Court, announced that she was
running for mayor of Chicago. Mayor Richard M. Daley has long been viewed as
untouchable, but because of recent scandals some people have begun to wonder
whether the political landscape is changing.  A11

Storm Heads for Carolinas
Tropical Storm Ernesto drenched the coastline of the Carolinas, hovering just
below hurricane strength as it headed for the border between the two states. The
National Hurricane Center said that the storm could reach hurricane strength by
the time it made landfall.  A12

Gene Therapy for Skin Cancer
In a study involving 17 patients with advanced melanoma skin cancer, genetically
altered immune cells reduced tumors in two, helping to keep them disease-free
for 18 months, government scientists said.  A12

NEW YORK/REGION B1-6

Painting Becomes Focus Of Astor Legal Battle
The details surrounding the $10 million sale of an American impressionist
painting owned by Brooke Astor has become the focus of allegations and denials
in the contentious legal battle between her son and grandson over her care and
fortune.  B1

Two State Troopers Shot
Two state troopers were shot in western New York in an area where law
enforcement agencies had been looking for a fugitive who broke out of jail in
April, the police said. The fugitive had been spotted in the same area in the
last few weeks.  B1

Appraisal Snags Railyard Bid
The Bloomberg administration's plan to buy the development rights to the 26-acre
railyards on the Far West Side of Manhattan has hit another snag. A recent
appraisal pegs its value at $1.5 billion -- nearly three times what the city has
offered.  B1

WEEKEND E1-20; E21-26

Munch Paintings Recovered
Edvard Munch's paintings ''The Scream'' and ''Madonna,'' which two armed robbers
ripped from the wall of a museum in Oslo in August 2004, were recovered in
relatively good condition in Norway.  E3

BUSINESS DAY C1-10

Spacecraft Builder Chosen
Lockheed Martin won a multibillion-dollar contract from NASA to build the
nation's next spaceship for human flight, a craft called Orion that is to
replace the space shuttle and eventually carry astronauts to the moon and
beyond.  A1

Business Digest C2

EDITORIAL A16-17

Editorials: Which Iraqi army?; from California, a breakthrough; AIDS money
suddenly at risk; boolah-moolah kickoff time.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Thomas Frank.

Crossword: E24
Public Lives: B2
TV Listings: E20
Weather: A15

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              640 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Used to Treat Skin Cancer

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 31

BODY:

   In a study involving 17 patients with advanced melanoma skin cancer,
genetically altered immune cells greatly reduced tumors in two, helping to keep
them disease-free for at least 18 months, government scientists said Thursday.

     But the 15 other patients did not respond to the experimental treatment,
and independent researchers said much more work was needed to assess its
potential usefulness.

   In the new study, researchers at the National Cancer Institute infused the
patients with their own white blood cells after the cells had been removed and
genetically engineered to fight tumors. The research, which will appear Friday
in the journal Science, is one of the few published advances in the field of
gene therapy.

     Scientists have promoted gene therapy as holding great promise for a
variety of ailments, but safety problems have set the field back. One experiment
cured two French ''bubble boys'' with a rare immune disorder, but later gave
them leukemia, and an 18-year-old died in a 1999 gene therapy experiment.

     The patients who received the melanoma therapy had not been helped by
standard therapies and were expected to live just three to six months, said Dr.
Steven A. Rosenberg, leader of the study. The therapy appeared to eliminate the
tumor in one man for 18 months and shrank the cancer in another's liver to the
point where it could be removed, Dr. Rosenberg reported.

     ''The tumors went away,'' he said, ''and both of the patients are now
completely disease-free over a year and a half later.''

     The researchers said the white blood cells had been armed with genes to
spark production of proteins called T-cell receptors. Those receptors recognized
molecules on the melanoma cells and directed the white blood cells to destroy
the cancer, they said.

     Other gene therapy researchers expressed cautious optimism.

     ''This certainly is a significant technical advance that is going to fuel
more interest,'' said Dr. Michel Sadelain of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center. Noting the therapy's failure in 15 patients, however, Dr. Sadelain said,
''The response here is rather disappointing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              641 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE MEDICINE AND TECHNOLOGY; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 501 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY FOR CANCER GAINS

BYLINE: KAREN KAPLAN, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have genetically modified tumor-fighting immune
cells, allowing patients to rid themselves of an aggressive form of cancer,
according to a study released yesterday.

   The technique, used to cure two patients with advanced melanoma, paves the
way for a new approach to fighting cancer by harnessing -- and boosting -- the
body's immune system instead of relying on toxic chemotherapy and radiation
treatments.

   The researchers from the National Cancer Institute, whose findings were
published online by the journal Science, say the strategy could be adapted to
treat breast, prostate, lung, colorectal and other common cancers.

   "It's obviously very exciting," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief
medical officer of the American Cancer Society, who was not involved in the
research. "It's a proof of concept of being able to develop a technique where
they can use a patient's own blood cells to fight cancer." Dr. Steven A.
Rosenberg, chief of the National Cancer Institute's surgery branch and senior
author of the study, said the results reaffirm the promise of gene therapy after
several high-profile setbacks.

   "We've been hyping gene therapy for a long time," he said. "This is the first
example of where we can actually use it to treat a cancer patient." Dr.
Rosenberg and others cautioned that it would take several years to translate
this initial success into a practical therapy.

   They added that there is still more failure than success with the technique.
Fifteen other melanoma patients enrolled in the study failed to show sustained
improvement from the modified immune cells.

   But the success with two patients, who are cancer-free more than a year and a
half after their treatment, was enough to demonstrate the possibility of a new
front in the long, intractable war against cancer.

   "The important thing is this approach worked," said Dr. Margaret Kemeny,
director of the Queens Cancer Center of the Queens Hospital in New York.

   Melanoma accounts for only 4 percent of skin cancer cases, but it is the most
lethal type. More than 62,000 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma this
year, and 7,910 people will die from it, according to American Cancer Society
estimates. Dr. Rosenberg had previously discovered that some melanoma patients
are able to generate a type of immune cell, called T cells, that recognize the
tumor cells as unwanted intruders and respond by attacking them.

   His research team removed white blood cells from patients with metastatic
melanoma and isolated the most aggressive tumor-fighting T cells. Those cells
were multiplied in the lab while patients underwent chemotherapy to clear out
their own immune systems. Once the slates were clean, patients were injected
with concentrated doses of their own most-powerful cells.

   The experiments showed promise, but about half the patients didn't have any T
cells that were able to target melanoma, Dr. Rosenberg said. So he decided to
give ordinary T cells the genes they would need to become attack cells.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              642 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1095 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy used to zap melanoma;
Tests hailed as breakthrough in treating deadly skin cancer

BYLINE: Sabin Russell, Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Two patients with advanced stages of melanoma, a particularly deadly skin
cancer, have been living virtually disease-free for more than 19 months after an
experiment hailed by federal researchers as the first successful application of
gene therapy against cancer.

   The test described Thursday in the online version of the journal Science was
carried out at the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., using a technique
that transferred tumor-killing genes into the white blood cells of the patients
who had little chance of survival.

   "These results represent the first time gene therapy has been used
successfully to treat cancer," said Dr. Elias Zerhouni, director of the National
Institutes of Health, which paid for the research.

   Zerhouni noted that the same technique might eventually be summoned against
other deadly cancers, such as those of the breast and lung.

   Strictly defined, gene therapy is the insertion of a foreign gene into a cell
to give it new properties or to correct an inherited genetic error. In the early
1990s, it was considered one of the hottest fields in experimental medicine, but
that early optimism faded with the realization that gene transfers to patients
were difficult and sometimes dangerous.

   Research in the field has persisted, however, and Thursday's findings could
breathe new life into the experimental technology.

   Skeptics quickly noted that this latest experiment was tiny and helped only
two of 17 patients enrolled.

   "I'm very enthusiastic about this latest advance, but we should not
over-spin," said Savio Woo, a professor at New York's Mount Sinai School of
Medicine and a past president of the American Society for Gene Therapy.

   But Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the cancer institute researcher who led the
melanoma study, said no therapy of this sort has ever worked this well before.
He has been tinkering with various gene therapy techniques since 1990, when he
led the first study showing that it was possible to transfer cancer-fighting
traits into the genes of patients. Despite early promise, none of those efforts
bore fruit until now.

   "This is certainly highly experimental, but this is proof of the principle
that you can use genetic engineering to treat cancer patients," Rosenberg said
in a telephone interview.

   He contends that his laboratory has been refining the latest technique since
the patients were treated nearly two years ago, and he is seeking U.S. Food and
Drug Administration approval next month to conduct a new round of experiments.

   Rosenberg's strategy was to take ordinary white blood cells from the cancer
patients and modify them in the lab with genes derived from a patient who seemed
to have an ability to control melanoma naturally.

   The genes cause the white blood cells in the laboratory to sprout molecular
"receptors" that have an affinity for certain proteins that stud the surface of
tumor cells. These newly modified white blood cells are then infused into the
bloodstream of the melanoma patient. Like microscopic assassins, they use their
newly installed receptors to stalk the tumor cells, latch onto them and kill
them with a toxic "kiss." Ideally, these cancer guardians and successive
generations remain circulating in the bloodstream permanently.

   Rosenberg said that the receptors used in the initial experiment were barely
adequate to the task. "We now have receptors that are 100 times as powerful," he
said. His lab also has isolated different receptors for other types of cancer
cells: those of the breast, lung, liver and esophagus and some types of solid
tumors known as sarcomas.

   "This potentially will give us a way to treat very common cancers," he said.

   Dr. Patrick Hwu, a former colleague of Rosenberg and now chairman of the
melanoma department at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, said he was
excited by the latest findings. Melanoma kills 7,000 Americans every year, and
the incidence of the disease is rising for reasons that researchers can't yet
explain.

   "Although it's only two out of 17, this is a conceptual breakthrough," Hwu
said. "People have been working on gene therapy for a long time. This is the
first evidence that it works at all."

   Dr. Mark Kay, a Stanford University professor of pediatrics and genetics and
the most recent past president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, said
Rosenberg's results should be "viewed with cautious optimism."

   Although only two of 17 patients responded to the therapy, Kay noted that at
such late stages of melanoma, survival is rare. "The tumors seemed to have
disappeared," he said.

   But Kay said it is a stretch to call the advance a "first" in gene therapy
against cancer. "Some of my cancer gene therapy colleagues don't agree with
that," he said. "There are more trials going on in the field of gene therapy for
cancer than for any other particular class of disease." Some of those trials
have reached Phase III -- large-scale studies -- whereas the Rosenberg trial
represents the earliest stage of human testing in drug development.

   The Chinese government, meanwhile, has already approved a gene therapy
product for the treatment of head and neck cancer.

   Rosenberg insists that his study represents a significant advance. "Of
course, people will make claims, especially companies. But none of the other
gene therapy attempts have worked," he said.

   Dr. Boris Bastian, a UCSF dermatologist, remains skeptical of the importance
of Rosenberg's study. Although the recovery of two patients was heartening, he
said, the experiment does not prove that their response was the result of the
newly installed genes.

   Bastian said he believes a more promising approach to fighting cancer lies in
the development of drugs -- such as the leukemia drug Gleevec -- that target
specific mutations in cells that contribute to cancer. Gleevec was subsequently
found to be an effective treatment for a different cancer of the
gastrointestinal tract that was triggered by a similar mutation. That same
mutation has now been found in some forms of melanoma. "I believe that targeted
drugs are the future for melanoma therapy," said Bastian.

   ----------------------------------------------------------

   At a glance

   Advance: An experimental form of gene therapy to fight melanoma apparently
has cured cancer in two patients.

   Caveats: The experiment was small and didn't work for 15 other patients.

   Gene therapy: A new way to fight disease by inserting helpful genes into a
patient's cells. The most common way to insert genes is to piggyback them onto
harmless viruses that burrow into the cells. As those cells reproduce, they
replicate the helpful gene.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              643 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: An altered cell cures 2 cancer patients

BYLINE: KAREN KAPLAN, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:

   Scientists for the first time have genetically modified cells that fight
tumors, allowing patients to rid themselves of an aggressive form of cancer,
according to a study released yesterday.

   The technique, which cured two of 17 test patients who had advanced melanoma,
paves the way for a new approach to fighting cancer by harnessing - and boosting
- the body's immune system instead of relying solely on toxic chemotherapy or
radiation treatments.

   The researchers from the National Cancer Institute, whose findings were
published online by the journal Science, say the strategy used in the skin
cancer cases could be adapted to treat other common cancers.

    "It's obviously very exciting," said Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical
officer of the American Cancer Society, who was not involved in the research.
"It's a proof of concept of being able to develop a technique where they can use
a patient's own blood cells to fight cancer."

   Steven A. Rosenberg, chief of the National Cancer Institute's surgery branch
and senior author of the study, said the results reaffirm the promise of gene
therapy after several high-profile setbacks.

   "We've been hyping gene therapy for a long time," he said. "This is the first
example of where we can actually use it to treat a cancer patient."

   Rosenberg and others cautioned that it would take several years to translate
this initial success into a practical therapy.

   They added that there is still more failure than success with the technique.
The 15 other melanoma patients enrolled in the study failed to show sustained
improvement from the modified immune cells.

   But the success with two patients, who have been cancer-free for more than a
year and a half, was enough to demonstrate the possibility of a new front in the
long, intractable war against cancer.

   "The important thing is this approach worked," said Margaret Kemeny, director
of the Queens Cancer Center of the Queens Hospital in New York. "Can they make
this approach work more often? That is the question."

   Melanoma accounts for only 4 percent of skin cancer cases, but it is the most
lethal type. More than 62,000 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma this
year, and 7,910 people will die from it, the American Cancer Society estimates.

   Rosenberg had previously discovered that some melanoma patients are able to
generate T cells, a type of immune cell, that recognize the tumor cells as
unwanted intruders and respond by attacking them.

   'ATTACK CELLS' UNLEASHED

   His research team removed white blood cells from patients who had metastatic
melanoma and isolated the most aggressive tumor-fighting T cells. Those cells
were multiplied in the lab while patients underwent chemotherapy to clear out
their own immune systems. Once the slates were clean, patients were injected
with concentrated doses of their own most-powerful cells.

   The experiments showed promise, but about half the patients didn't have any T
cells that were able to target melanoma, Rosenberg said. So he decided to give
ordinary T cells the genes they would need to become attack cells.

   Tumor cells are coated in distinctive proteins called antigens, and a variety
called MART-1 is present on the surface of melanoma. To recognize melanoma
cells, T cells must have the specific receptor that binds to MART-1. Then the T
cells are able to lock onto the tumor and secrete hormones that destroy it.

   Rosenberg's team spliced the genes for making the anti-MART-1 receptor into a
disabled retrovirus. Then the retrovirus was let loose on a few million white
blood cells that had been removed from each melanoma patient.

   As the virus infected the cells, the new gene was incorporated into the T
cells. As the cells multiply, "all of the daughter cells express that material
as well," Rosenberg said. As in the earlier experiments, patients in this study
had their immune systems wiped out and replaced with the genetically modified
cells.

   Some patients showed hardly any uptake of the new genes, but half of the
patients wound up with the new gene in at least 20 percent of their T cells.
After three months, eight patients still had detectable levels of the
genetically modified T cells in their systems.

   Rosenberg is also looking beyond melanoma. Antigens have been identified for
several other cancers, and the research team has isolated the genes for some of
the corresponding T cell receptors.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              644 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                   1 Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1334 words

HEADLINE: Turning cells into tumor fighters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Mark Origer entered the last-ditch experiment hoping to beat back his
melanoma for a few months, long enough to walk his daughter down the aisle.

   He got far luckier: Almost two years later, his body shows no signs of the
aggressive skin cancer.

   Government scientists rescued Origer and another man with advanced melanoma
by genetically altering their own white blood cells to turn them into tumor
fighters.

   The treatment didn't help 15 other melanoma victims. So scientists are trying
to strengthen it to work better.

   Still, the National Cancer Institute called its experiment, unveiled
Thursday, the first real success in the long quest for gene therapy for cancer -
because it fought the disease's worst stage, when it had spread through the
body, not just single tumors.

   And it did so in a way far different than today's standard options, by
harnessing patients' immune systems to continually search out and kill tumors.

   "It's not like chemotherapy or radiation, where as soon as you're done,
you're done," said Dr. Steven Rosenberg, the NCI's surgery chief who led the
research published in the journal Science. "We're giving living cells which
continue to grow and function in the body."

   "The important thing is this approach worked," said Dr. Margaret Kemeny,
director of the Queens Cancer Center of the Queens Hospital in New York. "Can
they make this approach work more often? That is the question."

   Melanoma accounts for only 4 percent of skin cancer cases, but it is the most
lethal type. More than 62,000 patients will be diagnosed with melanoma this
year, and 7,910 people will die from it, according to estimates from the
American Cancer Society.

   Doctors can't predict how the therapy's first two successful patients will
fare long term. Melanoma is notorious for returning years after patients think
they have subdued it.

   "I'm cured for now," is how a grateful Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wis., puts
it.

   He recalls his doctors' wide grins when, just a month after his December 2004
treatment, his tumors started to shrink. By his daughter's wedding last fall,
just one small cancerous spot remained, on his liver. Surgeons later cut it out.

   A checkup from NCI doctors this week confirmed that Origer is still
cancer-free.

   "I know how fortunate I am to have gone through this and responded to this.
Not everybody's that lucky," he said.

   Origer said his frightening struggle with melanoma began in 1999, when his
wife noticed a small, dark mole between his shoulder blades.

   After the mole was removed, a biopsy showed it contained melanoma cells.
Despite repeated operations and chemotherapy treatments, the cancer continued to
spread, he said.

   "It's an emotional roller coaster," he said. "You fight it and you feel
you've done all you can do and sometimes you get your hopes up and think you've
finally defeated it. And then it shows you who's boss."

   Origer said doctors finally told him they could not stop the cancer's spread.

   "They told me there are some treatments that would buy me a year, but that's
all," he said.

   He said he and his wife "went to the Internet" in search of clinical trials
and learned of the NCI research.

   After he was accepted to participate in Rosenberg's research, blood was drawn
from his arm and the white cells were separated out.

   Rosenberg said some melanoma patients produce white cells that are capable of
recognizing telltale "knobs" on the cancer cells.

   When these cells encounter a melanoma cell, they "clomp onto (the knob) and
inject molecules called perforins that cause the cell to burst open," he said.

   However, most melanoma victims and all the victims of other forms of cancer
do not produce white cells that can recognize cancer cells, Rosenberg said.

   Cancer specialists praised the work, but warned that years of additional
research are needed.

   "Clearly this is a first step," said Dr. Len Lichtenfeld of the American
Cancer Society. "We have to be very cautious about not raising hopes too much."

   But, "it is exciting," he said. "It certainly is a proof of concept that this
approach will work."

   In the Tampa Bay area, a top researcher at H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
Research Institute said he's already talking with Rosenberg about studying the
technique in patients here.

   Jim Mule, Moffitt's associate center director for translational research,
said he envisions setting up a consortium of three or four centers around the
United States.

   "What needs to be done next is to get this promising treatment to other
centers, including our own," he said. "To enter many more melanoma patients in
trials outside the NCI, to show this approach and this technique are
transportable."

   In St. Petersburg, Dr. James M. Spencer, a clinical dermatology professor at
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, called the news "wonderful."

   "Melanoma's a good one to study (with gene therapy) because we don't have any
good treatments for metastatic melanoma," said Spencer, who practices at St.
Anthony's Carillon Outpatient Center.

   Using gene therapy to boost the body's immune system is intriguing, Spencer
said, because other attempts to use the immune system with melanoma, by using a
vaccine, haven't been successful.

   "Melanoma is sneaky," Spencer said. "It evades the immune system by shuffling
the (cell) surface proteins. ... There are proteins on the surface that the
immune system can recognize, but by the time you get the vaccine, it's no good
anymore."

   Also, the gene therapy can be customized to create cells that should attack
more common cancers, said Dr. Patrick Hwu, melanoma chairman at the University
of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, who once worked with the NCI team.

   In a few months, NCI hopes to begin studying the approach in small numbers of
patients with advanced breast, colon and other cancers.

   White blood cells called T-lymphocytes hunt down germs and other foreign
tissue. But cancerous cells look a lot like healthy cells, making it hard for
those T-cells to spot a problem.

   By 2002, Rosenberg had made a breakthrough. He found small numbers of
cancer-fighting T-cells inside some patients with advanced melanoma. He
literally pulled those cells out of their blood, and grew billions more of them
in laboratory dishes, enough to have a chance at overwhelming a tumor when
they're pumped back into patients. About half significantly improve after this
so-called "cell-transfer therapy."

   But few melanoma patients make enough cancer-fighting T-cells naturally to
spot in their bloodstream, and T-cells that attack other cancers are virtually
impossible to find. So Rosenberg and colleagues set out to create those tumor
fighters from scratch.

   The scientists took normal lymphocytes - ones that don't recognize cancer -
out of patients with advanced melanoma who had exhausted their treatment
options. They infected those cells with a virus carrying genes that create
T-cell receptors, essentially homing devices for, in this case, melanoma.
(Different genes create receptors for other cancers.)

   "We can take a normal cell from you or me or any patient and ... convert that
cell into a cell that recognizes the cancer," Rosenberg said.

   Here's the key: When scientists infused the newly armed cells into 17
patients, only Origer and his fellow survivor maintained super-high levels for
more than a year - and only their tumors gradually faded. In most of the other
patients, only low levels of the tumor-fighting cells persisted for a few
months.

   No patients suffered serious side effects, although they required a few weeks
of chemotherapy to suppress their natural immune system and make room for the
extra T-cells.

   Why did those cells flourish in only two people?

   "That's the critical question," said M.D. Anderson's Hwu.

   Picking the right lymphocyte to genetically alter isn't easy - there are many
different kinds - or perhaps more precise T-cell receptors were needed for the
cells to better take root and do the job, he suggested.

   But "these are all solvable issues," Hwu said, calling the study "one of the
first documented, effective cases of cancer gene therapy working."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              645 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            September 1, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A04

LENGTH: 822 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Shows Progress;
Melanoma Is Halted in 2 Men, Cancer Researchers Report

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A team of researchers from the National Cancer Institute reported yesterday
that they have successfully treated two cancer patients using gene therapy, the
introduction of genes into the human body for medical purposes.

    Two men, both with the rapidly growing skin cancer melanoma, were given
immune system cells taken from their own blood and engineered to attack their
tumors. They are alive, with no evidence of cancer, 18 months later. Fifteen
other patients who got the same treatment died.

    The report, published online by the journal Science, is the latest result of
a three-decade effort by surgeon Steven A. Rosenberg to find ways to manipulate
the human immune system to fight cancer.

    Four years ago, Rosenberg and his colleagues treated a group of melanoma
patients with naturally occurring anti-cancer cells extracted from their tumors,
and some of those patients also have had long-term disappearance of their
cancers. The new report, however, is believed to be the first time that
genetically engineered immune system cells  --  specifically, T lymphocytes  --
have produced the same effect.

    Neither Rosenberg nor others would describe the two patients as cured. At
least five years would need to pass before such a declaration would be
considered. And cancer sometimes returns even after that much time has elapsed.

    Gene therapy was once viewed as the great hope for treating, or even curing,
a long list of dread diseases. But tests of the concept since the late 1980s
have been overwhelmingly disappointing.

    "I do consider this a proof of the principle that it can work," Rosenberg
said yesterday. "I have every expectation that we can get it to work better."

    Response by others in the field was positive but not effusive.

    "I think it is an important landmark to see some cancer patients respond to
a gene therapy  --  finally," said Patrick Hwu, a physician and gene-therapy
researcher at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, in Houston,
who was not involved in the new study. "I think that clearly all of us want to
do better than two out of 17."

    Michael T. Lotze, a professor of surgery and bioengineering at the
University of Pittsburgh, said that "the work is heroic. The question is, does
it advance the field in a major way?"

    While the good results in two patients are encouraging, "in terms of
response rates, the overwhelming data is that T cells, even in high numbers, are
inadequate to mediate sufficient anti-tumor effects," Lotze said.

    In the study, Rosenberg and his colleagues took lymphocytes from the blood
and inserted into them genes for a receptor capable of "recognizing" a protein
on melanoma cells called MART-1. This would allow the lymphocyte to attach to a
tumor cell and kill it.

    The patients, all of whom had previously undergone surgery and immune-based
treatments, were given chemotherapy to temporarily wipe out their immune
systems. The engineered cells were then re-injected, with the hope that they
would proliferate as the immune system recovered. The patients also received
interleukin-2, which is a cytokine, or immune-system hormone.

    One of the patients, a 52-year-old man, had melanoma in his neck, armpit and
liver. It disappeared every place but one spot in the liver; surgeons removed
that area. The other man, age 30, had cancer in his lungs and just outside them
in the middle of the chest. His cancer disappeared, also.

    The paper published yesterday provided few details of previous treatment the
men had received. Rosenberg also did not analyze any of the reintroduced
lymphocytes to see if, in fact, they had the ability to kill cancer cells.

    Because of that, it is difficult to say with certainty that the engineered
cells were responsible for the tumors' disappearance. However, Lotze, the
Pittsburgh expert, said "it is unlikely" that it was the result of other
treatments.

    Rosenberg said he and his colleagues have engineered lymphocytes to
recognize tumor markers, or antigens, found in about half of all cancers,
including breast, colon and lung cancers. He said many of the modified cells
have a much better ability to bind to tumor cells than the anti-melanoma cells
he used in the study reported yesterday, which was conducted two years ago.

    The research team recently applied to the Food and Drug Administration to
try the new cells in about a hundred patients. The FDA is expected to respond to
the request by the middle of this month.

    Other researchers are working on similar strategies. Hwu, of M.D. Anderson,
is engineering lymphocytes that have receptors for substances called chemokines
that some tumors put out. This will help the lymphocytes home in on the cancer.

     "We need to figure out how to get the T cells to migrate into the tumor
more efficiently," he said. "If the T cells are able to recognize the cancer but
are circulating in the bloodstream, then they are not on the battlefield where
they need to be."

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                              646 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            August 29, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES - HEALTHY LIVING; ASK THE DOCTOR; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Muscular dystrophy has many forms, severity varies

BYLINE: SHARI RUDAVSKY

BODY:

   Dr. Robert Pascuzzi, chairman of the department of neurology at Indiana
University School of Medicine, discusses muscular dystrophy.

   Question: The Muscular Dystrophy Association has broadcast its telethon each
Labor Day weekend since 1966. How common is muscular dystrophy, and how
devastating is it?

   Answer: Most people define muscular dystrophy as an inherited disease of the
muscle that causes the muscle to very gradually become weaker over the course of
years so patients have a slow decline in muscle function. There are about 20
different kinds of muscular dystrophy and, depending on which kind one is
talking about, a patient can have a lot of difficulty or relatively mild
problems.

   Q: What's the most common?

   A: Duchenne dystrophy. The Jerry Lewis telethon often emphasizes these
children -- boys that present trouble walking, running and jumping around age 5
and their muscles get progressively weaker, such that at around age 10, they
require a wheelchair. Unfortunately, due to the involvement of breathing and
heart muscle, their survival is limited. They often don't make it beyond the age
of about 20.

   Myotonic muscular dystrophy is probably the most common adult form of
muscular dystrophy. It can start from birth to 90, causing slow progressive
weakness that lasts over a lifetime. It's inherited in a dominant pattern,
meaning you tend to see it in every generation.

   It can be mild or very severe and can cause many problems unrelated to
muscles; for instance, heart trouble, cataracts, diabetes, breathing troubles.

   Q: How common are these diseases?

   A: Probably about 30 disorders affect the muscles and nerves that the MDA
addresses, including Lou Gehrig's disease and myasthenia gravis. If one includes
all those patients, I would estimate that one in 100 people either have a
neuromuscular disease or are living with someone who has one.

   Q: What has the telethon's impact been over the years?

   A: The MDA telethon has generated millions of dollars to fund basic research
to determine the underlying cause and mechanisms of these diseases. The current
research being done, especially in regard to gene therapy, is at a critical
time. There are important trials that are just now starting up in humans to try
to fix the genetic defect by inserting a corrective gene.

   The telethon is a really good model for how to deal with generating attention
and enthusiasm and support to combat an important medical condition.

   Have a question for Ask the Doctor? Contact Shari Rudavsky at (317) 444-6354
or shari.rudavsky@indystar.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2006


                              647 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             August 28, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Tech Matters; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 747  words

HEADLINE: Biotech entrepreneur Girondi seeks orphan disease, son's cure

BYLINE: Michael Krauss, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   Patrick Girondi is a Chicago biotech entrepreneur who wants to save his son's
life. He also wants to deliver profitable returns for investors in his
Chicago-based biotech company, Errant Gene Therapeutics. In the process, he
might deliver a cure for thalassemia, a horrible disease that devastates the
lives of people of Mediterranean descent. Girondi also has his sights set on a
cure for sickle cell anemia. If he's successful, he could also help put Chicago
on the map as a biotech center. He has raised $1.7 million so far, and believes
the prospects for his company and its gene therapy treatment, Thalagen, are
good.

   Girondi says, "We will be in our first patient in about six months. The FDA
has already given us six beds at the NIH. We'll have six beds at
Sloan-Kettering. We should see results in 40 to 50 days. We don't need to see a
cure. We just need to see if a patient is producing hemoglobin."

   It would be a tremendous step forward.

   Girondi is an unusual tech entrepreneur. He grew up at 26th and Halsted, and
doesn't have a degree in biochemistry or an MBA. He describes himself as a tough
kid who attended De La Salle, and found his way into the Air Force, then to the
Board of Trade, where he made his fortune.

   "I lived the rags to riches story," Girondi says. "I grew up on the streets
with no education. . . . I was lucky. I made some money."

   Girondi married in 1987. Then in 1992, his first son, Rocco, was diagnosed
with thalassemia, a severe blood disorder.

   "Thalassemia is a genetic disease where the patient can't produce enough
hemoglobin, the oxygen carrier in the blood," Girondi says. "It is a cousin
disease to sickle cell anemia. Patients have to do whole blood transfusions
every 15 to 25 days to hold their hemoglobin up. With transfusions there are
complications and risks of other diseases, plus iron builds up in the body.

   He says patients live to an average age of 27, succumbing to iron overload in
the body.

   Girondi says only about 1,800 Americans are affected with the disease. Faced
with these small numbers, Girondi realized thalassemia was a so-called orphan
disease, not likely to be researched and cured. He decided to learn everything
he could about the disease.

   "I moved out of trading, and into the pharmaceutical company," Girondi says.
He credits his fellow La Salle Street traders for helping fund the company.
"They just wrote checks," he says.

   Will Girondi find a cure for thalassemia? There's no guarantee but De La
Salle President Brother Michael Quirk lauds Girondi. Quirk says, "Patrick has
worked his way up from the bottom. He's been generous to De La Salle. Pat's a
guy who never forgot his roots. He's really committed."

   That commitment could boost Chicago biotech. "EGT is the type of company
Chicagoans should be supporting," Dan Lyne, director of technology development
at World Business Chicago, says. "Patrick's taken a successful career at the
exchanges and a challenging personal situation, and used his global network and
personal resources to fund a venture in the orphan pharmaceutical area. I think
it's fantastic."

   Sell Cubs, boost tech

   Would the acquisition of the Chicago Cubs by tech entrepreneur and Dallas
Mavericks owner Mark Cuban boost both Chicago's sports and tech communities?

   You bet.

   Cuban's arrival would be transformational. But Cuban throws cold water on the
Cubs idea. "They aren't for sale, so it doesn't matter," a pragmatic Cuban says.

   Closing the digital divide

   The Mayor's Advisory Council on Closing the Digital Divide plans four public
hearings, council Chairwoman and MacArthur Vice President Julia Stasch says.

   The hearings will allow Chicagoans to share ideas for closing the digital
divide with the advisory council. Hearings are scheduled for 6 p.m. Sept. 13 at
the Woodson Regional Library; 6 p.m. Sept. 14 at the Sulzer Regional Library;
noon Sept. 20 at the Harold Washington Library Center, and 6 p.m. Sept. 21 at
the West Chicago Avenue Branch library.

   In May, Mayor Daley announced a plan to provide affordable Internet access
throughout the city, and formed the advisory council to examine ways to close
the digital divide.

   How did Hedy land Oprah?

   How did Hedy Ratner, co-president of the Women's Business Development Center,
land Oprah Winfrey to keynote the WBDC's 20th anniversary luncheon Sept. 27?

   Ratner was entrepreneurial. She saw Oprah working out at the East Bank Club
and asked. Oprah said yes.

   Michael Krauss is a Chicago area tech writer and consultant.

   e-mail: mkrauss@ suntimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2006


                              648 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Sun-Times Media, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             August 28, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Tech Matters; Pg. 58

LENGTH: 746  words

HEADLINE: Biotech entrepreneur Girondi seeks orphan disease, son's cure

BYLINE: Michael Krauss, Special to the The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   Patrick Girondi is a Chicago biotech entrepreneur who wants to save his son's
life. He also wants to deliver profitable returns for investors in his
Chicago-based biotech company, Errant Gene Therapeutics.

   In the process, he might deliver a cure for thalassemia, a horrible disease
that devastates the lives of people of Mediterranean descent. Girondi also has
his sights set on a cure for sickle cell anemia. If he's successful, he could
also help put Chicago on the map as a biotech center. He has raised $1.7 million
so far, and believes the prospects for his company and its gene therapy
treatment, Thalagen, are good.

   Girondi says, "We will be in our first patient in about six months. The FDA
has already given us six beds at the NIH. We'll have six beds at
Sloan-Kettering. We should see results in 40 to 50 days. We don't need to see a
cure. We just need to see if a patient is producing hemoglobin."

   It would be a tremendous step forward.

   Girondi is an unusual tech entrepreneur. He grew up at 26th and Halsted, and
doesn't have a degree in biochemistry or an MBA. He describes himself as a tough
kid who attended De La Salle, and found his way into the Air Force, then to the
Board of Trade, where he made his fortune.

   "I lived the rags to riches story," Girondi says. "I grew up on the streets
with no education. . . . I was lucky. I made some money."

   Girondi married in 1987. Then in 1992, his first son, Rocco, was diagnosed
with thalassemia, a severe blood disorder.

   "Thalassemia is a genetic disease where the patient can't produce enough
hemoglobin, the oxygen carrier in the blood," Girondi says. "It is a cousin
disease to sickle cell anemia. Patients have to do whole blood transfusions
every 15 to 25 days to hold their hemoglobin up. With transfusions there are
complications and risks of other diseases, plus iron builds up in the body.

   He says patients live to an average age of 27, succumbing to iron overload in
the body.

   Girondi says only about 1,800 Americans are affected with the disease. Faced
with these small numbers, Girondi realized thalassemia was a so-called orphan
disease, not likely to be researched and cured. He decided to learn everything
he could about the disease.

   "I moved out of trading, and into the pharmaceutical company," Girondi says.
He credits his fellow La Salle Street traders for helping fund the company.
"They just wrote checks," he says.

   Will Girondi find a cure for thalassemia? There's no guarantee but De La
Salle President Brother Michael Quirk lauds Girondi. Quirk says, "Patrick has
worked his way up from the bottom. He's been generous to De La Salle. Pat's a
guy who never forgot his roots. He's really committed."

   That commitment could boost Chicago biotech. "EGT is the type of company
Chicagoans should be supporting," Dan Lyne, director of technology development
at World Business Chicago, says. "Patrick's taken a successful career at the
exchanges and a challenging personal situation, and used his global network and
personal resources to fund a venture in the orphan pharmaceutical area. I think
it's fantastic."

   SELL CUBS, BOOST TECH

   Would the acquisition of the Chicago Cubs by tech entrepreneur and Dallas
Mavericks owner Mark Cuban boost both Chicago's sports and tech communities?

   You bet.

   Cuban's arrival would be transformational. But Cuban throws cold water on the
Cubs idea. "They aren't for sale, so it doesn't matter," a pragmatic Cuban says.

   CLOSING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE

   The Mayor's Advisory Council on Closing the Digital Divide plans four public
hearings, council Chairwoman and MacArthur Vice President Julia Stasch says.

   The hearings will allow Chicagoans to share ideas for closing the digital
divide with the advisory council. Hearings are scheduled for 6 p.m. Sept. 13 at
the Woodson Regional Library; 6 p.m. Sept. 14 at the Sulzer Regional Library;
noon Sept. 20 at the Harold Washington Library Center, and 6 p.m. Sept. 21 at
the West Chicago Avenue Branch library.

   In May, Mayor Daley announced a plan to provide affordable Internet access
throughout the city, and formed the advisory council to examine ways to close
the digital divide.

   HOW DID HEDY LAND OPRAH?

   How did Hedy Ratner, co-president of the Women's Business Development Center,
land Oprah Winfrey to keynote the WBDC's 20th anniversary luncheon Sept. 27?

   Ratner was entrepreneurial. She saw Oprah working out at the East Bank Club
and asked. Oprah said yes.

   Michael Krauss is a Chicago area tech writer and consultant.

   e-mail: mkrauss@ suntimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2011


                              649 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 28, 2006 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy drug shows potential in cancer trials

BYLINE: Linda Marsa, Special to The Times

BODY:

   Among the most promising gene therapy trials are ones to treat various forms
of cancer. More than 100 of these are in the works, taking a variety of
approaches: using genes to ramp up the immune system or block the action of
other, cancer-causing genes, to name a couple.

   Most of these -- and, indeed, all gene therapy treatments -- are still in the
early stages of development. But one therapy could be on the market in the U.S.
within the year.

   Named Advexin, the injectable medication contains a genetically engineered
form of a gene, p53, inserted into a harmless virus.

   In the Advexin therapy, the virus enters cells, where it produces a p53
protein.

   The p53 gene is normally present in humans and controls the activity of more
than 100 other genes. When it is functioning normally, it blocks the formation
of tumors and may even make cancerous cells more vulnerable to chemotherapy and
radiation.

   But mistakes in the gene can develop in people's tissues over time, and in
rare cases people are born with such defects. Under both circumstances, the gene
plays a key role in the development of cancers.

   In fact, researchers estimate that p53 mutations are involved in at least
half of all cancers, including ones of the lung, colon, breast, ovary, brain and
lymph nodes.

   Advexin is delivered in a number of ways: It can be directly injected into
tumors or the bloodstream, or delivered orally in a mouthwash.

   Results of small tests with several cancers including advanced ones of the
breast and lung have been encouraging. In a 2004 study at the MD Anderson Cancer
Center in Houston, for example, 12 patients with advanced breast cancer received
several injections of Advexin, followed by a course of chemotherapy. Their
tumors shrunk by nearly 80%, from about 8 centimeters in diameter to less than 2
centimeters.

   A Japanese study reported this year involved 10 patients suffering from
late-stage cancer of the esophagus who were no longer responding to conventional
therapies. After receiving four Advexin injections, at one year 60% were still
living. (Only a 20% survival rate would normally be expected.) In three
patients, doctors found no evidence of the tumor even after multiple biopsies.

   Advexin is currently being evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration for
use in recurrent head and neck cancers. In Europe, approval is pending for its
use on a rare inherited cancer, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, in which sufferers are
born with defective p53 genes.

   Last November, Advexin's maker, the Austin, Texas-based Introgen Therapeutics
Inc., entered into an alliance with Colgate-Palmolive Co. in New York to
incorporate the gene therapy into mouthwashes and gels to treat and prevent oral
cancers. The mouthwash is now in the early stages of clinical tests for the
prevention of oral cancers in high-risk patients.

   "This is a glimpse of the future application of these agents," says David
Nance, chief executive of Introgen. "To prevent or reverse cancer in its
earliest stages."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2006


                              650 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 28, 2006 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2256 words

HEADLINE: Biotech's bright hope;
Scientists are newly optimistic that gene therapy will help fight the most
serious diseases.

BYLINE: Linda Marsa, Special to The Times

BODY:

   TO the shrill whine of a high-speed drill, neurosurgeon Dr. Paul Larson makes
two nickel-sized holes in Shirley Cooper's skull. Guided by a computerized MRI
map, he plunges a long, thin needle through one hole and deep into the brain --
and empties the syringe.

   A very special payload trickles into her brain: genes that, if all goes well,
will help her control the movement of her muscles.

   It is a day in late May and Cooper, 60, an artist who lives near Seattle, has
come to the UC San Francisco Medical Center to find some relief from the
Parkinson's disease that is stealing her identity. Without medication, she has
trouble walking and talking, and can't hold a paint brush. And the drugs are
wearing off -- as they eventually do for all Parkinson's patients. After that,
she probably will deteriorate rapidly.

   The experimental treatment Cooper is undergoing is intended to reverse that
process. Parkinson's destroys cells in the brain that make dopamine, and the
loss of this key brain transmitter triggers the disease's crippling symptoms:
tremors in the arms, legs and face, stiff or frozen limbs, and impaired balance
and coordination. In the trial she's involved in -- the earliest of clinical
tests, designed to assess safety -- scientists have engineered a harmless,
stripped-down virus to carry a gene that will boost brain dopamine through the
enzyme it encodes: amino acid decarboxylase, or AADC.

   When the virus is injected into her brain, they hope the gene will be
incorporated into healthy brain cells and steadily produce the enzyme.

   Gene therapy is making a comeback after a series of serious setbacks that
threatened to permanently derail human tests. In recent years, European
scientists have cured more than two dozen patients suffering from three rare,
and in some cases lethal, immune disorders.

   Spurred by this success, plus the development of new techniques aimed at
making the therapy safer and more effective, more than 300 gene therapy trials,
including the one for Parkinson's at UC San Francisco, are underway in the U.S.
and abroad.

   The approaches include what people traditionally think of as gene therapy:
inserting functional genes to replace single, faulty ones to treat relatively
rare genetic diseases such as muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, sickle cell
anemia, beta thalassemia and hemophilia. But, more and more, gene therapy is
being studied as a treatment for lethal ills that are not inherited in any
clear, simple way -- cancer, hepatitis, AIDS, heart disease -- and which also
plague millions.

   Today, scientists are injecting genes into people to try to block the
formation of deadly cancerous tumors. They're implanting genes that stimulate
cell growth in an attempt to regenerate heart muscle cells and grow blood
vessels in patients with congestive heart failure; halt disease progression in
people with macular degeneration; and slow the death of brain cells in
Alzheimer's as well as Parkinson's patients.

   Though most of these treatments are still in the early phases of human tests,
a gene therapy drug to combat cancer could be available within the year. (See
related story).

   "There is genuine excitement in the field," says Dr. Ronald Crystal, a gene
therapy pioneer and chairman of the department of genetic medicine at Weill
Medical College of Cornell University in New York.

   "Gene therapy," he predicts, "will evolve into a major therapeutic method."

   Progress amid trials

   Today's upbeat mood is in stark contrast to the gloom that pervaded the field
in the late 1990s. After the rise of genetic engineering in the late '70s, gene
therapy had been touted as a magic bullet that would quickly fix an array of
debilitating and often fatal inherited ills.

   It was nowhere near that simple.

   The first human trial was performed in September 1990 at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., on a young girl suffering from a rare
genetic disease called ADA-SCID, in which the immune system doesn't function
properly. Healthy versions of the ADA-SCID gene were successfully added to the
girl's blood cells, but she was still taking medication for her condition and
doctors couldn't conclude that the gene was providing any benefit.

   Even so, it was a breakthrough to show that genes could be added to the body
-- and in the wake of that pioneering experiment, more than 450 gene therapy
tests were launched, involving 4,000 volunteers.

   Not one of those tests cured anyone, according to a 1995 National Institutes
of Health report that was commissioned to determine where the field stood
scientifically. More damningly, the report concluded that the technology had
been tainted by hype, leading to "the mistaken and widespread perception that
gene therapy is further developed and more successful than it actually is," the
report stated.

   Scientists had been stymied by a host of unanticipated technological
problems. They didn't know how to get the genes to the sites in the body where
they would do any good. They didn't know how to make those genes function
properly even if they got to intended sites. "The concept was so simple, but
some of these barriers were tougher to overcome than people originally thought,"
says Dr. Mark A. Kay, a geneticist at the Stanford University School of Medicine
in Palo Alto.

   Part of the problem was that researchers used a scattershot method of
delivery: Millions of genes were infused into patients through the bloodstream,
in the hope that enough genes would land where they were needed.

   However, even when the genes were incorporated into the right cells -- which
didn't happen very often -- their effects were only transitory. After a couple
of weeks, they'd stop working.

   And the "carriers" used to ferry genes inside cells sometimes caused
problems. Because naked pieces of DNA can't penetrate cell membranes, scientists
generally insert copies of the genes into viruses, which can easily enter cells.
The viruses, and scientists have used various types, are stripped of their genes
so they cannot reproduce or cause disease -- but, as researchers soon
discovered, they can still elicit an immune response.

   In a 1993 experiment, for example, scientists successfully added "good" genes
to airway cells in the lungs of 10 patients suffering from the lethal inherited
disorder, cystic fibrosis. But the effect was short-lived. After a week or two,
the patients' immune system recognized the virus particles as foreign and
eliminated the cells, says Crystal, who conducted these experiments.

   Then in 1999, an 18-year-old volunteer in a gene therapy test at the
University of Pennsylvania died after a fatal immune reaction to the modified
virus used in the trial. The incident cast a pall over the field and funding for
research dried up. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration halted several other
trials and increased its oversight, requiring far more stringent monitoring and
documentation.

   Yet the trials did continue.

   Success, when it finally came, was tempered with sadness. In trials in France
and Britain, scientists successfully corrected the genetic mistake causing
X-SCID, which leaves sufferers with no infection-fighting white blood cells, in
11 young boys.

   But between 2002 and 2005, three of the French boys developed a leukemia-like
disease. Though the boys had been cured of their genetic disease, the inserted
DNA had inadvertently switched on a cancer-causing gene. One of the children
later died of complications from the leukemia treatment.

   In the wake of this disaster, dozens of gene therapy trials that employed the
same approach -- using retroviruses to carry genes into blood-producing stem
cells -- were shut down temporarily in the U.S. and other countries. "We were on
and off hold for almost two years," says Dr. Donald Kohn, a gene therapy pioneer
at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles who is in the midst of a similar study in
children with ADA-SCID.

   Researchers scrambled to uncover what had caused the leukemia. They tried to
find better ways to safely transport genes to the right parts of the body
without accidentally turning on other genes or triggering an immune reaction.
And they tried to improve the chance that cells, once genes were added, would
continuously secrete therapeutic doses of the desired compounds.

   Though there's still much to be done in all these fronts, significant
progress has been made, scientists say.

   In Europe, for example, the gene therapy protocols that caused leukemia in
the children have been modified by adding chemotherapy. That stops the dangerous
overproduction of white blood cells.

   And researchers have improved their ability to control the genes that they
insert -- restricting the genes' activities to only certain types of cells and
allowing them to remain active longer.

   Scientists are also using safer viral transporters that are less likely to
turn cells cancerous or trigger immune responses.

   One crucial advance is the development of a new gene transporter based on a
family of harmless viruses known as adeno-associated virus, or AAV. They've
become popular DNA vehicles because, first of all, AAV viruses don't trigger an
adverse immune response.

   But another benefit is that AAV comes in different types that home in on
different cells. For example, one form of AAV has an affinity for nerve cells,
another is attracted to the liver while yet a third type targets muscle cells.
This means that scientists can select the AAV transporter based on where they
want their gene to end up and it will go directly to the right place in the
body, says Dr. Michael Kaplitt, a neurosurgeon at Weill Medical College who
helped develop the AAV vectors.

   Advances in imaging technology also make it easier to narrowly target
therapies: Instead of flooding the bloodstream with millions of genes,
researchers can inject small amounts of genetic material to specific regions of
the body.

   "This way, you don't have to make gigantic amounts of the vectors, and
there's a safety advantage because you're not exposing the entire body to what
could be a potent agent," says Rich Gregory, a biochemist and senior vice
president of research at Genzyme Corp., the Cambridge, Mass., biotech company
that has developed some of these treatments, including the experimental
Parkinson's therapy underway at UC San Francisco.

   In the Parkinson's trial, for example, the genetic material is encased in an
AAV vector that is attracted to nerve cells in the brain, and injected into a
discrete region of the brain that governs movement.

   A similar strategy was used in another Parkinson's experiment recently
completed on 12 patients at Weill Medical College that used gene therapy to
normalize the overactive nerve cells of Parkinson's patients. A year later, the
patients had a 27% improvement in stability and ability to walk, and less
stiffness and tremors on the treated side of the body, says Kaplitt, who helped
devise this technology.

   Although some of the original obstacles have been overcome, scientists say
they still have more to do.

   "We're very aware of the challenges but I don't think it's now being
over-hyped," says Kohn, who plans to resume his own, long-delayed ADA-SCID
trials at Childrens this fall. "The field is advancing steadily if slowly."

   Gene therapy is also being tested as a treatment for angina, a debilitating
condition in which the blood supply to the heart is severely impaired because of
blockages to the coronary arteries. Cardiologists at medical centers around the
country have injected a gene known as VEGF-2 into the hearts of 400 patients.
They hope that the DNA material will spark the growth of tiny blood vessels and
increase blood flow to oxygen-starved cells. (Results are expected later this
year.)

   And gene therapy may also improve blood flow in the legs of patients with
peripheral arterial disease. In an ongoing clinical trial that will involve
about 300 patients, volunteers are being given about 20 injections in each leg
of a gene called HIF-1 alpha, which controls the body's response to low oxygen,
in the hope that new blood vessels will grow. In other human experiments, gene
therapy is being looked at for conditions as varied as Alzheimer's and
arthritis: A preliminary trial for the latter, for example, showed a 20% to 30%
reduction in swelling when 14 patients were treated with a gene to interfere
with an inflammation-causing chemical.

   In animals, scientists are exploring even broader possibilities, such as
therapies to restore someone's hearing, or clear clogged arteries and thus
prevent heart attacks. Despite its troubled history, researchers now believe
that gene therapy is finally coming of age and that DNA-based medicine will one
day become an integral part of mainstream medical practice.

   "The initial treatments may not be curative but will be helpful additions to
the therapeutic arsenal," says Stanford's Kay. "And as the technology gets
refined, we may move from things that merely improve quality of life to actual
cures."

   For Parkinson's patient Shirley Cooper, these advances may be coming just in
time, but it is too soon to tell. She's only the fifth patient in the world to
be treated in this trial, and it is designed, primarily, to test safety. If the
therapy works, however, "it could greatly prolong the time that patients get
benefit from their medication," says Dr. Chad Christine, a neurologist at UC San
Francisco Medical Center and a co-investigator for the trial.

   Cooper, now home from the hospital with two permanent titanium caps plugging
the holes in her skull, is hoping for the best. "I just want to feel like myself
again," she says.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Using genes to mend the brain  CREDIT: DOUG STEVENS Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: THE START: Before surgery, Dr. Paul Larson, right, examines
Shirley Cooper, who has Parkinson's disease, for a gene therapy procedure at UC
San Francisco.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Robert Durell Los Angeles Times PHOTO: LIFELINE: A
tube will deliver a gene into the brain that's expected to boost a key chemical.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Robert Durell Los Angeles Times PHOTO: TRIAL THERAPY: Dr. Paul
Larson, above, preps Shirley Cooper for an experimental gene therapy procedure
to treat her Parkinson's disease. While this particular trial is designed
primarily to assess safety, the treatment is intended to reverse the crippling
symptoms of the disease. At right, Larson marks the spot where he will drill two
small holes in Cooper's skull. He will then insert a needle into the brain that
will inject a gene that is expected to increase levels of dopamine, a key brain
transmitter. It's still too soon to know, but if the therapy works, "it could
greatly prolong the time that patients get benefit from their medication," says
Dr. Chad Christine.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Photographs by Robert Durell Los Angeles
Times PHOTO: TRIAL THERAPY: Dr. Paul Larson, above, preps Shirley Cooper for an
experimental gene therapy procedure to treat her Parkinson's disease. While this
particular trial is designed primarily to assess safety, the treatment is
intended to reverse the crippling symptoms of the disease. At right, Larson
marks the spot where he will drill two small holes in Cooper's skull. He will
then insert a needle into the brain that will inject a gene that is expected to
increase levels of dopamine, a key brain transmitter. It's still too soon to
know, but if the therapy works, "it could greatly prolong the time that patients
get benefit from their medication," says Dr. Chad Christine.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Photographs by Robert Durell Los Angeles Times PHOTO: GUIDE: A measuring device
will determine the precise place to add genes in a trial at UC San Francisco.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Robert Durell Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2006


                              651 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            August 26, 2006 Saturday
                             Orange County Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: Dana Parsons / ORANGE COUNTY;
New Lyrics, Alas: `Bleep Me Out of the Ballgame'

BYLINE: Dana Parsons

BODY:

   It seemed the perfect way to spend an August night. An old friend and former
Orange County resident was in town and, lo and behold, he discovered that the
Red Sox were playing our hometown Halos. A Bosox fan of 50 years standing, he
suggested we take in some pennant-race baseball.

   Being a fun-loving guy who would do anything for a friend's happiness, I
agreed.

   Here's how our Thursday night went:

   We bought scalped tickets, and I reminded my buddy that Row L in Section 512
meant we'd be in the crow's nest near the top of the ballpark.

   Crow's nest, indeed. Judging from the residue left on the seats, it appeared
that a flock of crows actually had been using them in the last 24 hours.

   No biggie. A handful of wet towels and some elbow grease later, and we
settled in for a pleasant night in Southern California. Steve remembered his
time in Orange County and how, just a decade or so ago, you could sit in the
stadium and work a crossword puzzle without being disturbed by something as
unnerving as the fans cheering.

   By game's end Thursday, however, he wondered where he was. Like if he was
back in the Fenway Park in Boston he remembered from his youth, when potential
danger always lurked in the bleachers.

   Our immediate problem was a young woman in front of us, there with two young
men, and all of whom looked to be in their 20s. She stood up, blocking our view,
for the Angels' leadoff hitter in the first inning. Her friends occasionally did
likewise. An annoyance, but not a cardinal sin.

   Their enthusiasm waxed and waned, until a point early in the game when, for
no reason that either of us could determine, the woman yelled out a 10-letter
obscenity that you don't hear every day and certainly not in mixed company.

   The outburst seemed unprovoked and directed at some unseen target, presumably
a Red Sox fan. The crudity of it caught us off guard, but we shrugged.

   A while later, she got the urge again. Same word, again without any
provocation. But, this time, she caught the attention of a gaggle of Red Sox
fans a few rows in front of her who figured she meant them. One or two of them
returned the fire, but not as profanely, and to paraphrase an old joke, suddenly
we were at a baseball game when a Jerry Springer show broke out.

   The baiting continued. The young woman's boyfriend, who hadn't been openly
antagonistic, found himself defending his lady's honor and stood up to throw
down the gauntlet to a young man from Red Sox Nation. They made the standard
reference to meet under the stands, but nothing happened.

   Shortly after, a couple of the Red Sox fans left their seats for the
concession area and our young heroine again uncorked her favorite 10-letter
epithet -- this time clearly at them, but adorning it with an obscene pantomime.

   That moment passed without an exchange of gunfire. Pretty soon, a large guy
in the Red Sox row had had enough and yelled up to the trio in front of us:
"Shut the [bleep] up!"

   It worked. The trio in front of us went stone silent. A couple innings later,
the young man in front of us went down and shook hands with a few Sox fans.

   Peace returned to Section 512.

   However, a couple of the Sox fans weren't there, so Angel Fan returned later
to make up with them, too. One of them misinterpreted his movement toward them
and splashed him with half a cup of beer.

   We now had a brawl five rows in front of us. It lasted 30 seconds or so,
before police eventually escorted the parties away. The threesome in front of
us, including the woman who sparked the entire episode, eventually returned. The
beer-splasher did not return to his seat.

   Somewhere in all this a 2-1 ballgame was played. But instead of my buddy and
I discussing thwarted rallies and stellar pitching, we pondered the carnage.

   What compels someone to go to the ballpark on a summer's night and hurl
obscenities at strangers? And with such obliviousness as to whether children
were in the vicinity (they were), not to mention people who plunked down good
money to watch a ballgame? From what we could tell, no one in front of us was
the least bit intoxicated.

   Is it the Angels' status as perennial contenders that stirs the passions? Is
it that the team is a few games out of first place and running out of time? The
intensity of a rivalry with one of the East Coast powers?

   We knew we were giving her too much credit. The answer lay in some
personality defect that, one hopes, gene therapy can someday eliminate.

   The loudmouth severely tainted our night, but life goes on.

   My friend left town the next day wondering what happened to the genteel Angel
crowd of yore.

   Me, I've got another buddy visiting next week, specifically to see his
lifelong team, the Cincinnati Reds, play the Dodgers in an important series for
both teams.

   Oh boy. I can hardly wait.

   Dana Parsons' column appears Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. He can be
reached at (714) 966-7821 or at dana

   .parsons@latimes.com. An archive of his recent columns is at
www.latimes.com/parsons.

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2006


                              652 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            August 26, 2006 Saturday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: Bakken, Greatbatch still revved up on science;
Two med-tech legends talk about their invention - the pacemaker - as well as
diverse and ambitious projects they're pursuing in ``retirement.''

BYLINE: Janet Moore, Staff Writer

BODY:

   It's not every day that two legends in the medical technology field - Earl
Bakken and Wilson Greatbatch - sit down for a casual chat over coffee and
blueberry bread.

   The inventors of the pacemaker are longtime friends, and have spent their
"retirements" pursuing vast and ambitious projects ranging from alternative
medicine to alternative fuels.

   "We've known each other since time immemorial,'' laughed Greatbatch, 86, of
Buffalo, N.Y.

   "I remember meeting him in a little town east of Buffalo in 1958 - we had to
land in heavy snow drifts. I've never seen snow like that,'' said Bakken, a
native Minnesotan who probably has seen serious snow in his time.

   Bakken, 82, invented the first transistorized, wearable pacemaker in 1957 and
co-founded Fridley-based Medtronic Inc., now the world's largest medical
technology company.

   And Greatbatch invented the first implantable pacemaker with Dr. William
Chardack in 1961 - technology that was licensed to Medtronic. He went on to
invent the lithium-iodine battery that extended pacemaker life, and founded
Wilson Greatbatch Ltd., now known as Greatbatch Inc. He also worked with what is
now Boston Scientific Corp. to develop pacemakers using the battery he invented.

   The inventors appeared Thursday at the Bakken Museum in Minneapolis to launch
a yearlong series of programs and exhibits highlighting the electricity of the
heart. They also spoke to a group of youngsters at the museum, urging them to
take up science and engineering as careers. Earlier in the day, they attended
Medtronic's annual shareholder meeting.

   Their inventions probably have saved millions of lives, a fact that both men
modestly shrug off. "Almost every day someone will approach me and say a
pacemaker saved their life, or a loved one's,'' Bakken said. "It is very
gratifying.''

   Bakken is a walking tribute to the technology made by his own company: He has
a pacemaker, a diabetes insulin pump and two heart stents.

   Just as intriguing, both men have opted to apply their inherent sense of
curiosity to other areas of science and medicine. Bakken long has supported the
North Hawaii Community Hospital, a pioneering facility that focuses on holistic
health and alternative medicine, as well as other efforts supporting the health
and well-being of residents on the Big Island, where Bakken maintains a home.

   More recently, he has established the Earl and Doris Bakken Heart-Brain
Institute at the Cleveland Clinic, which will explore the connection between the
heart and the brain.

   Greatbatch - who holds 320 patents, adding two last year -spent the better
part of two decades trying to develop a gene therapy to cure AIDS. He also built
a solar-powered canoe and, in recent years, concentrated on developing
alternative fuels using materials such as soybeans and poplar trees. "I'd like
to put OPEC out of business,'' he declared.

   Both were bestowed with the Russ Prize for achievements in bioengineering by
the National Academy of Engineering in 2001, considered the "Nobel Prize" of the
profession. Over the years, the two have been passionate ambassadors for the
engineering profession, speaking to hundreds of youngsters about careers in
science and technology.

   "Earl and I are both former Sunday school teachers,'' Greatbatch said. "So it
comes naturally.''

   Greatbatch recommends that young people "go home and see what their mothers
do, and then see if they can make something their mother uses better. Then, if
their dads say an occasional swear word over something, fix that.''

   Both men urge those with ideas to write them down. Ever practical, Greatbatch
urges them to "write it down with two witnesses'' to prepare for a patent.
Bakken, on the other hand, says he keeps an astronaut's pen by his bedside to
write down ideas, presumably while lying down, that he encounters while in a
slumber.

   "When I go to bed, my brain is still going," he said. "It's just one thing
after another.''

   Janet Moore - 612-673-7752

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2006


                              653 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                             August 25, 2006 Friday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Teen puts fear aside and takes down man who molested her;
Girl's confrontation of top scientist leads to his sexual abuse conviction

BYLINE: PETER H. YONG, Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES - The girl set the showdown with the man for the oak-shaded lawn
in front of the South Pasadena public library, a lovely spot for an ugly
encounter.

   She was a high school student with a painful secret that surfaced on her
wrists, scarred where she had cut herself.

   He was William French Anderson, world-renowned scientist, the father of gene
therapy and a martial-arts expert with law-enforcement connections from the FBI
to the chief of his hometown police department in San Marino. But he couldn't
handle the girl.

   Using an expletive, she told him: " ... you're like, whining!"

   He said he was sorry, again and again. "I will love you forever," he told
her.

   He was 67; she was 17.

   "I just did it - just something inside me was something just evil," he said.

   "Why did you molest me?" she demanded.

   He said he didn't know.

   The girl challenged him. "Are you guilty enough to turn yourself in, huh?"

   No. That would damage "all the people who ironically look up to me as a model
of the right way to live, people in Oklahoma (his native state)," he said.

   These words, captured by a police wire the girl wore during that 2004
encounter, were part of the evidence that helped convict Anderson on child
molestation charges in July.

   `Do it for someone else'

   In her first media interview, the girl described how, after years of denial,
she got herself to take on - and eventually take down - one of the biggest stars
in medicine.

   "I realized he could repeat what he did to me. He could do it to somebody
else," the girl, now a college student, told a reporter last week in the office
of her attorney, Mary Fulginiti.

   She spoke on condition of anonymity.

   She said she told herself, "If you can't find the strength to do it for
yourself, then do it for someone else."

   Anderson is in custody and could not be interviewed for this story. His
attorney, Barry Tarlow, said he would comply with the judge's order not to speak
to the media about the case.

   During his trial, Anderson testified that he might have emotionally abused
the girl by pushing her too hard to do well in school and sports, but he said
the sexual abuse claims were a lie. He had cared deeply about her, he said.

   His defense lawyers argued that the girl's mother, Anderson's employee,
wanted to usurp the scientist's position as chief of a gene therapy lab at the
University of Southern California.

   Guilty of four counts

   Anderson testified that his statements at the library were not sincere, that
he was telling the girl what she wanted to hear so he could get away. Afterward,
French and his wife, Kathryn, signed a joint letter to the San Marino
department, whose chief had sent his two children to the Anderson home for
karate lessons.

   The 3 1/2 -page, single-spaced letter speculated that the girl might be
preparing to extort them: "If she has also descended into street drug use, then
she may need money. ... How do we protect ourselves from an extortion attempt?
What should we do?"

   Four weeks later, Anderson was arrested and released on bail.. On July 19, a
Los Angeles Superior Court jury found him guilty of four counts of continuous
sex abuse and lewd acts toward a child younger than 14.

   He is undergoing psychological tests in prison in preparation for his Nov. 17
sentencing. Kathryn Anderson no longer lives in the house she had shared with
her husband of 45 years. It was sold in May.

   Anderson faces up to 22 years in prison, perhaps a life sentence.

   The girl says his abuse could pain her forever. But it has also strengthened
her sense of purpose.Other victims should know, she says, "you do not have to be
a victim forever."

GRAPHIC: Mug: William French Anderson is a world-renowned scientist and the
father of gene therapy. He faces up to 22 years in prison for sex abuse.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2006


                              654 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             August 20, 2006 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; Metro Desk; Part A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2275 words

HEADLINE: THE STATE;
Victim's Resolve Brings Down a Star of Science

BYLINE: Peter Y. Hong, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   The girl set the showdown for the oak-shaded lawn in front of the South
Pasadena public library, a lovely spot for an ugly encounter.

   She was a high school student with a painful secret that surfaced on her
wrists, scarred where she had cut herself.

   He was William French Anderson, world-renowned scientist, the father of gene
therapy and a martial arts expert with law enforcement connections from the FBI
to the chief of his hometown police department in San Marino.

   But he couldn't handle the girl.

   "God damn it, you're like whining!" she barked.

   He said he was sorry, again and again. "I will love you forever," he told
her. He was 67; she was 17.

   "I just did it -- just something inside me was something just evil," he said.

   "Why did you molest me?" she demanded. He said he didn't know.

   The girl challenged him. "Are you guilty enough to turn yourself in, huh?"

   No. That would damage, he said, "all the people who ironically look up to me
as a model of the right way to live, people in Oklahoma [his native state]."

   These words, captured by a police wire the girl wore during that 2004
encounter, were part of the evidence that helped convict Anderson on child
molestation charges in July.

   In her first media interview, the girl described how, after years of denial,
she got herself to take on -- and eventually take down -- one of the biggest
stars in medicine.

   "I realized he could repeat what he did to me. He could do it to somebody
else," the girl, now a college student, told a reporter last week in the office
of her lawyer, Mary Fulginiti. She spoke on condition of anonymity.

   She said she told herself, "If you can't find the strength to do it for
yourself, then do it for someone else."

   Anderson is in custody and could not be interviewed for this story. His
lawyer, Barry Tarlow, said he would comply with the judge's order not to speak
to the media about the case.

   During his trial, Anderson testified that he might have emotionally abused
the girl by pushing her too hard to do well in school and sports, but he said
the sexual abuse claims were a vicious lie. He had cared deeply about her, he
said. Defense lawyers argued that the girl's mother, Anderson's employee, wanted
to usurp the scientist's position as chief of a gene therapy lab at USC.

   *

   Anderson had a difficult childhood, which in some ways paralleled that of the
girl.

   Born in Tulsa, Okla., to an engineer father and journalist mother, Anderson
was an unpopular stutterer a year younger and inches shorter than his
classmates, according to a 2003 biography by Bob Burke and Barry Epperson titled
"W. French Anderson: Father of Gene Therapy."

   As he recalled in the book, he obnoxiously pointed out his superior
intelligence.

   A few elders, including his grade school principal and the head of a summer
boy's camp, helped him improve his speech and social skills. By high school, he
was a top middle-distance runner and a star in debate and drama as well as
academics.

   He was admitted to Harvard, where he flourished. Only a pulled hamstring kept
him from the 1960 Olympic trials as a runner, his biography states.
Academically, he did well enough to win a university scholarship for graduate
study at Cambridge, where he met Kathryn Dorothy Duncan, a British
undergraduate, in an anatomy class. They married on her graduation day and moved
on to Harvard for medical school.

   Photographs from the period show a strikingly attractive young couple. Kathy
looked like Grace Kelly playing a doctor; her charm offset French's lingering
traces of awkwardness.

   His wife called him "socially underdeveloped," according to his biography.
When they entertained at their home, "French played in the pool with the
children while the adults chatted," the book noted.

   The Andersons told biographers they decided within a few years of their
marriage to devote their lives to medicine instead of having children. Kathy
became a pediatric surgeon, while Anderson, in 1965, joined the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.

   Genetic engineering was in its infancy, and the thought of using it to cure
human diseases was seen more as science fiction than as science by many.

   Anderson nevertheless worked feverishly on first establishing its
credibility, then making genetic therapy a reality. Each half day, he charted
how he spent his time and gave himself a score: two points for research, one
point for speeches and journal reading, zero points for administration or
non-science.

   In the late 1980s, Anderson and his collaborators performed an experimental
implant of a harmless bacterial gene into a human. In their 1995 book "Altered
Fates: Gene Therapy and the Retooling of Human Life," journalists Jeff Lyon and
Peter Gorner compared that scientific achievement with jet airplanes breaking
the sound barrier.

   In September 1990, Anderson and two colleagues implanted a healthy gene to
correct 4-year-old Ashanti DeSilva's defective immune system. Lyon and Gorner
called the procedure "arguably the most audacious medical experiment in history,
the first U.S. government-sponsored attempt to reprogram the genetic code of a
living human being."

   Whether the operation or later medical treatment saved DeSilva's life is now
in dispute. The media then, however, hailed Anderson as the man who bested
nature, the closest thing to playing God.

   Critics, however, said he took too much credit for achievements in which
other scientists shared.

   In 1992, Anderson announced that he was leaving the NIH, his scientific home
for 27 years. He was moving to Los Angeles, he said, for his wife.

   Passed over for the chairmanship of the surgery department of the Children's
National Medical Center in Washington, D.C., she accepted the surgery chair at
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. She later settled a sex-discrimination lawsuit
against her former employer.

   Anderson founded the Gene Therapy Laboratories at USC. A year later, he hired
a cardiologist from China who, according to Anderson's biography, "was awed by
French's humility and his mission." She was the girl's mother.

   "She told me he was a prominent person, a great person," the girl recalled in
the interview. "My mom told me to be really polite to him."

   But gene therapy failed to meet the heightened expectations that followed
Anderson's early success, and his lab at USC had lost most of its funding by
2003 and was set to close, even before he was accused of any crimes.

   Since his early days at NIH, Anderson's chief diversion from intense lab work
was an equally intense interest in taekwondo and other martial arts. He became a
black belt and served as the U.S. taekwondo team's physician. News photographs
showed him breaking boards with his fists. He later taught martial arts to
children.

   Without children of their own, the Andersons had long taken on what they
called "surrogate children," guiding nine through college and in some cases
medical school.

   In Los Angeles, the girl became Anderson's next protege. Like him, she had
early speech problems, talking only to her more outgoing twin sister in their
own language.

   The girl learned English in school but continued to let her twin speak for
her. She had few friends and had been acting up at school.

   Her mother believed that she would blossom under Anderson's guidance, and he
agreed.

   He began teaching her karate when she was 9 and later drove her to soccer and
softball practice. He also arranged speech therapy for her and told her mother
he would prepare her to possibly attend Harvard.

   By all outward appearances, the girl was thriving in elementary and middle
school. Asked in one school assignment to name five things that made her
special, she said, "I know French Anderson personally."

   Beneath the surface, however, Anderson was more of a buddy than mentor, the
girl said during the interview. "He told me I could slack off in middle school
because nobody would look at those grades [for college admission]," she said.

   Anderson, who portrayed himself as never smoking or drinking, offered her
alcohol and let her drive his car without a license, she testified during the
molestation trial.

   Anderson at trial said it never happened.

   The girl was swinging playfully on a large hanging punching bag when he first
touched her crotch, she testified.

   Later, he would ask her to undress for "medical exams," weighing her and
touching her private parts, she said from the witness stand.

   The worst abuse happened in the summers, when Anderson would disrobe, have
her undress to her underwear and lie on a towel on the bed, she testified. She
told jurors she would read Garfield comics while he thrust against her until he
ejaculated.

   The abuse stopped in ninth grade, after she began resisting more strongly,
she testified. But their close relationship continued.

   The girl lived with her family in a simple hillside house in South Pasadena,
a short drive from Anderson's much grander residence, a spacious Cape Cod on a
row of mansions across from the Huntington library and gardens. The twins built
a treehouse in Anderson's backyard and had their friends over for get-togethers.
Anderson bought the girl her prom dress.

   During her sophomore year in high school, after the abuse had stopped,
according to a police report, the girl took a friend to her basement and showed
her a three-page letter describing the abuse. After the friend read it, the girl
tore it up, the report said.

   She swore the friend to secrecy and said she would "lie through her teeth" if
police found out, the report added.

   The girl later testified that she cared for Anderson and felt "he didn't
understand the extent that he had hurt me. And, I mean, he was this
well-respected man that so many people look up to."

   Teammates and coaches, however, witnessed her angry outbreaks during
practices. A teacher noticed her distress and sent the girl to the school
counselor, according to court documents.

   At first, she refused to detail her problem. Then she said a friend of hers
had been molested. Finally, after several meetings, she told the counselor that
she had been molested by her mother's boss but didn't want it reported, she
testified.

   The counselor, as required by state law, told police anyway.

   When the mother arrived home to find her daughter speaking to police, she
telephoned the family's most-trusted advisor: French Anderson.

   At first, the girl told officers there was no molestation. The counselor was
wrong. Eventually, she confided the abuse.

   By this time, the girl had cut off personal contact with Anderson. He sent
her e-mails begging to see her. She didn't have to talk to him or even
acknowledge him, he wrote, he could just watch her at a soccer game.

   "I would park in the back on Meridian, arrive just at the start, go up into
the stands on the far right and sit by myself, never approach the field or make
any contact, and leave right away at the end without talking to anybody," he
pleaded in e-mails presented during the trial.

   She testified that she sent him e-mails asking him why he had abused her and
insisting that he admit what he had done.

   Anderson, also testifying in court, said his e-mail replies addressed
emotional, not sexual, abuse. In one e-mail, he wrote he was considering
suicide:

   "If I saw you and your whole family destroyed, and my whole career down the
tubes, and all the thousands of people abandoned who would have been helped by
cures your mother and I are developing, then I can understand what would drive a
person to suicide.... For me, a powerful 9-millimeter bullet through the side of
the head would be the way to go."

   Directed by Los Angeles County sheriff's deputies, who were given the case
because of Anderson's connections to the San Marino police force, the girl
demanded the library meeting the Thursday before the Fourth of July weekend in
2004.

   Anderson testified in his trial that his statements at the library were not
sincere, that he was trying to tell the girl what she wanted to hear so he could
get away. Afterward, French and Kathryn Anderson signed a joint letter to the
San Marino department, whose chief had sent his two young children to the
Anderson home for karate lessons.

   The 3 1/2 -page, single-spaced letter speculated that the girl might be
preparing to extort them: "If she has also descended into street drug use, then
she may need money.... How do we protect ourselves from an extortion attempt?
What should we do?"

   Four weeks later, Anderson was arrested and released on bail, then arrested
six months later, when a Maryland man claimed that Anderson had molested him 20
years earlier. Anderson was charged then with abusing the boy, but Maryland
prosecutors eventually dropped the case.

   A Los Angeles Superior Court jury on July 19 found Anderson guilty of four
counts of continuous sex abuse and lewd acts toward a child under 14.

   Anderson is undergoing psychological tests in prison in preparation for his
Nov. 17 sentencing. Kathryn Anderson no longer lives in the house she had shared
with her husband of 45 years. It was sold in May.

   Anderson faces up to 22 years in prison, perhaps a life sentence for a man
now 69 years old.

   The girl says that her abuse could pain her forever. But the injury has also
strengthened her sense of purpose. Powerfully built, she tells her story
confidently. She is a soccer star at a prestigious college.

   She says she wants to tell other victims to fight back, even against powerful
people whom they may have cared for. "A lot of things were shattered," she said
in her interview. She had to accept that "a person I had trusted my whole life
was not a good person."

   But she also found "so many people came to my side; they helped me realize
the world's a good place."

   Others should know, she says, "you do not have to be a victim forever."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: 'AUDACIOUS': Patient Ashanti DeSilva and Anderson are pictured
on the cover of a book about the doctor's work.  PHOTO: 'MY WHOLE CAREER DOWN
THE TUBES': Anderson appears at a hearing 17 months before his conviction on
four counts of continuous sex abuse and lewd acts toward a child under 14. He is
undergoing psychological tests and is to be sentenced Nov. 17.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Walt Mancini Associated Press PHOTO: ABUSER: "I just did it -- just something
inside me was something just evil," said William French Anderson in a recorded
encounter with the girl he molested.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Annie Wells Los Angeles
Times

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2006


                              655 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                           August 16, 2006 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1456 words

HEADLINE: Research role expands at community hospitals;
Shift brings prestige, profits, but also fears over conflicts of interest

BYLINE: JONATHAN D. ROCKOFF, SUN REPORTER

BODY:

   At Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore, the medical director has pored over
patient records to determine which antibiotics are to blame for a potentially
fatal infection. In Ohio, physicians at Akron General Medical Center are
experimenting with rats to determine whether a popular painkiller also slows the
spread of cancerous cells. And in Los Angeles, doctors at Cedars Sinai Medical
Center are teaching computers to interpret heart scans.

   Across the country, tighter finances and tougher competition are prompting
many community hospitals to move beyond their core business of administering
tests and performing surgery. Increasingly, they are doing cutting-edge research
that had been left to universities, drug companies and government laboratories.

   "The classic paradigm of research is expanding," said Barbara V. Howard,
president of the research arm of MedStar Health, a network of seven area
hospitals that includes Union Memorial. "Hospitals like ours are taking an
increasing role."

   In addition to treating patients, community hospitals are studying
experimental drugs, developing medical devices and investigating serious
diseases.

   They are also recruiting scientists, building laboratories and competing for
prestigious research grants. Some are publishing papers in peer-reviewed
journals and obtaining patents.

   "It just enriches your ability to do high-quality medical care," said Margot
LaPointe, medical director of research at Henry Ford Health System in Detroit,
which has 71 scientists and a $56 million research budget for studying the
treatment of prostate cancer with gene therapy, among other projects.

   The work can also bolster a hospital's profits. At a time of heightened
competition from other medical centers, research breakthroughs burnish a
hospital's reputation, helping it attract physicians and patients. It also
provides new sources of income to offset rising labor costs and lower Medicare
payments.

   Companies pay

   Community medical centers are conducting some of the research on behalf of
pharmaceutical companies, which pay for patients to participate in clinical
trials testing new drugs and medical devices. As that work increases, ethicists
and watchdogs worry about the possibility of conflicts of interest.

   "If you think of it as philanthropy, it is not," said Frank Sloan, a
professor of health economics at Duke University. "Some of it is public
relations, and there's some money."

   Community hospitals are distinct from those that are part of medical schools,
such as Johns Hopkins Hospital and the University of Maryland Medical Center in
Baltimore. The medical centers and regional networks aren't owned by any
university, though they might employ residents from medical schools.

   Nationwide, 120 health care systems conducting research independently. Most
have done so for years as a condition of employing medical school residents, but
administrators say that until recently, the work was nothing like the
high-powered scientific work being done in academia, industry and government.

   Typical is Baylor Health Care System in Houston. It established a research
institute in 1984 but didn't begin seriously pursuing grants and projects until
2000, said Dr. Michael Ramsey, the institute's president.

   Budget quintuples

   Since then, the institute's budget has quintupled, to $50 million. It has 175
staff members, including an investigator hired from Stanford University to
develop a lymphoma vaccine. Baylor also established a biotechnology company to
develop cancer vaccines.

   "Once the train gets rolling, you have to follow it," Ramsey said.

   The research has helped Baylor attract top clinicians and has made the system
more of a draw for patients, he said.

   The Alliance of Independent Academic Medical Centers, a trade association of
52 hospitals that are not part of medical schools, does not keep statistics on
the amount of research its members conduct.

   Kimberly Pierce-Boggs, the group's executive director, said cutbacks in
federal reimbursement and the pressures of managed care have forced independent
hospitals to hone their research in ways that attract patients and to improve
medical care and cut costs.

   Dr. Robert P. Ferguson, medical director at Union Memorial, began analyzing
patient records three years ago to find out whether certain antibiotics
contributed to a colon infection that had proved fatal in several patients.

   He recently directed physicians to use what he found to be the most effective
drug, which he estimates could save the hospital $400,000 a year in costs for
medical care that insurance companies won't cover.

   "If we can come up with a solution to which antibiotic to prescribe over
another, we would presumably save a lot of anguish for the patients and a lot of
cost to the hospital," said Ferguson, who plans to present his findings at a
conference in October.

   Research programs draw funding from several sources, administrators say. The
hospitals contribute millions of dollars, as do foundations connected to health
care systems. Researchers compete for grants from the National Institutes of
Health, whose list of top recipients includes several independent academic
medical centers.

   Cedars Sinai earns $15 million a year in royalties and licensing fees from
its heart-imaging software, said David Meyer, the hospital's vice president for
research.

   In addition, the hospitals are paid by drug and medical device companies for
enrolling patients in clinical trials of products under development.

   "If you're lucky, you might break even," said Dr. James M. Dougherty,
chairman of medical education and research at Akron General Medical Center,
which has 94 home-grown science projects, is involved in 67 cancer projects
sponsored by nonprofit foundations and is participating in 54 trials paid for by
companies.

   Ethicists and watchdogs worry that the best interests of patients will suffer
as the research - especially the clinical trials of new drugs and devices
subsidized by companies - becomes a more important source of hospital revenue.

   Then, they say, independent medical centers might face the same accusations
that some teaching hospitals are battling: that good business, rather than best
medical practice, is influencing doctors' decisions to enroll patients in
clinical studies or steer them to a certain company's products.

   Clinic criticized

   Cleveland Clinic, a former independent medical center that now runs a medical
school with Case Western Reserve University, was heavily criticized recently
after published reports disclosed that it and some of its doctors had financial
ties to companies that made medical devices being used in patients.

   After one patient died, the clinic stopped using a heart-lung machine. It
also adopted new conflict-of-interest safeguards and rewrote its consent forms
to better inform patients of company connections.

   "This is research; it's not patient care," said David J. Rothman, director of
the Center for the Study of Society and Medicine at Columbia University, who
studies conflicts between companies and doctors at university hospitals.

   "Are subjects being told everything they should be told? Are drug companies
behaving like they should?"

   Last year, a MedStar patient suffered a fatal complication while
participating in a company-sponsored study of an anti-cancer drug, said Dr.
William P. McGuire III, who enrolled the terminally ill woman in the trial.
After the woman and several others died, the study stopped accepting new
subjects.

   Nevertheless, McGuire, a former researcher at the National Cancer Institute
and several universities, enthusiastically supports the trials.

   Patients who participate in studies of new products get access to
cutting-edge therapies, backed by extra care and monitoring that insurers
wouldn't subsidize, but the drug companies pay for it as part of the testing,
McGuire said.

   Ensuring safety

   A hospital committee ensures that a trial is conducted safely and that
patients are properly informed of the risks involved.

   McGuire enrolls as many as 100 patients a year in the 80 studies he
participates in. Typically, the drug companies pay the hospital $4,000 to $8,000
per patient for the trials, generating a small profit, he said.

   But McGuire said his purpose is helping patients and furthering
understanding, not producing profits for the hospital.

   The studies yield so little income, he said, that he sometimes encounters
resistance from hospital administrators - "the bean counters across the street,"
he calls them - who would prefer that he focus on seeing more patients and
billing for more procedures.

   "I'm not in it to make money," he said. "Lots of patients are looking for new
hope - new drugs, new approaches."

   jonathan.rockoff@baltsun.com

   Sun researcher Paul McCardell contributed to this article.

CORRECTION:

   A Page 1A article yesterday about the expansion of research at community
hospitals incorrectly reported the location of the Baylor Health Care System. It
is in Dallas, Texas.

   The Sun regrets the errors.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2006


                              656 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                             August 14, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1318 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH TO UNLEASH GENE THERAPY ON ARTHRITIS

BYLINE:  BY ALICE DEMBNER, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Within months, scientists will begin testing the first gene therapies for
osteoarthritis, in search of a more effective treatment and perhaps a cure for
the joint disease that afflicts more than 21 million Americans.

   One effort, led by a Harvard Medical School researcher, is focusing on a
simple idea: Inject into the diseased joint a gene that will continuously pump
medicine right where it is needed. Another project, led by a Maryland company,
will instead use genetically modified cells to prompt growth of damaged
cartilage.

   Some of the work will piggyback on gene therapy experiments in rheumatoid
arthritis that are showing hints of effectiveness.

   The arthritis studies are part of an expansion of gene therapy research to
diseases that are neither purely genetic nor necessarily lethal. Seven years
after the death of a healthy teenager in a flawed experiment stalled most gene
therapy studies, research is booming in diseases ranging from Alzheimer's and
angina to cancer and multiple sclerosis.

   In osteoarthritis, one "goal is to convert the joint into a factory that
makes its own medicine," said Christopher Evans, a Harvard professor of
orthopedic surgery who is leading some of the new research.

   The National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
recently awarded Evans a $1.6 million grant for the initial tests of his
treatment in people with moderately advanced arthritis. Gayle Lester, who
oversees clinical research in osteoarthritis for the institute, calls the work
"a very strong and a very rational approach to the disease."

   New treatments for osteoarthritis are desperately needed, especially since
the popular Cox-2 painkillers Vioxx and Bextra were pulled from the market
nearly two years ago. None of the current options steroids, lubricants, pain
pills, or dietary supplements alter the course of the disease, and some do
little to ease the pain and disability. As cartilage in their joints erodes from
injury and other unknown causes, nearly 500,000 Americans every year face joint
replacement surgery, the Arthritis Foundation said.

   "Gene therapy is one of the more promising areas for future therapies for
arthritis," said Dr. John Klippel, president of the foundation.

   Evans plans to inject into the knee joint a virus whose genes have been
replaced by a human gene. The virus, which commonly infects humans but causes no
disease, will carry the gene inside the cells that line the joint. There, the
gene is expected to produce a steady stream of a protein called
interleukin-1-receptor antagonist to block the inflammation and destruction of
cartilage caused by another protein, interleukin-1.

   The therapy will be tried initially in nine volunteers who have
osteoarthritis that is bad enough to hamper their quality of life but not to
require joint replacement. Evans hopes to begin the testing within a year.

   In dogs and rabbits, the technique preserved cartilage, and in horses, it
reduced lameness, said Evans, who has patents on the technology. The animals
showed no harmful side effects.

   "The animal data are fairly convincing in stopping the progression of
disease," Lester said. And in Germany, tests of a drug made of the same protein
used in Evans's gene therapy have reduced arthritis symptoms. However, the
effects of the drug, Orthokine, now available in Europe, wear off after a few
months, he said. Evans hopes the gene therapy will provide more sustained
relief.

   At least three other groups of researchers worldwide are working on gene
therapy treatments for osteoarthritis, including teams in Japan, Montreal, and
at a Maryland biotechnology company, TissueGene, that has licensed Evans's
patents and hired him as a paid consultant.

   TissueGene is preparing to test a different technique, perhaps as soon as
this fall, in patients scheduled for total knee replacements in Baltimore,
according to J. Kelly Ganjei, vice president of business development. Instead of
injecting genes into the joint, researchers plan to inject cells that have been
genetically modified to pump proteins that stimulate cartilage growth. After
four weeks, the patients will undergo knee replacement surgery, and the company
will collect the old joints for study.

   Even if the first tests show the treatment is safe and offer some hints of
effectiveness, it could be a decade before any gene therapy treatment for
osteoarthritis is widely available.

   All gene therapy research is proceeding cautiously because of continuing
public concerns about safety.

   The death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 was followed three years
later by evidence that the first major gene therapy success treatment for a rare
immune disorder known as "bubble boy syndrome" caused cancer. Since then, there
has been steady progress toward new treatments for immune disorders, cancers,
and blindness, although there is still no gene therapy product on the market in
the United States.

   "We're more sober and more careful," said Dr. Theodore Friedmann, president
of the American Society of Gene Therapy. "The field has become a bit more
realistic about timeliness and about not promising more than we can deliver."

   Lester said Evans is working with materials that have a long history of safe
use and that a safety panel will monitor all aspects of the experiment. But
Evans acknowledged that one serious side effect could derail the effort.

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, warns potential volunteers to get involved in
gene therapy studies only after asking lots of questions about safety. "If it's
not life-threatening, I would go for much more conventional treatment," he said.

   Carlene Lauffer, however, said she would volunteer in a minute, although her
arthritis is too advanced to qualify for Evans's research. Lauffer, 78, suffers
from osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis and has had finger joint
replacements and a hip replacement. She takes medicine for rheumatoid arthritis,
an auto-immune disorder in which the joint lining swells and produces a
substance that destroys the joint's surface. She also takes pain pills for her
osteoarthritis.

   "I think there's a need for gene therapy" for arthritis, said Lauffer, of
Weirton, W.Va. "We can maybe lick this."

   In 1996, Lauffer was the first patient to undergo gene therapy for rheumatoid
arthritis in an experiment run by Evans and colleagues, then at the University
of Pittsburgh, that was designed to test only the principle and safety. The
researchers injected her knuckles with the gene therapy or a placebo, monitored
it for a week, and then removed and replaced the diseased joints. In Lauffer and
eight other volunteers, they found that the gene entered cells in the joint and
pumped the same medicinal protein now being used in the osteoarthritis research.
Five years later, none of the volunteers had any ill effects.

   For rheumatoid arthritis, which affects more than 2 million Americans, Evans
and at least four other groups of scientists are pursuing clinical trials in
gene therapy. Targeted Genetics, a Seattle company, is furthest along, with
preliminary results that show a 20 to 30 percent reduction in swelling and
tenderness in some patients, said Pervin Anklesaria, vice president of
therapeutic development. The results have not yet been published.

   Work on gene therapy for arthritis began with rheumatoid arthritis, because
scientists understand more about the underlying causes and mechanisms, making
targets for gene therapy more obvious. In addition, the advance of the disease
is fairly predictable, making it easier to determine if new treatments are
working.

   Both the causes and biology of osteoarthritis remain mostly a mystery, Evans
said, and the symptoms wax and wane, making testing of treatments more
difficult.

   "Having a treatment that could be administered in the joint and stop the
progression or reverse the disease process would be very attractive," said
Lester. "That's what I find appealing about gene therapy."

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2006


                              657 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                            August 12, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: METRO; HIGHER EDUCATION NOTES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: LSU lauds 48 students in health school;
They resumed work shortly after storm

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   To honor 48 students' work after Hurricane Katrina slammed New Orleans and
floodwaters drowned its campus, Louisiana State University's School of Allied
Health Professions is holding an honors ceremony today at 10 a.m. in the New
Orleans Hilton's Jefferson Ballroom.

   In previous years, this would have been a commencement because students in
this division of the Health Sciences Center generally graduated in August,
shortly after completing their degree requirements. But in a revision of the LSU
calendar, there will be only one commencement, in May, spokeswoman Leslie Capo
said, and students who finished their course work this summer are invited to
participate in next year's ceremony.

   But, she said, school leaders wanted to give recognition to the students who,
less than a month after the storm hit, resumed classes in Baton Rouge. The
school returned to New Orleans in late May.

   "This is the first year that there won't be an August commencement, and this
is a chance to celebrate their accomplishments," Capo said.

   Thirty-four students have finished the master of physical therapy program,
and 11 have completed requirements for the bachelor of science degree in
rehabilitation services. The remaining three have earned master of occupational
therapy degrees.

   Ben F. Massey Jr., immediate past president of the American Physical Therapy
Association, will speak.

   . . . . . . .

   RESEARCH INTERNS REPORT FINDINGS: Twelve students from high schools,
universities and medical schools who had had summer internships in local
laboratories presented their findings Monday at LSU Health Sciences Center.

   Although the program's leader, Paula Gregory, is an LSU geneticist, students
were paired, based on their interests, with researchers at Tulane University
Health Sciences Center and the Ochsner Health System, too, LSU spokeswoman
Leslie Capo said.

   Their projects included studying alcohol's influence on the immune system in
the development of pneumonia, analyzing the ability of certain mechanisms to
target tumor cells as a way of delivering gene therapy, and studying
characteristics of certain types of prostate-cancer cells.

   Through this eight-week program, Gregory said, "we hope we are cultivating
and nurturing the interests of some of Louisiana's best scientists to stay here
and continue their careers in their home state."

   The initiative, which is in its fourth year, is sponsored by the Louisiana
Cancer Research Consortium and underwritten by the National Cancer Institute, an
arm of the National Institutes of Health, and the Louisiana Gene Therapy
Research Consortium.

   . . . . . . .

   LOCAL SCHOOLS TO OFFER ENDOWED POSITIONS: Institutions of higher learning
across Louisiana, including eight in the New Orleans area, are to receive nearly
$14 million in state money that, when matched with private donations, will
create 11 endowed chairs for eminent scholars and 200 endowed professorships.

   Local schools, and the positions they will set up, are:

   -- Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center  --  two chairs, seven
professorships.

   -- Loyola University  --  seven professorships.

   -- Our Lady of Holy Cross College  --  one professorship.

   -- St. Joseph Seminary  --  five professorships.

   -- Tulane University  --  three chairs, 14 professorships.

   -- Tulane University Health Sciences Center  --  16 professorships.

   -- University of New Orleans  --  three professorships.

   -- Xavier University  --  three professorships.

   These endowed positions, which provide money for travel and research, let
colleges attract and retain outstanding teachers and researchers, state
Commissioner of Higher Education Joseph Savoie said.

   . . . . . . .

   RICKS ELECTED TO POST: Joe Ricks, an assistant professor of business
administration at Xavier University, has been elected vice president of the
Louisiana Quality Foundation.

   The nonprofit group is made up of volunteers from business, government,
education, manufacturing and service sectors that work to help organizations
work better so they can gain a competitive advantage. It administers the
Louisiana Performance Excellence Award.

   . . . . . . .

   John Pope can be reached at jpope@timespicayune.com or (504) 826-3317.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2006


                              658 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             August 8, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TODAY/HEALTH TODAY; Pg. 61

LENGTH: 834 words

HEADLINE: Identifying early warnings for Alzheimer's

BYLINE: JIM WARREN, McCLATCHY-TRIBUNE NEWS

BODY:

   Immunizing youngsters against measles, mumps, polio and other childhood
diseases is one of the cornerstones of modern public health.

    But the University of Kentucky's William Markesbery thinks a day is coming
when we might be able to protect children from the illnesses of old age -
including Alzheimer's disease.

    Emerging evidence suggests that in a few decades it could be possible to
identify young people at risk of Alzheimer's and start treating them with
protective drugs, lifestyle changes or other approaches decades before symptoms
of the disease appear, Markesbery says.

    "It's speculative, but that might be where we are headed," said Markesbery,
director of UK's Sanders-Brown Center on Aging in Lexington.

    Sanders-Brown - now expecting approval for another five years as a federally
designated Alzheimer's research center - plans to be in the middle of the chase.

    Center officials are expecting a new five-year, $6.5 million grant from the
National Institute on Aging, which would extend Sanders-Brown's funding through
2011 and, in effect, make it a federally designated Alzheimer's research center
for 25 years.

    Sanders-Brown was one of the first 10 Alzheimer's centers named by the
federal government in 1985.

    University of Kentucky officials said the new grant should enable the school
to attract up to $11 million from other sources to back research into
Alzheimer's and other problems of aging.

    Some examples of Sanders-Brown research now gearing up:

     Molecular biologist Steve Estus is studying chemical receptors in the brain
that could help explain how a particular genetic variation increases risk for
Alzheimer's. That might help identify people who are at risk.

     Researcher Jeff Keller is chasing an enzyme that removes damaged protein
from brain cells. He hopes to learn why the enzyme sometimes goes wrong, how
that affects cells and how it might figure into Alzheimer's.

     Neuroscientist Chris Norris is studying cells that normally seem to protect
neurons but can be harmful when brain inflammation occurs. Inflammation is
associated with Alzheimer's.

    "We've come a long way," Markesbery said. "Back when we started, we knew
hardly anything about this disease."

    In many ways, Alzheimer's remains a mystery. Doctors don't know what causes
it, or how to stop it. Evidence suggests, however, that the slow-moving disease
process begins many years before symptoms appear, which might offer the best
avenue for combating it.

    "If you could pick up the disease five years before it shows any symptoms,
you would have five years to do some kind of intervention," Markesbery said.
"Right now, we still have no single diagnostic test that can reliably say, `You
have Alzheimer's.' Looking for that test is one of the hottest areas in research
right now."

    One reason for that is work at Kentucky, in which Sanders-Brown researchers
did autopsy tests on the brains of elderly patients. Surprisingly, they found
that many of the brains showed some of the classic signs of Alzheimer's - even
though the patients had exhibited no memory loss or other symptoms.

    These results, plus work at Washington University in St. Louis, suggest that
it might be possible to detect Alzheimer's before patients exhibit any symptoms,
Markesbery said.

    "In the next five years of our grant, we're going to be looking at
pre-symptomatic detection here in Lexington," he said. "There are very few
places that are doing that."

    So far, no one knows how to devise a test that can detect the beginnings of
Alzheimer's when there are no symptoms. But Markesbery thinks it's coming, and
it probably will involve looking for abnormalities in the cerebrospinal fluid,
the serum-like fluid that circulates through the brain and spinal cord.

    "If pre-symptomatic people had abnormal spinal fluid, theoretically you
could start treating them five years, eight years before they have symptoms," he
said.

    Another key, he says, is the developing understanding of how genes affect
Alzheimer's. It's now known that at least three genetic mutations increase risk
for the disease, and more are likely to turn up, researchers say.

    "Ten years, 15 years from now, we're probably going to know all the genes
that are important in Alzheimer's," Markesbery said. "So, at birth or in the
first year of life, we could see whether a child has mutations in these genes
and whether that child is at risk of getting the disease."

    Doctors could then potentially intervene though drug treatments or genetic
therapy - assuming they are perfected by then - or through simpler means, such
as encouraging patients to follow a low-calorie diet, stay intellectually active
and avoid sedentary living. All these steps now are thought to help protect
against Alzheimer's.

    "I'm beginning to believe that intellectual activity and physical activity
are some of the best nerve protectors we have available to us," Markesbery said.
"It may be that the joggers who are out hitting the pavement every day may be
repairing any changes in their brains that occur."

GRAPHIC: William Markesbery, above, the physician who heads the University of
Kentucky's Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, believes research some day will help
protect children from the illnesses of old age. Below, Chris Norris works on
cell studies in his lab at the Sanders-Brown center.

 LIST: Facts about Alzheimer's

 Here are some basic facts about Alzheimer's disease, a brain disorder that
gradually destroys its victims' ability to reason, remember, speak or perform
the simplest daily activities.

  The best estimate is that 4.5 million Americans suffer from Alzheimer's,
although the number probably will rise as the population ages.

 Scientists don't know exactly what causes Alzheimer's, but they think many
factors can affect each person differently.

 Though Alzheimer's is not a normal part of aging, age is a primary risk factor.
Alzheimer's usually doesn't appear until after age 60. About 5 percent of people
ages 65 to 74 have the disease, but the percentage jumps to nearly half after
age 85.

 Generally, if members of your family have had Alzheimer's, you are more likely
to be at risk. For example, researchers know that early-onset Alzheimer's, a
rare form that strikes between ages 30 and 60, is inherited. Doctors think a
number of genetic mutations and variations can increase risk, but they haven't
been identified yet.

 Alzheimer's develops slowly and can begin to appear as forgetfulness, but most
people with mild forgetfulness don't have Alzheimer's.

 For now, the only way to definitely diagnose Alzheimer's is to examine brain
tissue after a person dies. At specialized centers, however, experts can use
specialized cognitive testing to accurately diagnose Alzheimer's in about 90
percent of cases.

 Drugs sometimes can slow symptoms in the early and middle stages of the
disease, but there is no cure.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              659 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              July 31, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; D08

LENGTH: 1154 words

HEADLINE: File:z9418

BODY:

 Name Loc Fun Business  S              Disclosed Investors
      ati din           t
      on   g            a
          (in           g
          mil           e
          lio
          ns)

CoGen Roc 55  Pharmaceu S  New Enterprise Associates, OrbiMed Advisors
esys  kvi       tical   t      LLC, Red Abbey Venture Partners LLC
Inc.  lle     research  a
                        r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
Macro Roc 45  Therapeut L    Alta Partners, CDP Capital - Technology
Genic kvi        ic     a  Ventures, InterWest Partners, MPM Capital,
  s   lle      biotech  t  Mithra Group LLC, OrbiMed Advisors LLC, Red
Inc.          products  e Abbey Venture Partners LLC, RiverVest Venture
                        r    Partners , TPG Ventures , Ventures West
                        s                Management Inc.
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Glyco Gai 15. Pharmaceu E Alliance Technology Ventures, Anthem Capital
Mimet the  4    tical   a  Management, Maryland Department of Business
 ics  rsb     research  r   and Economic Development, New Enterprise
Inc.  urg               l   Associates, Novartis Corp., PTV Sciences
                        y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Panac Gai 8.9 Pharmaceu L   Individuals, Mizuho Capital Co., Softbank
 ea   the       tical   a               Investment Corp.
Pharm rsb     research  t
aceut urg               e
icals                   r
Inc.                    s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Intra Roc 7.4  Biotech  L  Frazier Healthcare and Technology Ventures,
digm  kvi  4  research  a    Generics Group, Maryland Department of
Corp. lle               t  Business and Economic Development, MediBIC
                        e           Alliance, Novartis Corp.
                        r
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
MaxCy Gai 5.2 Therapeut L     Harbert Venture Partners, Intersouth
 te   the        ic     a Partners, Maryland Department of Business and
Inc.  rsb      biotech  t    Economic Development, Tall Oaks Capital
      urg     products  e                 Partners LLC
                        r
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Sucam Bet 4.5 Pharmaceu E    Mizuho Capital Co., Tokio Marine & Fire
 po   hes       tical   x                 Insurance Co.
Pharm da      research  p
aceut                   a
icals                   n
Inc.                    s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Profe Bal  3  Therapeut E        Cross Atlantic Capital Partners
ctus  tim        ic     a
BioSc ore      biotech  r
ience         products  l
  s                     y
Inc.                    s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
NanoV Ell 0.1  Biotech  S       Ben Franklin Technology Partners
 ec   ico  5  research  t
 LLC  tt                a
      Cit               r
       y                t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
Canto Bal 0.0 Pharmaceu E     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
  n   tim  8    tical   a
Biote ore     research  r
chnol                   l
ogies                   y
Inc.                    s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Excim Sav 0.0   Gene    S     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
 us   age  8   therapy  t
Biote         research  a
 ch                     r
Inc.                    t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
GeneT Bal 0.0  Biotech  S     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
rade  tim  8  research  t
 LLC  ore               a
                        r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
NeoDi Roc 0.0 Diagnosti S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
agnos kvi  5      c     t                  Development
 tix  lle     products  a
Inc.                    r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d

Marke McL 13   Online   E   Menlo Ventures, New Enterprise Associates
 t10  ean        job    a
              marketpla r
                 ce     l
                        y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Jane  Bal  6  Cosmetics E  Stone Canyon Venture Partners, Walnut Group
& Co. tim               x
      ore               p
                        a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Salem Sal 0.5 Universit E                  TL Ventures
Educa em,  0      y     x
tion  W.V               p
 LLC  a.                a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n

Gridp Was 16.   Power   E Advantage Capital Partners, Altira Group LLC,
oint  hin 05  supply/ma x          Contango Capital Management
Inc.  gto     nagement  p
       n      equipment a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
 ICx  Was 10.  Threat   E            Wexford Management LLC
Techn hin 75  detection x
ologi gto      devices  p
 es    n                a
Inc.                    n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Acagi Fre 0.0   Video   E     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
Inc.  der  8  processin a
      ick         g     r
                        l
                        y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e

Impul Col  9  Diagnosti E            Tullis-Dickerson & Co.
 se   umb         c     x
Monit ia      services  p
oring                   a
Inc.                    n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
 Ion  Mid  5   Managed  E  Anthem Capital Management, Harbert Venture
Healt lot      health   a                   Partners
hcare hia       care    r
Corp. n,                l
      Va.               y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Prema Bet  3  Electroni E Foundation Capital, General Catalyst Partners
tics  hes      c drug   a
Inc.  da      prescript r
                 ion    l
              services  y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Recov Hol 0.0   Drug    S     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
 ery  lyw  8  delivery  t
Scien ood     equipment a
 ce                     r
 LLC                    t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d

SunEd Bal 26.   Solar   E  Goldman, Sachs & Co., MissionPoint Capital
ison  tim  2   energy   a         Partners, Allco Finance Group
 LLC  ore     provider  r
                        l
                        y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Tcom  Col  5  Aerostats E                Prudent Capital
 LP   umb      for use  x
      ia         in     p
              military, a
              intellige n
                 nce    s
              operation i
                  s     o
                        n
First Lin  1    HVAC    L             Grotech Capital Group
Servi thi     contracto a
 ce   cum         r     t
Netwo Hei               e
 rks  ght               r
Inc.  s,                s
      Md.               t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Blue  Cha 3.1  Product  E   Global Environment Fund Management Corp.
Ridge rlo     engineeri x
Numer tte        ng     p
 ics  svi     services  a
Inc.  lle               n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n

Arpu  Was  5  E-commerc E  Draper Atlantic Venture Fund LP, Grosvenor
Inc.  hin         e     x    Funds, New Markets Growth Fund, Polaris
      gto     services  p               Venture Partners
       n                a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Messa Bet 1.2 Internet  S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
 ge   hes     transacti t                  Development
Level da       on and   a
Inc.          security  r
              services  t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d

Power Her Not Semicondu E           VentureTech Alliance LLC
Preci ndo dis   ctors   a
 se    n  clo           r
Solut     sed           l
ions                    y
Inc.                    s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e

Sourc Col 20. Security  L    Core Capital Partners, Inflection Point
efire umb 95  software  a Ventures, Maryland Department of Business and
Inc.  ia                t    Economic Development, Meritech Capital
                        e Partners, New Enterprise Associates, Sequoia
                        r           Capital, Sierra Ventures
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Parat Vie 13. Customer  E  Liquid Capital Management Group LLC, Sierra
 ure  nna  7  managemen x          Ventures, Valhalla Partners
Inc.              t     p
              software  a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Indus Vie 12. Outsource E     Draper Atlantic Venture Fund LP, New
logic nna  5      d     x  Enterprise Associates, WestBridge Ventures
Inc.          software  p                      LLC
              developme a
                 nt     n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Realo Her  8  Business  E      Palomar Ventures, Valhalla Partners
 ps   ndo     software  x
Inc.   n                p
                        a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Servi Fai 7.3 Business  L    JMI Equity, New Vantage Group, Valhalla
ceBen rfa     software  a                   Partners
 ch    x                t
Inc.                    e
                        r
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Qovia Fre 7.1 Telecommu E Anthem Capital Management, BlueRun Ventures,
Inc.  der  6  nications x                Canaan Partners
      ick      netork   p
              monitorin a
              g sofware n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Wasab Nor 4.1  Newtork  L  Himalaya Capital, Hudson Venture Partners,
  i   fol  2  software  a      Intel Capital, Newlight Associates
Syste  k                t
 ms                     e
Inc.                    r
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Logic Bow  4   Speech   E              Edison Venture Fund
Tree  ie      recogniti x
Corp.            on     p
                        a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Trust McL 2.5 Security  E    Avansis Ventures LLC, BCE Capital, Core
Digit ean     software  x    Capital Partners, TD Capital Group Ltd.
 al                     p
 LLC                    a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Nimay Fai  2  Business  E                Updata Partners
  a   rfa     software  x
Inc.   x                p
                        a
                        n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Reviv Vie 1.8 Security  E       Novak Biddle Venture Partners LP
  e   nna     software  a
Syste                   r
 ms                     l
Inc.                    y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Colle Col 0.7 Networkin S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
ctive umb  5      g     t                  Development
  X   ia      software  a
Inc.                    r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
Secur Her 0.7 Security  E                 Carlyle Group
  e   ndo  5  software  x
Eleme  n                p
 nts                    a
Inc.                    n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Zenos Ann 0.4 Business  S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
  s   apo  5  software  t                  Development
Inc.  lis               a
                        r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
Wisor Gai 0.2 Telcommun L    Hickory Venture Capital Corp., Maryland
Telec the     ications  a      Department of Business and Economic
 om   rsb     managemen t    Development, SAIC Venture Capital Corp.
Corp. urg         t     e
              software  r
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
3CLog Roc 0.1 Networkin S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
 ic   kvi         g     t                  Development
Inc.  lle     software  a
                        r
                        t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d
netXc Gai 0.0   Sales   E     Maryland Technology Development Corp.
 cel  the  8  managemen a
Inc.  rsb         t     r
      urg     software  l
                        y
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
 XTS  Ell 0.0 Business  S Maryland Department of Business and Economic
Inc.  ico  5  software  t                  Development
      tt                a
      Cit               r
       y                t
                        -
                        u
                        p
                        /
                        s
                        e
                        e
                        d

Curre Ger 130 Broadband E EarthLink Network Inc., EnerTech Capital, GE
 nt   man     delivery  x  Equity, Goldman, Sachs & Co., Hearst Corp.,
Commu tow       over    p         Liberty Venture Partners Inc.
nicat  n        power   a
ions            lines   n
Group                   s
 LLC                    i
                        o
                        n
Mobil Vie 11  Wireless  L   HarbourVest Partners LLC, Pitango Venture
eAcce nna     communica a Capital, Poalim Capital Markets Technologies
 ss             tions   t                     Ltd.
Netwo                   e
 rks                    r
Inc..                   s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Labra Cha 1.5 Wireless  E   Ackerley Group, Court Square Ventures LLC
 dor  rlo     communica a
Commu tte       tions   r
nicat svi               l
ions  lle               y
Inc.                    s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e
Sophi Cha 1.1 Wireless  E  Chesapeake Emerging Opportunities Club LLC
  a   nti     communica x
Wirel lly       tions   p
 ess                    a
Inc.                    n
                        s
                        i
                        o
                        n
Clear Arl  1  Internet  E       Novak Biddle Venture Partners LP
sprin ing     backbone  a
 gs   ton     infrastru r
Techn           cture   l
ologi                   y
 es                     s
Inc.                    t
                        a
                        g
                        e
 Trx  Lan 0.0 Wireless  E Maryland Technology Development Corp. SOURCE:
Syste ham  8  communica a    PricewaterhouseCoopers/Thomson Venture
 ms             tions   r      Economics/National Venture Capital
Inc.                    l Association MoneyTree Survey, SEC documents,
                        y                  companies.
                        s
                        t
                        a
                        g
                        e

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2006


                              660 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                             July 29, 2006 Saturday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES; Doug Elfman; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1093  words

HEADLINE: More dreaded than deadly

BYLINE: Doug Elfman, The Chicago Sun-Times

BODY:

   Last year, 28 Americans were killed by this potentially vicious animal with
its amazing jaws. The deaths came from brutal attacks by beasts that people come
into contact with all the time: dogs. Which, when you think about it, isn't so
bad compared to people who perished from bicycle wrecks (around 700), cars
hitting deer (130) and lightning strikes (around 40).

   Sharks, on the other hand, killed four people.

   But, you know, sharks look really menacing, especially during "Shark Week,"
starting Sunday. Now in its 19th year, the Discovery Channel summer stunt is one
of cable's top draws, luring more than 20 million people last year with its
relentless emphasis on undersea beasties.

   Hosts of "Shark Week" episodes make it clear sharks are not so much a threat
to people -- even as the hosts take tentative dips in ocean waters as if they're
about to be surrounded by, well, sharks.

   "Man goes into the cage. The cage is in the water. Shark's in the water,"
says Mike Rowe, host of "Dirty Jobs: Jobs That Bite" (8 p.m. Sunday).

   Rowe, there, is paraphrasing the shark-hunting character Quint (Robert Shaw)
from "Jaws," a movie that after 31 years still has the power to make you afraid
to go into a swimming pool.

   "I was even scared of toilet water after that," my friend Molly told me this
week, while she was relating her love for previous "Shark Week" runs on
Discovery.

   Normally, "Shark Week" episodes put explorers and camera operators in an
ocean, and there's a lot of shark this and shark that. Newbies to the experience
of standing in shark cages often are surprised at how big, say, a great white
looks (20 feet long, for starters) as it smiles its rows of teeth.

   But as you see in "Jobs That Bite," sharks are the perfect killing machines
that don't really care about humans. The only reason they're attracted to Rowe
and other watery men during "Shark Week" is that cages and wet suits are covered
in tuna.

   One expert convinces Rowe that sharks sense his heartbeat, and if Rowe gets
nervous and the heartbeat increases, sharks will get wigged out and swim away.
Sharks no like nervous people.

   And yet, we fear these big fish eaters.

   There is good reason. Shark deaths may be low, but attacks are nasty and
attract big media notice. My friend Molly supposes that there's a huge cachet to
getting bit. Here's her reasoning: it's cool, like getting a tattoo.

   It's so cool that amateur teen surfer Bethany Hamilton lost an arm to a shark
in Hawaii in 2003, kept surfing afterward and was named by British kids'
magazine CY one of the world's top 10 heroes for kids, alongside David
Attenborough and environmentalist Zac Goldsmith.

   "Shark Week" episodes focus away from human attacks and more toward the
nitty-gritty of living as a shark, eating as a shark and getting autopsied as a
shark.

   In the one-hour "Perfect Shark" (8 p.m. Tuesday), host Mike deGruy stands in
a "viru-arium" -- a special-effects virtual aquarium making it look like sharks
are swimming around him -- and holds up a 10 million-year-old shark tooth and a
10 million-year-old bone that has shark teeth marks in it. In other words, 10
million years ago, someone toothy was hungry.

   Sunday's two-hour "Jobs That Bite" is less concerned with the action of
showing sharks than it is in interviewing people who look for sharks. One guy's
job is to sit on a hill all day and spy for great whites through his binoculars,
as surfers and swimmers frolic closer to shore.

   But yes, there will be a man in a cage in the water in "Jobs That Bite,"
right after Rowe gets a great white riled up with a seal decoy and chum.

   "We're gonna get him as angry as possible and then put me in" the water, Rowe
says.

   If Rowe can only get his heart rate up, the apparently shy-of-humans shark
also will get skittery, and man and shark's little prom dance will end without
bloodshed, as usual.

   e-mail: delfman@suntimes.com

   OUR FAVORITE SHARK BITES

   COMEDIAN ROBERT SCHIMMEL: "My brother scuba dives a lot and told me that if a
shark is 'bothering' you, you just wait until he gets up close to you and punch
him in the face. Punch a shark? What if he wasn't even going to attack you? What
if he's just curious, and swims by and ... blam!? And the shark says, 'What did
you do that for?' 'I thought you were going to attack me.' 'I am now! I was
gonna let you go, but the other sharks are watching. It doesn't look good now.'
"

   QUINT (ROBERT SHAW) IN "JAWS": "The thing about a shark, it's got lifeless
eyes, black eyes, like a doll's eyes. When it comes at you, it doesn't seem to
be livin' -- until he bites you, and those black eyes roll over white."

   OSCAR (WILL SMITH) IN "SHARK TALE": "I don't ever, ever, ever, never ever
want to see another shark around this reef again! Ever! Remember this name:
Oscar the Sharkslayer."

   DR. SUSAN MCCALLISTER (SAFFRON BURROWS) IN "DEEP BLUE SEA": "Jim and I used
gene therapies to increase their brain mass. A larger brain means more protein.
As a side effect, the sharks got smarter."

   Janice Higgins (Jacqueline McKenzie): "You stupid bitch!"

   Woman (Laraine Newman) in "Saturday Night Live": "Who is it?"

   Landshark (Chevy Chase): "Flowers."

   Woman: "Flowers? From whom?"

   Landshark (after pausing): "Plumber, ma'am."

   Woman: "I don't need a plumber. You're that clever shark, aren't you?"

   Landshark: "Candy gram."

   Woman: "Candy gram, my foot. Get out of here before I call the proper
authorities. You're the shark, and you know it."

   Landshark: "I'm only a harmless dolphin."

   Woman: "A dolphin? Well, OK."

   Roger Ebert's review of "Jaws the Revenge": "I believe that the shark wants
revenge against Mrs. Brody. I do. I really do believe it. After all, her husband
was one of the men who hunted this shark and killed it, blowing it to bits. And
what shark wouldn't want revenge against the survivors of the men who killed
it?"

   WHAT ELSE IS ON

   TONIGHT

   "America's Most Wanted" (8 p.m., WFLD-Channel 32): Host John Walsh witnesses
the president signing the Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act, named
after Walsh's late son, who would be 31 now if he hadn't been kidnapped in a
mall and decapitated 25 years ago. The law creates a national registration
process for sex offenders.

   "Feasting on Asphalt" (8 p.m., Food): In a new series, cookbook nerd Alton
Brown rides a motorcycle around the country and eats local foods. Tonight, it's
pickled pigs and other icky stuff in a regional episode punnily titled "The
South Shall Fry Again." (Repeats at 11 p.m.)

   SUNDAY

   "The Girls Next Door" (8 p.m., E!): As the second season begins, Mr. Hugh
Hefner's girlfriends plan an 80th birthday party for the legendary porn pioneer.

GRAPHIC:
Color Photo: Sharks;
Color Photo: (See microfilm for photo description).

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2006


                              661 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 29, 2006 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 91 words

HEADLINE: Science File;
IN BRIEF;
FDA Approves Drug for Hunter Syndrome

BYLINE: From Times Staff and Wire Reports

BODY:

   The first drug treatment for the rare but potentially deadly inherited
disease Hunter syndrome has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration.

   Shire Human Genetic Therapies of Cambridge, Mass., manufacturer of Elaprase,
said it planned to have the drug available within 30 days. Hunter syndrome
impedes the body's ability to break down complex sugars; treatment is estimated
to cost $300,000 a patient annually. The syndrome is generally diagnosed around
ages 1 to 3, and it affects mainly males. It occurs in one or two of about
132,000 births.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2006


                              662 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             July 29, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: Shire's earnings off 44%, partly from takeover cost

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C., the Britain-based pharmaceutical company with major operations
in Wayne, said yesterday that profit fell 44 percent in the second quarter due
to the high cost of marketing new products and absorbing another company last
year.

   The maker of Adderall XR, the world's best-selling drug for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, already had been expecting a big decline because of its
$1.6 billion acquisition last year of Transkaryotic Therapeutics, renamed Shire
Human Genetic Therapies. Its marketing costs also have soared with the launch or
pending review of new products, including a new ADHD patch Daytrana and
Elaprase, a drug for the rare condition Hunter syndrome.

   Net income fell to $61.3 million, or 12 cents a share, from $109.9 million,
or 22 cents a share, a year earlier. Shire said second-quarter total revenue
rose 3 percent, to $439.1 million from $424.6 million.

   The company so far has failed to reduce its reliance on Adderall XR, which
provides half of its product revenues. Adderall XR sales rose 7 percent, to
$220.7 million from $205.4 million a year earlier. Shire said the drug increased
its share of the U.S. ADHD market to 26 percent from 24 percent.

   Daytrana has not produced revenue yet, but its launch required Shire to begin
paying $50 million to Daytrana's license holder, Noven Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Shire also faces patent challenges on Adderall XR. It has sued generic-drug
producer Barr Laboratories Inc. and petitioned the Food and Drug Administration
to block Barr's application to market a copycat.

   Its Wayne-based chief executive officer, Matthew Emmens, said Shire and Barr
were still negotiating for a settlement ahead of a possible courtroom showdown
in October. Shire, Britain's third-largest drug company, employs about 600
people in the Chesterbrook Corporate Center.

   Despite the uncertainties, Emmens said in a statement that Shire was sticking
by its previous guidance of 2006 revenue growth "in the low double-digit range."

   Shares of Shire closed yesterday at $46.98, up 11 cents, or 0.2 percent, in
trading on the Nasdaq.

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2006


                              663 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              July 28, 2006 Friday

LENGTH: 323 words

HEADLINE: Marketing, acquisition costs drag down Shire's profits

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire PLC, the Britain-based pharmaceutical company with major operations in
Wayne, Pa., said today that profits fell 44 percent in the second quarter due to
the high cost of marketing new products and absorbing another company last year.

   The maker of Adderall XR, the world's best-selling drug for attention
deficit-hyperactivity disorder, already had been expecting a big decline because
of its $1.6 billion acquisition last year of Transkaryotic Therapeutics, renamed
Shire Human Genetic Therapies.

   Its marketing costs also have soared with the launch or pending review of new
products, including a new ADHD patch Daytrana and Elaprase, a drug for the rare
condition Hunter syndrome.

   Net income fell to $61.3 million, or 12 cents per share, from $109.9 million,
or 22 cents per share, a year earlier. It said second-quarter total revenues
rose 3 percent, to $439.1 million from $424.6 million.

   The company so far has failed to reduce its reliance on Adderall XR, which
provides half of its product revenues. Adderall XR sales rose 7 percent, to
$220.7 million from $205.4 million a year earlier.

   Daytrana has not produced revenue yet but its launch required Shire to begin
paying $50 million to Daytrana's license holder, Noven Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Shire also faces patent challenges on Adderall XR. It has sued generic
drug-maker Barr Laboratories Inc. and petitioned the Food and Drug
Administration to block Barr's application to market a copycat.

   Its Wayne-based chief executive, Matthew Emmens, said Shire and Barr were
still negotiating for a settlement ahead of a possible courtroom showdown in
October.

   Despite the uncertainties, Emmens said in a statement that Shire is sticking
by its previous guidance of 2006 revenue growth "in the low double-digit range."

   Its share price was up about 1 percent, or 68 cents, to $47.55, in morning
trading on the Nasdaq.

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2006


                              664 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              July 28, 2006 Friday

LENGTH: 358 words

HEADLINE: Marketing, acquisition costs drag down Shire's profits

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C., the Britain-based pharmaceutical company with major operations
in Wayne, said today that profit fell 44 percent in the second quarter due to
the high cost of marketing new products and absorbing another company last year.

   The maker of Adderall XR, the world's best-selling drug for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, already had been expecting a big decline because of its
$1.6 billion acquisition last year of Transkaryotic Therapeutics, renamed Shire
Human Genetic Therapies.

   Its marketing costs also have soared with the launch or pending review of new
products, including a new ADHD patch Daytrana and Elaprase, a drug for the rare
condition Hunter syndrome.

   Net income fell to $61.3 million, or 12 cents a share, from $109.9 million,
or 22 cents a share, a year earlier. Shire said second-quarter total revenue
rose 3 percent, to $439.1 million from $424.6 million.

   The company so far has failed to reduce its reliance on Adderall XR, which
provides half of its product revenues. Adderall XR sales rose 7 percent, to
$220.7 million from $205.4 million a year earlier. Shire said the drug increased
its share of the U.S. ADHD market to 26 percent from 24 percent.

   Daytrana has not produced revenue yet, but its launch required Shire to begin
paying $50 million to Daytrana's license holder, Noven Pharmaceuticals Inc.

   Shire also faces patent challenges on Adderall XR. It has sued generic-drug
producer Barr Laboratories Inc. and petitioned the Food and Drug Administration
to block Barr's application to market a copycat.

   Its Wayne-based chief executive officer, Matthew Emmens, said Shire and Barr
were still negotiating for a settlement ahead of a possible courtroom showdown
in October. Shire, Britain's third-largest drug company, employs about 600
people in the Chesterbrook Corporate Center.

   Despite the uncertainties, Emmens said in a statement that Shire was sticking
by its previous guidance of 2006 revenue growth "in the low double-digit range."

   Shares of Shire closed today at $46.98, up 11 cents, or 0.2 percent, in
trading on the Nasdaq.

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2006


                              665 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 28, 2006 Friday

SECTION: ZONE; Pg. NC-4

LENGTH: 541 words

HEADLINE: Parents set sights on vision breakthrough

BYLINE: Meredith Wade, COMMUNITY NEWS WRITER

DATELINE: CARMEL VALLEY

BODY:

   CARMEL VALLEY -- Sometimes sight involves more than perceiving the world
through a pair of eyes -- it involves a vision for the future.

   The Vision of Children Foundation is a Carmel Valley-based organization
established in 1990 to eradicate hereditary childhood blindness and vision
disorders and to improve the quality of life of visually impaired individuals
and their families.

   Sam and Vivian Hardage created the foundation after one of their four
children was diagnosed with ocular albinism.

   "When our son was diagnosed at 2 months old, we were stunned to find out that
no one in the world was doing research in this area," Vivian said. "Doctors just
told us there was no cure, no treatment, and to go home and be glad our son was
not totally blind."

   Ocular albinism is a genetic disorder that affects the amount of pigment in
the eyes, hair and skin. The disease can result in a loss of vision;
uncontrollable, rapid movement of the eyes; crossed eyes; and sensitivity to
bright light.

   The Hardages refused to accept that they could not help their son. When he
was 2, they found a team of Italian scientists who were conducting research on
the genetic causes of childhood blindness, specifically ocular albinism. The
couple pledged to financially support the researchers in their attempts to
identify the gene causing the disorder, clone the disease and develop an
infected mouse model.

   "When we started doing this stuff 15 years ago, genetic research was a pretty
far-out idea," Vivian said.

   "Neither one of us had any scientific knowledge in this area," Sam said. He
worked in the hospitality industry, and Vivian was a former educator.

   "Our goal is simple," Sam said. "We want to find a cure and go out of
business."

   So far, researchers have determined the disease is carried in females. A
woman with the gene linked to ocular albinism has a 50 percent chance of passing
the disease to her son.

   Although there are no current treatments for ocular albinism, a test has been
developed using funding from The Vision of Children Foundation to determine
whether a mother is a carrier of the disease.

   Health-care statistics in the United States do not record the frequency of
the disease, but estimates are between 1 in 20,000 and 1 in 50,000 persons.

   Through the coordination of The Vision of Children Foundation, more than 500
families around the world have created a network of support and camaraderie.

   "We don't want these parents to feel like they are alone. We want them to
know we are looking for a cure and that there is support out there," Vivian
said.

   "The cavalry is on the way," Sam said. "There is a person on the Earth today
who is blind and will one day be able to see because of this gene therapy."

   In addition to its other functions, the foundation has recently developed a
computer monitor the Hardages hope to install in every learning center in the
country. The monitor is attached to an adjustable arm so a visually impaired
person can choose the height and angle of the screen to use a computer more
easily.

   The Vision of Children Foundation depends solely on supporter contributions
to maintain its research, outreach and education programs. For more information
on the organization, call (858) 799-0810 or visit www.visionofchildren.org.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Sam Hardage founded The Vision of Children Foundation
after his son was born with a vision impairment. The Carmel Valley-based
organization helps fund research and serves as a support network for families.;
PHOTOBY: Nadia Borowski Scott / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2006


                              666 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            July 26, 2006 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH WEDNESDAY; HEALTH CALENDAR; Pg. D-2

LENGTH: 468 words

BYLINE: Compiled by Rick Nowlin

BODY:

   Special Events

   * Three Rivers Center for Independent Living is sponsoring a rally at noon
today in the courtyard of the Allegheny County Courthouse, 436 Grant St., in
celebration of the 16th anniversary of the Americans with Disabilities Act. For
information, call 412-371-7700.

   Charity Events

   * The deadline to buy $15 discounted tickets for the 84 Lumber Classic Pro
Golf Association event, to take place Sept. 11 through 17 at Nemacolin
Woodlands, is Aug. 8. Proceeds from the discounted tickets benefit the Zach
Attack and Nathan's Battle Foundation to fund a gene therapy clinical trial for
Batten Disease. Ticketholders also may attend weekend concerts by the
Povertyneck Hillbillies, Clint Black and the Black-Eyed Peas. Call 724-538-5661.

   Blood Drives

   * To find a blood drive near you call:

   -- The Central Blood Bank, 412-209-7000 or 1-800-310-9551.

   -- The American Red Cross, 1-800-993-6667. For bloodmobile locations, check
http://www.redcrosslife.org.

   Classes/Workshops

   * The August meeting of Excela Health's program "Living with Cancer, Looking
Forward," for new cancer patients and their families, to be held every second
Wednesday of the month, is taking place from 6 to 7:30 p.m. Aug. 9 at the Arnold
Palmer Pavilion, Mountain View Medical Park, Unity. Registration is required.
Call 1-877-771-1234.

   Support Groups

   *Self Help Group Network, a service of HelpLine, provides a database of
support groups. Call: 412-255-1155.

   * The Brain Injury Peer Support Group meets from 7 to 9 p.m. Aug. 8 at
HealthSouth Harmarville, Guys Run Road, Harmar. Included is an ice cream social.
For details, call 412-531-0343.

   Special Opportunities

   * The Girls, Math & Science Partnership at the Carnegie Science Center, One
Allegheny Avenue, North Shore, is sponsoring "Click!", a day camp for girls ages
11 to 14, from 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Aug. 7 through 11. Participants are to solve
a biomedical mystery. The cost is $230, with scholarships available, and the
deadline is Friday. Call 412-237-1637.

   * SouthBridge EMS is sponsoring a free car-seat inspection clinic from 6 to 8
p.m. July 31 at its Cecil base, 22 Cecil Elementary Drive. For appointments,
call 412-221-5115.

   * The Parkinson Chapter of Greater Pittsburgh is presenting "Living Well with
Parkinson Disease," a retreat to be held Aug. 4 through 6 at Antiochian Village
Conference and Retreat Center, Route 711, Ligonier Township. Deadline is Aug. 2,
but space is limited. For more information, including costs, call 724-238-3677
or 412-365-2086.

   * The Westmoreland Tobacco-Free Coalition is sponsoring a public speaking and
demonstration contest for children and youth ages 8 to 18 on Aug. 23 at the
Westmoreland Fairgrounds, Greensburg-Mount Pleasant Road, Mount Pleasant
Township. Cash prizes are being awarded. The entry deadline is 7 p.m. Aug. 1.
Call 724-837-1402.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2006


                              667 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                             July 25, 2006 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE DRUG GETS FDA APPROVAL

BYLINE:  BY STEPHEN HEUSER, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Federal regulators yesterday approved a drug made in Cambridge that is
expected to be one of the world's most expensive medical treatments, at about
$300,000 per patient per year.

   Elaprase is the first-ever treatment for Hunter syndrome, an inherited and
potentially fatal disorder in children that causes bulging features, growth
problems, swollen organs, and eventual breakdown of the lungs. Only 500 patients
in the United States are believed to have the disease, which affects mostly boys
and can cause mental retardation.

   A spokeswoman for manufacturer Shire PLC said about 100 people are taking the
drug as part of its human clinical testing.

   Elaprase joins a handful of highly specialized drugs called
enzyme-replacement therapies, in which a crucial protein missing in patients'
bodies is engineered in a lab and infused regularly into their bloodstreams. The
global leader in such treatments is Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, which has become
a multibillion dollar business by selling a handful of drugs that treat fewer
than 5,000 people each.

   Drug companies' interest in such rare-disease treatments has grown
dramatically in recent years as firms have shown they can reap large profits
treating small groups of patients. They are protected by the 1983 Orphan Drug
Act, which rewards companies that develop drugs for rare diseases by giving them
seven years to sell each new treatment without competition from other
manufacturers.

   Cambridge has emerged as a capital for such "ultra-orphan" drugs. Genzyme's
success is built on Cerezyme, an enzyme replacement for a genetic disorder
called Gaucher disease. It costs $200,000 or more annually for each patient.
Cerezyme is used by about 4,500 patients worldwide and is expected to notch $1
billion in sales this year. Genzyme makes two related drugs for even rarer
diseases, and sells a fourth developed by the California company BioMarin
Pharmaceutical Inc. All are sold at similar prices, which vary by the patient's
weight.

   The drug approved yesterday, Elaprase, was developed by Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., a Cambridge biotech firm. TKT also developed a similar drug,
Replagal, which treats Fabry disease and is sold in Europe but not the United
States.

   Shire, a British company that focuses on specialized drugs, bought TKT for
$1.6 billion last year, triggering a dispute by some stockholders who said the
company should have brought a higher price. TKT's chief executive at the time,
Michael Astrue, resigned to protest the merger, saying the company would be more
valuable if it could have continued developing its drugs independently.

   The firm is now known as Shire Human Genetic Therapies Inc., with 425
employees and local headquarters in Kendall Square. Elaprase will be
manufactured in the Alewife neighborhood of North Cambridge. Shire expects to
begin selling it next month, and is simultaneously launching a program to help
patients and doctors win insurance reimbursement to pay for their treatment.

   The drug is administered in weekly infusions of one to three hours. In tests
in 96 patients between age 5 and 31, Elaprase improved patients' walking and
breathing ability, compared to a placebo. A small percentage suffered serious
reactions to the substance.

   Kyle Barrett, a 13-year-old Hunter patient who lives in Ayer, was one of the
first to be given the drug in human trials. He and his parents flew to North
Carolina every other week for infusions that his father, Bill Plunkett, said had
a noticeable effect on Kyle's stamina.

   "We had to traipse through Logan, through central parking, all the way to
Terminal B, and he was running ahead of us that was a big change," he said.

   Kyle likened the experience to the energizing bite that turns Peter Parker
into a superhero in the movie Spider-Man.

   "I kind of felt like I had the energy to do anything, to climb a wall," he
said.

   Ken Cacciatore, a pharmaceutical analyst for Cowen & Co., estimated the drug
could be a significant product for Shire, eventually selling as much as $250
million per year. He did not foresee the price causing problems for insurance
reimbursement.

   "Even though it's so expensive, there's really nowhere else to turn," he
said.

   Stephen Heuser can be reached at sheuser@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2006


                              668 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             July 25, 2006 Tuesday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 03D

LENGTH: 823 words

HEADLINE: Multiple sclerosis cluster remains under study;
Epidemiologists searching for explanation for very high rate in Lorain County
village

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, The Columbus Dispatch

BODY:

   It could be tied to the environment. Then again, it could simply be a cruel
coincidence.

   Either way, Lorain County's rate of multiple sclerosis cases is higher than
the national average, prompting local and federal researchers to look for a
common link.

   In September, a state-federal study found that the county's rate for the
disease was 32 percent higher than the national average. And the village of
Wellington in Lorain County had a rate 3.7 times the U.S. average.

   New studies, including one at Kent State University, are looking at the same
problem.

   "The rate is high, and the question is, why?" said Ken Pearce, the county's
health commissioner.

   The crippling illness, which strikes twice as many women as men, affects an
estimated 17,000 people in Ohio, including more than 2,400 in central Ohio,
according to the National Multiple Sclerosis Society's Buckeye chapter, which
includes central and northeastern Ohio.

   Franklin County has an estimated 1,600 cases.

   A follow-up study of Lorain County is looking for causes.

   "They've already taken my blood," said Sally Giar, 56, a lifelong Wellington
resident who was 33 when doctors diagnosed her illness.

   Wellington, a village of about 4,000 residents in southern Lorain County, had
17 cases from 1998 through 2000, which translates to about three times the
average of about 85 per 100,000.

   Lorain County had 320 cases, a rate of 112 per 100,000 people.

   Giar said the actual number in Wellington is closer to 30 because the federal
study included only people who had been to a neurologist and did not include
patients who had moved away.

   Many of Wellington's multiple sclerosis patients live within nine blocks of a
foundry landfill that area residents once suspected of contributing to the
disease.

   But a study concluded that there was not enough evidence to connect the
landfill or any of several factories in town to the cases.

   "It's the cumulative factor we wonder about," Giar said.

   Clusters of any diagnosed disease can be misleading. They are not that
uncommon and don't necessarily indicate a problem.

   However, Patti Blake, a co-founder of Oak Clinic, a treatment center in
Portage County, said there are many places like Wellington.

   "We have in this part of the country three to four times the normal incidence
for multiple sclerosis, and we're not sure why," Blake said.

   Geographic data, however, is hard to come by because doctors are not required
to report the disease to the state or federal governments.

   Blake's multiple sclerosis was diagnosed 28 years ago.

   "I'm in a wheelchair part of the day and walk with a cane the rest. I'm lucky
to still be working," the 51-year-old said.

   Scientists at Kent State University are trying to crack the disease, which
attacks the central nervous system.

   "We know MS is partly genetic, but even with identical twins there's only a
30 percent chance that both will develop MS," said Kent State neuroscientist
Jennifer McDonough.

   "That other 70 percent has something to do with the environment."

   An estimated 400,000 Americans suffer with multiple sclerosis, which causes
muscle weakness, paralysis, decreased vision and memory loss.

   The CDC study of Lorain County found that the disease is more prevalent the
farther north a person lives. For example, Ohio has a higher rate than Texas.

   But researchers also say it could be connected to where your family came
from.

   "It could be that a large portion of people of northern European descent have
the susceptibility gene," McDonough said. "No one has done a good
epidemiological study to figure it out."

   Earlier this year, McDonough and her brother, Ernest Freeman, a Kent State
imaging specialist, discovered that flaws in genes that control energy
production in nerve cells starved the cells and sped up nerve cell degeneration
in MS patients.

   Now the researchers are investigating whether gene therapy and diets rich in
anti-oxidants can help existing treatments.

   They're also planning to use MRI scans to track how the disease progresses.

   "We're trying to halt the neurodegenerative component because right now there
are no therapies for that," McDonough said.

   There were no drugs at all until the 1990s. Now there are about six.

   McDonough said she expects the number to grow in the next decade.

   "A lot of new drugs should help to really slow it down," she said. "The
objective is just to enable sufferers to live mostly normal lives."

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

   Box Story: Multiple sclerosis by the numbers

   Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disease in which the body attacks its own
nerve cells. It causes muscle weakness, paralysis, decreased vision and memory
loss.

   The cause is unknown, but women are twice as likely to develop the disease as
men. It is more common among people of northern European descent. A genetic
predisposition seems to be important, and possible causes include viruses and
heavy metals.

   * Worldwide cases: 2.5 million

   * U.S. cases: 400,000

   * Central Ohio cases: 2,468

   * Franklin County cases: 1,668

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2006


                              669 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday
                                 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: AROUND THE NATION

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   WEST VIRGINIA

   Blast pulverized mine safety blocks

   BUCKHANNON - The 12 men who died in the Sago coal mine explosion in January
would have survived if foam blocks designed to seal off an abandoned section had
withstood the blast, according to an independent report released Wednesday. The
40-inch blocks were made to withstand a blast of up to 20 pounds per square
inch, but the force of the explosion exceeded that. "These blocks were
pulverized," said J. Davitt McAteer, who conducted the investigation. The report
came the same day the Mine Safety and Health Administration ordered all mines to
strengthen seals to withstand 50 pounds per square inch of pressure, more than
double the current standard.

   WASHINGTON

   2 women, 2 boys are found dead

   KIRKLAND - Two women and two young boys found dead after a house fire all
died of wounds to the neck, and the fire apparently was set to cover up the
slayings, authorities said Wednesday. The home belonged to a soldier serving in
Iraq, his wife and their two children, ages 3 and 5. The victims were the young
mother, the children and her sister, the King County medical examiner's office
said. Police have arrested a neighbor for investigation of arson and homicide.
Sgt. Leonid Milkin, 29, has been granted emergency leave from duty in Iraq.

   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

   Official in laptop incident quits VA

   WASHINGTON - A top Veterans Affairs official criticized after the theft of a
laptop containing 26.5 million veterans' sensitive information is leaving to
take a job in the private sector, the department said Wednesday. Tim McClain,
the VA's general counsel since 2001, is resigning effective Sept. 1 to pursue
unspecified opportunities elsewhere. He is the fifth official to leave the
department following the May 3 theft of a laptop from a VA data analyst's
Maryland home. Lawmakers said McClain resisted centralizing authority for
information security under a chief information officer.

   USDA to cut back mad cow testing WASHINGTON - The Agriculture Department will
announce today plans to scale back its mad cow surveillance program, according
to a source briefed by the department. The USDA is "lowering (testing) to
reflect the low level of BSE (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) in the United
States," the source said. "It is lower, but keep in mind it will still be
testing at a level 10 times higher than" international recommended standards.
The enhanced program, which was to run for 12 to 18 months, has tested more than
759,000 animals - far more than initially planned - and was responsible for
finding two of the three cases of the brain-wasting cattle ailment in the United
States.

   CALIFORNIA

   Scientist convicted in molestation case

   LOS ANGELES - A renowned geneticist was convicted Wednesday of molesting a
colleague's daughter, starting at age 10 when the girl took martial arts classes
at his home. William French Anderson, 69, is widely credited as the "father of
gene therapy," a promising but controversial experimental medical treatment that
involves injecting healthy genes into sick patients. His successful treatment of
a patient this way in 1990 launched the field. Anderson was convicted of one
count of continuous sexual abuse of a child under age 14 and three counts of
committing a lewd act on a child. The judge ordered a psychiatric study of
Anderson before his Nov. 17 sentencing.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              670 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: Scientist Guilty of Child Sexual Abuse;
Jury convicts famed geneticist William French Anderson, 69, on four counts of
molestation. He faces up to 22 years in prison.

BYLINE: Peter Y. Hong, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   An esteemed scientist known as "the father of gene therapy" was convicted
Wednesday of sexually abusing a child 50 years his junior.

   A Los Angeles County Superior Court jury found USC research director William
French Anderson, 69, guilty of four counts of continuous sex abuse and lewd acts
toward a child under 14. He faces a maximum prison sentence of 22 years.

   Anderson, who had warned his victim that her accusations would prevent him
from saving lives through medical cures and disillusion those who viewed him as
"a model of the right way to live," was jailed immediately.

   Anderson, director of USC's Gene Therapy Laboratories, focused on stem cell
research and correcting defective genes in fetuses.

   His accuser, now a 19-year-old college student, is the daughter of Anderson's
second in command at the lab. In addition to employing the girl's mother,
Anderson had been a close family friend.

   The jury of 10 men and two women took a little more than a day to reach its
verdict. Silver-haired and square-jawed, Anderson, dressed in a gray wool suit,
looked straight ahead as the jury verdicts were read by the court clerk.

   His wife, Kathryn Anderson, sat with her hands clasped and eyes closed as
Blair Berk, one of her husband's lawyers, kept a hand firmly on her shoulder.

   As Judge Michael E. Pastor thanked the jury for their service, Anderson
turned to his wife and smiled. She did not meet his gaze.

   Barry Tarlow, Anderson's lead defense attorney, told reporters he had no
comment but would appeal.

   Outside the courtroom, Deputy Dist. Atty. Cathryn F. Brougham said the
verdict showed the jury "did not allow his status, his high education and his
professional reputation to stand in the way of the truth."

   The victim and her family did not appear in court. Brougham said she spoke
briefly by telephone with the victim after the verdict. "She was very pleased,
and very emotional," Brougham said.

   Anderson's stature had been a focal point of the trial. His lawyers had
claimed the accusations against him were part of an attempt by the girl's mother
to take over his lab by destroying his reputation.

   Prosecutors argued that Anderson's position and influence were tools he used
to manipulate his victim. Deputy Dist. Atty. James W. Garrison said the victim,
who immigrated with her family from China and had none of Anderson's wealth or
influence, was concerned about the apparent disparity of power. "She knew what
she was taking on," he said.

   Anderson began teaching the girl taekwondo at his San Marino home in 1997,
when she was 10 and Anderson was 60. She claimed the abuse started during the
lessons and continued for five years.

   Anderson had also helped the girl with soccer and her studies. He helped her
get into a Stanford University summer program and advised her on social skills
such as how to introduce herself to people.

   There were gifts: a bicycle for Christmas, a prom dress. The girl and her
twin sister, who lived nearby in a comparatively modest house, swam in
Anderson's pool and built a treehouse with him in his spacious yard. They used
his house for a sleepover party for their friends.

   Anderson took the girl to dinner at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Pasadena. He
testified during the trial that he meant to expand her range of experiences; a
minister who had been his mentor had done the same for him when he was a boy in
Tulsa, taking him to his first nice restaurant and teaching him to eat oysters.

   From those simple beginnings, Anderson went on to college at Harvard, where
he competed as a runner and excelled academically.

   He went on to Cambridge University in England, where he met his future wife
in an anatomy class. Anderson married Kathryn Dorothy Duncan in 1962.

   Anderson has said in interviews with writers that the couple decided not to
have children in order to focus on their careers. Kathryn Anderson retired two
years ago as chief of surgery at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   Anderson emerged from his rags-to-riches early life an eclectic Renaissance
man. He has been a competitive martial artist and firearms enthusiast. Before
his arrest, he was the only holder of a concealed weapons permit in the city of
San Marino. He also held a California security guard license.

   On leave from his USC position for the last two years, Anderson has used his
time to work on a device to detect DNA evidence at crime scenes, and another for
spotting biological weapons on the battlefield, his lawyer Tarlow said. Tarlow
cited the work as a reason Anderson should be allowed to turn himself in to
prison later rather than be taken from the courtroom in handcuffs.

   Pastor denied the request, but allowed Anderson to say goodbye to his wife.

   Anderson will undergo evaluations by psychiatrists and prison officials,
which Pastor can consider along with the geneticist's work record in sentencing,
which was set for Nov. 17.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: DEFEATED: Defense attorneys Barry Tarlow, left, and Blair Berk
flank Anderson's wife, Kathryn, as they leave court.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Javier
Manzano Los Angeles Times PHOTO: DEFENDANT: William French Anderson at a 2005
extradition hearing. He was jailed immediately after Wednesday's verdict.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Walt Mancini Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              671 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 609 words

HEADLINE: 'PLEDGE' SHIELD BILL ADVANCES

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- The House, citing the nation's religious origins, voted
yesterday to protect the Pledge of Allegiance from federal judges who might try
to stop schoolchildren and others from reciting it because of the phrase "under
God."

   The legislation, a priority of social conservatives, passed 260-167. It now
goes to the Senate where its future is uncertain.

   Opponents said the legislation, which would bar federal courts from ruling on
the constitutional validity of the pledge, would undercut judicial independence
and would deny access to federal courts to religious minorities seeking to
defend their rights.

   2 tied to Atlanta plot

   ATLANTA -- Two men already accused of discussing terror targets with Islamic
extremists were indicted yesterday on charges of undergoing paramilitary
training in northwest Georgia and plotting a "violent jihad" against civilian
and government targets, including an air base in suburban Atlanta.

   The new indictment accuses Syed Ahmed, a Georgia Tech student who was
arrested in March, and Ehsanul Islam Sadequee of traveling to Washington to film
possible targets, including the U.S. Capitol and the headquarters of the World
Bank, and sharing the recordings with another alleged terrorist based in Great
Britain.

   Snake's blanket surgery

   KETCHUM, Idaho -- It took surgery to save a 12-foot Burmese python after it
swallowed a queen-size electric blanket -- with the electrical cord and control
box.

   The blanket must have gotten tangled up in the snake's rabbit dinner, owner
Karl Beznoska said. He kept the blanket in the cage to keep the 60-pound
reptile, named Houdini, warm.

   "Somehow, he was able to unplug the electric cord," Mr. Beznoska said
yesterday.

   Veterinarian Karsten Fostvedt conducted a two-hour operation on the python
Tuesday, and said afterward, "The prognosis is great."

   Beryl aims for Mass.

   KILL DEVIL HILLS, N.C. -- Tropical Storm Beryl gained strength yesterday as
it pulled away from the North Carolina coast and headed toward New England.

   The National Hurricane Center in Miami issued a tropical storm watch for
southeastern Massachusetts.

   At 5 p.m. EDT, the storm's maximum sustained winds were near 60 mph; Beryl
was centered about 135 miles northeast of Cape Hatteras.

   Heat kills 3 hikers

   MOAB, Utah -- Two people have died during separate hiking trips in the rugged
southern Utah desert country, one a participant in a wilderness survival course
and the other a teenager who got separated from her group in 110-degree heat,
officials said.

   Another hiker, Joan Kovach, 52, of Canfield, Ohio, near Youngstown, died of
apparent heat exhaustion and dehydration in South Dakota's Badlands National
Park, the park's chief ranger said.

   Lay heart disease bared

   HOUSTON -- Enron Corp. founder Kenneth Lay had three severely clogged
arteries and had experienced at least two heart attacks sometime before he died,
according to autopsy results released yesterday.

   The report blames severe coronary artery disease for Mr. Lay's death on July
5 while on vacation near Aspen, Colo.

   Mr. Lay, 64, and former Enron chief executive Jeffrey Skilling were convicted
May 25 of fraud and conspiracy for lying to investors and the public about the
financial health of Enron before the energy company he founded collapsed in
2001.

   Molestation conviction

   LOS ANGELES -- A jury yesterday convicted a renowned geneticist of molesting
the daughter of a colleague, rejecting the defense's contention that he was only
a kindly mentor to the girl.

   William French Anderson, 69, is widely credited as the "father of gene
therapy," a promising but controversial experimental medical treatment that
involves injecting healthy genes into sick patients.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              672 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday
                                   0 Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1267 words

HEADLINE: Who will finish first in the never-ending race?

BYLINE: LISA GREENE

BODY:

   Cyclists want to win the Tour de France so much that they train up and down
mountains and even compete with broken bones.

   But how many will cheat to win is a question that looms over this year's
Tour, the first in the post-Lance Armstrong era, now that a drug scandal has
clouded the world's most famous cycling race.

   The day before the tour began, several of the top contenders, including four
top finishers in last year's race, were barred from competing because they
became entangled in a Spanish investigation into blood doping.

   Such accusations have dogged the sport since the 1980s, when athletes began
to realize that a medical breakthrough to treat anemia also could help them
improve performance.

   Now athletes and the scientists who police them compete in a different kind
of race. Which can they get faster: new tests to catch cheaters, or new ways to
beat the tests?

   It's a strange game. Telltale evidence includes the electric signature of
cells from Chinese hamster ovaries. Athletes must be willing to pee on demand,
any time, anywhere in the world. Talk about "good intelligence" doesn't refer to
terrorist cells, but to the ability to find blood transfusion bags.

   Many cyclists use erythropoietin, or EPO, a hormone that helps boost the
body's production of red blood cells, said Dr. Don Catlin, director of the UCLA
Olympic Analytical Laboratory, the only U.S. lab accredited for drug testing by
the World Anti-Doping Agency.

   "We've known it for many, many years," Catlin said. "Not only in cycling, but
in other endurance sports - cross-country skiing, long-distance running. ... It
keeps showing up."

   The methods used to cheat in cycling and endurance sports differ from taking
steroids, the power sports drug of choice. They're a little more mysterious and
a lot more sophisticated. Unlike steroids, aspiring high school athletes can't
just order transfusion equipment from a handy Web site.

   But in the split-second finishes of competitive cycling, using EPO can move
an athlete from last to first.

   It also can kill.

   Red blood cells are the fuel trucks of the body, moving oxygen into muscles
that use it rapidly as cyclists spin their wheels. More red blood cells mean
more oxygen to the muscles and more cycling power.

   This is why blood doping is so effective. Cyclists inject either red blood
cells - their own stored cells or someone else's - or EPO so their muscles can
get more oxygen.

   But turbocharged blood comes with a risk. Extra red blood cells make blood
thicker. So does dehydration. A doped cyclist combines them. If the blood gets
too thick, then it can no longer pass through blood vessels and deliver oxygen.
The result can be a stroke, heart attack or death.

   "You have to be very, very careful," said Dr. Eric Coris, director of the
University of South Florida Division of Sports Medicine. "Particularly when
you're looking at a sport that's so intense aerobically, increasing your risk
for stroke and heart attack is not a good thing to do."

   Mysterious deaths are what first alerted Dr. Gary I. Wadler, a member of the
World Anti-Doping Agency, to the possibility that elite athletes were using EPO.
Between 1987 and 1990, scientists suspect that EPO use killed 18 Belgian and
Dutch cyclists.

   "These were the most fit people in their countries, and they were dying
inexplicably," said Wadler, also a clinical associate professor at the New York
University School of Medicine and lead author of a textbook, Drugs and the
Athlete. "I couldn't prove it ... but one could not escape this."

   It wasn't surprising, really, Wadler said. The deaths began just a few years
after EPO was introduced in the medical field, becoming a lifesaver for people
with severe anemia, chronic kidney disease and other problems.

   "It's one of the real dramatic therapeutic breakthroughs of the last 50
years," Wadler said.

   But that's how cheating in sports often works, Wadler said: Cheaters look at
how they can turn medical advances to their benefits. That's why Wadler and his
colleagues are now looking at using gene therapies in medicine.

   "It inevitably will be a challenge ... so we can be one step ahead," he said.

   Testing for blood doping now presents a challenge as well. In the Tour de
France, athletes' blood is tested to make sure their level of red blood cells is
below 50 percent. Above that isn't evidence of drug use, but the cyclist isn't
allowed to race.

   Synthetic EPO stays in the body only for about three days. A urine test for
EPO was developed in 2000, and while some athletes have attacked the test, the
World Anti-Doping Agency insists it's reliable.

   The test is based on the fact that synthetic EPO is made from cells of
Chinese hamster ovaries or, sometimes, mouse kidneys. By separating the EPO
proteins by their electrical charges, scientists can see the difference.

   The proteins, which are placed on a membrane, line up like ladder rungs.
Human EPO lines up in a different spot than synthetic EPO.

   But getting a test at the right time remains a challenge.

   "The trick is, for the doping agencies, we're very thoughtful about when we
go to collect the sample," said Larry Bowers, senior managing director at the
U.S. Anti-Doping Agency. "We don't necessarily go to a competition. We don't
necessarily advertise how we decide."

   Cyclists also can boost their red cell count with a blood transfusion. U.S.
Olympic gold medalist Tyler Hamilton was banned from competition for two years
after a test indicated some of his blood cells didn't match his DNA. Hamilton
has protested his suspension and says the test was flawed.

   But scientists, clearly skeptical of Hamilton's claims, say athletes commonly
attack the test. At UCLA, Catlin said his lab has false negatives, not false
positives.

   Scientists still can't test for athletes who transfuse their own blood. The
way it works: Remove the blood, store it while the body produces more, then
transfuse it back.

   The one difficulty with all such transfusions is that athletes can't do that
themselves. Coris says it's one reason that, unlike steroids, EPO and blood
doping doesn't seem to have drifted down to college and high school athletes.

   "I don't think the money is there, and the sophistication and demand is
there, to justify sophisticated blood-doping techniques," he said.

   Finding transfusion equipment and shady doctors can be the best way to catch
cyclists.

   "In the fight against doping, it's not only the science, it's the
intelligence," Wadler said. "It's the intelligence, in 1998 and 2006, that
caused the Tour de France to wind up in the newspapers. You're at risk if you've
got this paraphernalia."

   Despite the risk, Bowers can see why athletes are so tempted. In one Olympic
cycling event in Athens 2004, he pointed out, the difference between first and
17th place was less than seven seconds.

   "Increasing oxygen to the tissues, by whatever means you do it, is probably
the most effective way of improving your performance," he said.

   That's why Bowers said he tries to think like the people he's trying to
catch.

   "Part of my job is to figure out what I would do if I were trying to help
somebody cheat," he said. "And then how to circumvent that."

   BOOTED FROM COMPETITION

   The day before the Tour de France began, nine riders were forced out of
competition because they were implicated in a widespread blood-doping
investigation in Spain. Among those who left the race were 1997 Tour champion
Jan Ullrich, who finished third last year; Ivan Basso, who finished second; and
Francesco Mancebo, who finished fourth. Last year's fifth-place finisher,
Alexandre Vinokourov, wasn't implicated, but had to drop out because his
teammates were ousted.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GETTY IMAGES; PHOTO, (4); DRAWING, MCCLATCHY-TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              673 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 889 words

HEADLINE: Tulane stem cell unit lines up trials;
Patient's cells may be used to heal

BYLINE: By Leslie Williams, Staff writer

BODY:

   Tulane University introduced on Wednesday the latest addition to its
expanding medical ventures: a million-dollar Good Manufacturing Practice
facility that will grow large numbers of adult stem cells that one day may be
used to treat long-term, debilitating diseases.

   Already, stem cells grown at the facility on the 21st floor of the former
Tidewater building at 1440 Canal St. are scheduled to be used in trials in
Atlanta and New Orleans, said Dr. Darwin Prockop, medical director of the
facility.

   Adult stem cells produced at the facility will be used in trials in October
for patients in Atlanta with injured spinal cords, Prockop said.

   In about six months in New Orleans, adult stem cell therapy trials are
scheduled for people suffering from heart disease and diabetes, he said.

   The field of gene therapy has "taken off," Prockop said. "It's a big day for
us, a big step forward."

   Six years ago, Prockop was lured to Tulane from his post as director of the
Gene Therapy Center at MCP Hahnemann University in Pennsylvania.

   Paul Whelton, Tulane's senior vice president for health sciences, called
Prockop the "father figure and forerunner of this whole area of gene therapy in
the days when they called it molecular medicine."

   "When we were doing strategic planning several years ago, thinking what are
the areas we are going to focus on . . . our faculty came back and said there
was one area where we don't have real strength now, but we think it's so
important we must be in it," Whelton recalled. "And they said to me the best
person in the world who leads this area is Dr. Prockop . . . and in about six
years he has done such a magnificent job."

   Each of the trials in New Orleans likely will include six to 10 people.

   Embryonic cells have nothing to do with the procedure.

   "We deal with cells that we get from the patient we are treating. We get bone
marrow from the patient," said Prockop, who also is the director of Tulane's
Center for Gene Therapy. "It's a rather simple procedure: needle, syringe and
local anesthesia. It hurts a little bit, but not so much. You get a teaspoon of
bone marrow, bring it up to the 21st floor of this building where the GMP
facility is, and the crew we have there will produce about 300 million cells.
And those are the cells that go back into the same patient. And they're
marvelous cells . . . . they have this ability to find a place in the body with
damaged tissue and fix it."

   The Good Manufacturing Practice facility, which officially opened Wednesday,
was set up with about $1 million, money primarily from Tulane University, the
Louisiana Gene Therapy Research Consortium and the National Institutes of
Health. So far, it has a $700,000 annual operating budget and a staff of seven
people.

   The 25-story building at 1140 Canal St. also houses Tulane University's
School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine and administrative offices of
Tulane's Health Sciences Center.

   Repairing damaged cells

   The stem-cell manufacturing facility is supported by Tulane University's $25
million Center for Gene Therapy, Whelton said. Scientists believe stem-cell
therapy or regenerative medicine over time may one day repair damaged cells in
the bone, brain, heart, lung and kidney.

   Stem cells offer the possibility of a renewable resource to treat diseases
such as cancer, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, osteoarthritis and diabetes, said
Prockop, who was thanked for his work Wednesday by District B Councilwoman Stacy
Head.

   Her husband, she said, has juvenile diabetes and may one day benefit from the
stem-cell work in New Orleans.

   Prockop agreed.

   "Our results from animal experiments suggest we can help," he said.

   In about six months, the treatment for diabetes may be outpatient, said
Prockop, who brought Donald Phinney, an associate professor of microbiology,
with him when he left Pennsylvania for a Tulane University that, he said, was
supportive of stem-cell research and an educational community in New Orleans
that was investing money into such research and building facilities to support
it.

   Phinney conducts research at Tulane's Primate Center with monkey stem cells
and brain diseases.

   Other researchers on Dr. Prockop's team, who work at the Tulane Center for
Gene Therapy, include:

   -- Bruce Bunnell, an associate professor of pharmacology who works with
viruses that are used to transport the stem cells into the body.

   -- Carl Gregory, an assistant professor of medicine who creates conditions
favorable to manufacturing cells and using them to treat cancer of the bone in
animals.

   -- Radhika Pochampally, an assistant professor in pharmacology who works on
obtaining the most effective stem cells.

   "Back in the year 2000, there were few believers in these cells. Now there
are many believers out there," Prockop said.

   "The field that's taking off most is heart disease, and there now must be
something like 2,000, perhaps 3,000, patients being treated with bone-marrow
cells for heart disease of various kinds," he continued. "We're not the first,
but we want to be the best. And we'd like people with these diseases . . . to
come here to New Orleans, Louisiana  --  not to fly off to Bangkok, which is
advertised on the Internet for patients. We want them here, because we think . .
. we have the best cells."

   . . . . . . .

   Leslie Williams can be reached at lwilliams@timespicayune.com or at (504)
826-3358.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              674 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A13

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Geneticist Is Convicted of Sex Abuse

BYLINE: Sonya Geis, Washington Post Staff Writer

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES July 19

BODY:

   World-renowned geneticist William French Anderson was convicted Wednesday of
molesting the daughter of his lab director.

     The month-long trial aired his substantial scientific accomplishments and
graphic descriptions of alleged abuse of  a pre-adolescent girl. He faces 22
years in prison and is to be sentenced on Nov. 17.

     "We are pleased by the verdict and glad the victim will now have justice,"
said Cathryn Brougham, an assistant district attorney.

    Anderson, 69, became the first person to use gene therapy to treat a patient
when he injected healthy genes into a 4-year-old girl with a hereditary immune
system deficiency  in 1990. Anderson founded and is now director of the Gene
Therapy Laboratories at the University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine. He has been on leave since he was arrested in 2004.

    Anderson's wife, Kathryn Anderson, is former chief surgeon at Children's
Hospital Los Angeles and current president of the American College of Surgeons.
The couple has no children.

     The accuser, now a 19-year-old college student, is one of two daughters
whose mother runs Anderson's lab. The young woman testified that she spent much
free time at the Anderson home between ages  9 and 16. Anderson, who holds a
fifth-degree black belt in tae kwon do, gave the girl weekly martial arts
lessons and helped her with a science fair project.

     He also fondled her on a monthly basis for five years beginning when she
was 10, the young woman said.

    Defense attorneys called the accuser a disturbed young woman, who had cut
and burned herself. They also accused the student's mother of fabricating the
allegations  as part of a plot to run the lab.

    Jurors heard a secret recording the accuser made at the request of police.
On the tape, she confronts Anderson, recounting the times he molested her. He
responds, "What can I say, I did a horrible thing that ruined your life. What
can I do?"

    Anderson denied the accusations. He said when the girl confronted him, he
believed she was referring to emotional abuse he inflicted by pushing her to
excel.

      Anderson  was also arrested in February 2005 after a Maryland man accused
him of molesting him during karate lessons when he was a child and while
Anderson was working at the National Institutes of Health. Maryland prosecutors
dropped the case  before it was to go to trial in September because evidence was
ruled inadmissible, authorities said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                              675 of 783 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2006 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                      July 18, 2006 Tuesday Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES - HEALTHY LIVING; Pg. 2E

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Mergla protein tied to relieving muscle atrophy

BYLINE: BY BARB BERGGOETZ BARB.BERGGOETZ@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Purdue University researchers have found a chemical "switch" in the body that
enables them to turn off or arrest muscle atrophy caused by aging, lack of use
and diseases such as cancer.

   School of Veterinary Medicine researchers discovered a direct link between
atrophy and a protein called Mergla in the skeletal muscle.

   "No one has ever tied this protein to muscle atrophy," said Amber Pond, a
research scientist in the school's Department of Basic Medical Sciences.

   Results of the three-year project, funded primarily by the American Heart
Association, are published in the July issue of the Federation of American
Societies for Experimental Biology.

   The findings eventually may help those who are bedridden and, as a result,
lose muscle mass or limbs due to atrophy, according to Pond.

   Researchers found that atrophy of skeletal muscle in mice could be arrested
with both gene therapy and drug treatment. However, the drug used, an
antihistamine called astemizole, wouldn't be suitable for humans. It was
withdrawn from the market in 2000 due to potential cardiovascular problems.

   But Pond said the important step was first finding the "target" -- the
protein capable of sensing muscle disuse. Through the drug treatment to mice,
researchers were able to block atrophy, allowing muscle to keep 97 percent of
its original size.

   The researchers' next task is to elicit the help of pharmacologists or
chemists to help design a drug that will affect the muscle without injuring the
human heart.

   While they have already made some progress in doing this, Pond said it
probably will be a slow process to design, test and get the drug approved.

   "If a drug specific for skeletal muscles were produced, it would improve the
quality of life for aging people, improve rehabilitation of people who are
bedridden and probably prolong the life of cancer patients," said Pond.

   The research, she added, also has ramifications for space flight because a
drug could make longer trips more feasible without causing muscle atrophy in
astronauts.

   Call Star reporter Barb Berggoetz at (317) 444-6294.

LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2006


                              676 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             July 18, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES - HEALTHY LIVING; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: Mergla protein tied to relieving muscle atrophy

BYLINE: BARB BERGGOETZ BARB.BERGGOETZ@INDYSTAR.COM

BODY:

   Purdue University researchers have found a chemical "switch" in the body that
enables them to turn off or arrest muscle atrophy caused by aging, lack of use
and diseases such as cancer.

   School of Veterinary Medicine researchers discovered a direct link between
atrophy and a protein called Mergla in the skeletal muscle.

   "No one has ever tied this protein to muscle atrophy," said Amber Pond, a
research scientist in the school's Department of Basic Medical Sciences.

   Results of the three-year project, funded primarily by the American Heart
Association, are published in the July issue of the Federation of American
Societies for Experimental Biology.

   The findings eventually may help those who are bedridden and, as a result,
lose muscle mass or limbs due to atrophy, according to Pond.

   Researchers found that atrophy of skeletal muscle in mice could be arrested
with both gene therapy and drug treatment. However, the drug used, an
antihistamine called astemizole, wouldn't be suitable for humans. It was
withdrawn from the market in 2000 due to potential cardiovascular problems.

   But Pond said the important step was first finding the "target" -- the
protein capable of sensing muscle disuse. Through the drug treatment to mice,
researchers were able to block atrophy, allowing muscle to keep 97 percent of
its original size.

   The researchers' next task is to elicit the help of pharmacologists or
chemists to help design a drug that will affect the muscle without injuring the
human heart.

   While they have already made some progress in doing this, Pond said it
probably will be a slow process to design, test and get the drug approved.

   "If a drug specific for skeletal muscles were produced, it would improve the
quality of life for aging people, improve rehabilitation of people who are
bedridden and probably prolong the life of cancer patients," said Pond.

   The research, she added, also has ramifications for space flight because a
drug could make longer trips more feasible without causing muscle atrophy in
astronauts.

   Call Star reporter Barb Berggoetz at (317) 444-6294.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2007


                              677 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             July 18, 2006 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: Scientist in Sexual Abuse Case Hears Recordings in Courtroom;
Conversation indicates that William French Anderson molested student,
prosecutors say.

BYLINE: Peter Y. Hong, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   A renowned scientist sat expressionless Monday as prosecutors played
recordings of a conversation that they said amounted to an admission that he
sexually abused the daughter of a lab colleague over a five-year period.

   The recordings were part of the prosecution's closing arguments in the trial
of USC scientist William French Anderson.

   As his voice resounded through the courtroom, Anderson, silver-haired and
stone-faced, held his left hand up near his chin, his clenched fingers showing
his wedding band. His wife, a retired surgeon, looked to the floor, her hands
tucked into the sleeves of her cardigan.

   "It gets worse as I grow older," the accuser says in the recording. "When I
go to sleepovers, as girls, we talk. I can't. I don't know what to do." Anderson
answers pleadingly, "What can I say, I did a horrible thing that ruined your
life. What can I do?"

   In profanity-laced outbursts, the girl recalls alleged incidents in which
Anderson had her strip naked at his house. Anderson apologizes repeatedly
without mentioning specifics, then offers the girl a ride.

   When the playback stopped, one juror wiped his eyes. Prosecutor Cathryn
Brougham told the jury "you will not get a stronger case of molestation,"
calling Anderson's alleged crime "harm that will never go away. Short of taking
someone's life, this is as horrendous as it gets."

   But Anderson's lawyer, Barry Tarlow, told jurors that what really was
horrendous was the smearing of a scientist sometimes called "the father of gene
therapy." Tarlow said Anderson had been a father figure and mentor to the girl,
and, if anything, is guilty of pushing her too hard to succeed as a student and
athlete.

   The recorded apology, Tarlow said, had nothing to do with sexual abuse.
"Shouldn't he apologize if she crashed because of emotional abuse?" Tarlow said.

   As he argued during the trial, Tarlow said the victim was motivated by
financial gain, noting that she contacted lawyers at a high-powered law firm
early in the case. Tarlow also pointed out contradictions in statements the girl
made in court and to investigators or counselors. Tarlow noted, for instance,
that she said Anderson, who coached her in taekwondo, groped her while they
worked out with a punching bag; on one occasion she said the incident occurred
in the garage of Anderson's house, and on another she said it happened in his
backyard.

   Tarlow argued during the trial that the girl's mother, who was second in
command at Anderson's lab, was trying to smear him to usurp his position. He
repeated the assertion in his closing argument, saying she hoped Anderson would
have to resign, leaving her interim director and in a strong position to win the
job permanently.

   Anderson is accused of molesting the girl beginning in 1997, when she was 10
and Anderson was 60. The abuse allegedly began during Saturday morning taekwondo
lessons at his San Marino home.

   Tarlow said abuse could not have occurred because Anderson's wife and the
girl's mother and sister were often present at the lessons, which prosecutors
disputed.

   Neither side disputes that Anderson and his accuser had a close relationship.
Anderson bought the girl and her twin sister bicycles for Christmas. He helped
them get into a summer program at Stanford University and monitored the
accuser's progress in geometry class with her teacher. Anderson bought the
girl's prom dress and allowed her and her sister to host a sleepover party for
their friends at his house. He also bought her meals at the Ritz-Carlton in
Pasadena and at a restaurant in San Marino.

   Tarlow said those ties showed the father-like mentor relationship Anderson
innocently maintained with the girl. Brougham said the gifts and support were
calculated manipulations by Anderson to set up his abuse.

   Tarlow said the brilliant Anderson might have sometimes acted stupidly.
"Nothing about having a 176 IQ means you have good judgment" socially, Tarlow
said.

   One example of poor judgment was an e-mail Anderson sent the girl. In it, he
ponders suicide and the harm it could cause humanity: "My whole career could go
down the tubes and thousands of people could be abandoned who could be helped by
cures your mother and I are developing."

   Anderson wrote: a "Black Talon 9mm bullet is said to be able to blow half
your brain out of the other side of your skull. Just in case, I have bought the
ammunition."

   Brougham said such statements help explain the girl's reluctance to come
forward and the contradictions in her statements. Tarlow said the e-mail showed
that Anderson was "worried things were going to go public; he does not know what
they are." The e-mail, Tarlow said, was "dumb, he shouldn't have done it, but it
doesn't prove a crime."

   Closing arguments were to conclude today.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: DEFENDANT: William French Anderson at a 2005 extradition hearing
in Los Angeles. The USC scientist is accused of sexually abusing the daughter of
a lab colleague over a five-year period.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Walt Mancini Pool Photo

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2006


                              678 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              July 16, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: CURRENTS; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1352 words

HEADLINE: Please write a headline for cu1cover16 here, thanks! Typety typety
type

BODY:

   A key point to keep in mind as we contemplate the future: The pace of change
is accelerating.

   And that means our power to expand the boundaries of human knowledge and
accomplishment is accelerating, too.

   That the pace of change is accelerating may seem obvious, but most people
fail to take it into consideration. According to my models, we are doubling the
"paradigm-shift rate" (roughly the rate of technical progress) every decade, so
we'll see twice the change in the next decade that we saw in the last, four
times the change in the next 20 years that we saw in the last 20, and so on.

   The power of information technology is doubling even faster: in less than one
year. This means that information technology, as measured by price performance
and capacity, will multiply by 1,000 in less than a decade and 1 billion in 25
years. At the same time, we are shrinking the size of technology by a 100 (per
3-D volume) each decade, so the key features of our technology will be 100,000
times smaller in 25 years. That means the equivalent of your iPod nano will be
smaller than a human hair.

   But information technology is more than just computers and electronics. It is
increasingly encompassing everything we care about. Take, for example, our
health. Up until just recently, biology and medicine were hit or miss. We would
find something that, say, lowered blood pressure, but we had no realistic models
of how these drugs worked. And invariably, these crude tools had many side
effects. Almost all the drugs on the market today were developed and marketed
with this approach.

   The new paradigm is to understand and reprogram our biology. The completion
of the human genome (our genetic code) project three years ago is now allowing
us to do that. This process is also exponential: The amount of genetic data we
are able to sequence (decode) has doubled every 10 months, while the price for
decoding each gene base pair drops by half in the same time frame (from $10 per
base pair in 1990 to less than a penny today). For example, it took us 15 years
to sequence HIV, yet we sequenced the SARS virus in only 31 days, and can now
sequence a virus in just a few days.

   Being able to decode the human genome allows us to develop detailed models of
how major diseases, such as heart disease and cancer, progress, and gives us the
tools to reprogram those processes away from disease. For example, a technique
called RNA interference allows us to turn unhealthy genes off. New forms of gene
therapy are also allowing us to add healthy new genes. And we can turn on and
off enzymes, the workhorses of biology. Pfizer Inc.'s cholesterol-lowering drug
Torcetrapib, for example, turns off one specific enzyme that allows
atherosclerosis, the cause of almost all heart attacks, to progress. Phase II
FDA trials showed it was effective in preventing heart disease, so Pfizer is
spending a record $1 billion on the phase III trials. And that's just one
example of thousands of this "rational drug design" approach now under way.

   We are also understanding the thinking processes in our brain as information
processes, and here again the progress is exponential, not linear. The spatial
resolution (how small we can see) of brain scanning is halving in 3-D volume
each year, and, for the first time, we are now actually able to see how brains
create our thoughts. We can also see how our thoughts create our brain - in the
form of new connections representing what we've learned.

   The amount of data we are collecting about the brain is doubling each year,
and we are demonstrating that we can turn these massive databases into effective
models and simulations of actual brain regions. For example, there is a detailed
computer simulation of more than a dozen regions of the auditory cortex that
perform similarly to human auditory perception in tests, and another effective
simulation of the human cerebellum, which is responsible for skill formation and
comprises about half the neurons in the brain.

   The significance of exponential growth of technology is that the future is
surprising. It comprises far more capability and change than our "intuitive"
linear perspectives (steady, even growth) indicate. Many people believe the
future is impossible to predict (and there is no shortage of bad futurist
predictions to support that idea). True, any specific project is indeed
unpredictable. But I've concluded that the overall power of information
technology resulting from the vast complex system of technology evolution is
remarkably predictable. Computers, for example, have been growing smoothly and
exponentially in capability and price-performance for more than a century.

   So what does the future hold? By 2019, we will largely overcome the major
diseases that kill 95 percent of us in the developed world, and we will be
dramatically slowing and reversing the dozen or so processes that underlie
aging. We will be adding more than a year each year to remaining life
expectancy, so the amount of time individual human beings have "left" on average
will actually get longer each year.

   Computers won't be the large objects we carry around now, such as iPods,
phones, PDAs and laptops. There will be a seamless mesh of trillions of tiny
computing and communication devices deeply embedded in our environment, in our
clothing, and making their way into our bodies. Images will be written to our
retinas from our eyeglasses, creating full-immersion virtual-reality
environments. We will also have means of physically touching one another in
these environments, so we'll be spending more and more of our time interacting
with each other in increasingly realistic virtual-reality environments.

   We'll be able to talk to people speaking other languages, with real-time
speech-to-speech language translation systems (I'm already doing this with a
prototype system I've put together). We'll have augmented "real reality," with
pop-up displays in our visual field of view giving us reminders about the
people, buildings and objects in our environment (just reminding us what
people's names are will be quite helpful).

   By 2029, these progressions will become truly interesting. By that time, the
power of information technology in all these varied domains will increase in
capability a billionfold, while the size of key features will shrink by 100,000.

   Intelligent "nanobots" - robots the size of blood cells - will keep us
healthy from inside, indefinitely extending human longevity. These nanobots will
also go inside our brains through the capillaries, and interact with our
biological neurons. One application will be full-immersion virtual reality from
inside the nervous system, incorporating all of our senses. When we want to go
into a virtual-reality environment, the nanobots will shut down the signals from
our eyes and other senses, and replace them with signals generated by the
virtual-reality environment. There will be a vast and rapidly increasing number
of virtual environments to choose from, and you will be able to go to these
virtual places by yourself or with others.

   The most significant implication of these developments is that we will
directly extend human intelligence. Arguably, we are doing that already - we
routinely perform intellectual feats that would be impossible without our
computers. Few professionals today could do their jobs at all without the
brain-extenders all around us. When these sublimely intelligent devices are
intimately integrated into our bodies and brains, we will dramatically extend
human capability.

   Will we still be human? In my view, this is exactly what being human is all
about: expanding beyond our limitations.

ONLINE EXTRA

   For an epic self-interview by Ray Kurzweil, go to
http://go.philly.com/singularity

   Other Kurzweil-related Web sites:

   For KurzweilAI.net, a major source for information on artificial
intelligence, go to http://www.KurzweilAI.net

   Go to Web sites dedicated to his books: http://www.singularity.com for "The
Singularity Is Near" and http://www.Fantastic-Voyage.

   net for "Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough to Live Forever."

   Contact Ray Kurzweil at raymond@kurzweiltech.com.

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2006


                              679 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             July 13, 2006 Thursday

LENGTH: 154 words

HEADLINE: Covalent wins two clinical-trial contracts

BYLINE: INQUIRER STAFF

BODY:

   Covalent Group Inc. said today it had signed two cardiovascular disease
contracts valued at a combined $1.5 million.

   Under the contracts, the Wayne company will provide consulting services and
support for clinical operations involving early-phase clinical trials, which are
offering advanced therapeutic approaches to patients with severe heart failure.

   The first study uses gene therapy/transfer techniques to try to correct a
molecular abnormality in patients with advanced heart failure.

   The second study uses transplantation of bone-marrow mononuclear stem cells
to potentially improve conditions for heart failure patients who are not
eligible for conventional therapy.

   The contracts are expected to start in the current quarter.

   Covalent designs, develops and manages clinical trials and patient registries
for pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies. Its shares were up 14 cents to
$2.72 in early-afternoon Nasdaq trading.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2006


                              680 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                              July 10, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 806 words

HEADLINE: WHEN HUMANS TRANSCEND BIOLOGY

BYLINE:  BY CATHY YOUNG

BODY:

   WITH EVERYTHING else that's happening in the world today, debates about
whether humanity should embrace as yet nonexistent technologies that could
enhance our physical and intellectual abilities and someday make us "more than
human" may seem frivolous. Nonetheless, a debate on "transhumanism" has been
going on for the past few years, with naysayers and doomsayers on one side,
optimistic futurists on the other, and too little in between.

   Writing in a recent issue of The Weekly Standard, Wesley J. Smith, a senior
fellow at the Discovery Institute (a conservative think tank best known for
championing the cause of "intelligent design"), falls squarely on the naysayers'
side. Smith discusses a symposium, "Human Enhancement Technologies and Human
Rights," held at Stanford Law School in May, and does not like what he sees.
Some speakers are obsessed with achieving immortality, and others with uplifting
animals to a human level of intelligence. Some talk about changing human biology
so that women could have babies without any male input and men could become
biological mothers by gestating fetuses inside their bodies. Still others speak
with praise of a transhumanist pioneer known as "the Catman," who has undergone
cosmetic surgeries to make himself look like a cat.

   A lot of this sounds utopian or downright wacky, but there are plenty of
people who take transhumanism seriously. There are several recent books
exploring the topic, including "The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend
Biology" by inventor Ray Kurzweil and "Liberation Biology: The Scientific and
Moral Case for the Biotech Revolution" by science journalist (and my Reason
magazine colleague) Ron Bailey.

   In popular culture, the desire to transcend biology whether through genetic
engineering or artificial cyber-intelligence is almost invariably treated as a
dangerous, Frankenstein-like pursuit driven by human arrogance and recklessness,
and likely to have disastrous consequences. Proponents of enhancement argue that
this is nothing more than a knee-jerk fear of the unknown. Bailey points out
that people have been using technology to enhance their lives and their
abilities from time immemorial, and there is nothing radically new about
altering our bodies or our brains for that purpose. That's true, of course, but
there is a big difference between wearing glasses and, say, redesigning humans
to give them an extra eye in the back of the head.

   Some opposition to biotechnology is indeed rooted in knee-jerk fear of
change. Smith, for instance, sees something sinister about the proposal to
reduce menstruation in fertile women to four times a year and about the desire
to eliminate the physical effects of aging. But the optimists ignore some
disturbing implications of enhancement. One need not be a radical egalitarian to
be troubled by the prospect of a society in which the affluent can add genetic
enhancement to their children's advantages while the have-nots fall further
behind.

   The libertarian argument for genetic enhancement is that parents should be
free to choose what's best for the children. Rarely considered is the
possibility that some might define "best" in ways that are not only peculiar but
harmful. Even leaving aside oddballs who may want their child to be a cat
person, what if some people decided to breed submissive females or boys
genetically purged of competitiveness, aggressiveness, and other macho traits?

   What's more, the choices may not be entirely free. Aldous Huxley's "Brave New
World," in which the state determines each child's genetic programming, is an
unlikely future. But what about more subtle coercion? Suppose we get to the
point where genetic intervention, or chemical brain modification for those
already born, can reduce the risk of criminal behavior. Could parents be charged
with negligence if they reject such procedures and their child commits a crime?
Could a teenager with antisocial tendencies be forced to undergo the treatment?
What about the scenario depicted in the film "Gattaca," in which the unenhanced
become an underclass, and prospective parents face tremendous social pressure to
genetically engineer their children?

   None of this is to call for a ban on genetic engineering research. For one
thing, gene therapy targeting various diseases could alleviate much human
suffering, and even improvements in the baseline such as slowing down the aging
process could be highly beneficial. But enhancement enthusiasts tend to forget
that even beneficial changes can have a downside and that life can confront us
with tragic paradox. Moreover, opposition to government bans on morally
problematic uses of biotechnology should not foreclose a debate about moral
issues or a voluntary decision by scientists not to go down certain paths. The
abdication of moral judgment could invite intrusive laws.

NOTES: Cathy Young is a contributing editor at Reason magazine. Her column
appears regularly in the Globe.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2006


                              681 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                              July 10, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: G Pulse; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: Technique offers hope against hemophilia;
Bleeding stops in mice with clotting disease

BYLINE: KAWANZA NEWSON, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Local researchers have used a strategy that delivers a critical clotting
protein through blood cells to prevent hemorrhaging in mice with hemophilia, a
preliminary finding that may improve treatment of people with the hereditary
bleeding disorder.

    Although it is unknown if the technique ultimately will work in humans, the
research provides particular hope for the small percentage of patients who don't
respond to the standard treatment option.

    "If you can make this work in people, it would be a good boon," said Eliot
Williams, a professor of medicine at the University of Wisconsin Medical School
who was not involved in the study.

    However, there are two major hurdles to cross, he said.

    First, techniques that work well in mice might not give similar results in
humans and second, gene transfer to correct defective genes responsible for
disease development has not been proven safe and effective in humans, Williams
said.

    Hemophilia A is a genetic condition that primarily affects males. It is
caused by the lack of a clotting protein called Factor VIII that helps the blood
platelets stick together to clog openings at an injury site.

    Typical treatment, known as replacement therapy, involves infusion or
injection of a genetically engineered clotting factor directly into the
bloodstream two to three times a week. Replacement therapy can be given on a
regular basis to prevent bleeding or as needed to stop bleeding. However, 20% to
30% of patients develop antibodies that destroy the clotting factor before it
has a chance to work.

    Delayed treatment can lead to complications such as joint damage.

    For the study, researchers from the Medical College of Wisconsin and the
BloodCenter of Wisconsin inserted a gene into a blood stem cell so that Factor
VIII could be produced and stored in blood platelets.

    Placing the clotting factor inside a platelet essentially hides it from the
antibodies that could attack it, said Robert Montgomery, co-author of the study
and a senior investigator at the BloodCenter.

    However, it also ensures that the clotting factor only gets released when
it's needed at the site where it should be, said Montgomery, who also is a
professor of pediatric hematology at the Medical College.

    The researchers then treated the mice with high quantities of the antibody
known to prevent Factor VIII from functioning properly. Even in the presence of
the inhibitory antibodies, the mice were able to form clots quickly, meaning
that Factor VIII function was not affected.

    The study is published in the Journal of Clinical Investigation.

    The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute estimates that there are about
18,000 people in the United States living with hemophilia. Each year, about 400
babies are born with the disorder, according to the institute.

    The last major development for hemophilia treatment was about 20 years ago,
though some modifications have occurred since then, said Katherine High, an
investigator with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute in Philadelphia and
professor of pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania who was not involved
in the latest research.

    "This new study demonstrates very clearly that the treatment strategy can be
successful, even in the face of high (levels) of inhibitors," she said.

    "In the long term, it is likely that there will be multiple successful
strategies for gene transfers in hemophilia," she said.

    The promise of gene therapy was tarnished beginning in 1999 after a death in
a clinical trial, a life-threatening side effect in a cystic fibrosis patient in
another, and revelations about financial conflicts of interest involving some
researchers in the field.

    Researchers say much more work needs to be done before the gene therapy
technique can be tested in humans.

   Copyright 2006, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2006


                              682 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: FEATURES - LIFE; Pg. 07H

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: THE SOCIETY PAGE: OUT AND ABOUT

BODY:

   * Event: Breakfast With the Bishop

   * Date: May 31

   * Location: Hyatt Regency

   * Ticket price: $35

   * Attendance: 580

   * Beneficiary: Catholic Social Services

   * Highlights: breakfast; keynote speaker Bishop Frederick F. Campbell; guest
speaker Michael F. Curtin, associate publisher of The Dispatch; Star Award
presentation

   * Money raised: $25,000

   * Event: Distinguished Donors Event

   * Date: April 30

   * Location: Bexley home of Yana and Jimmy Schottenstein

   * Ticket price: $25

   * Attendance: 36

   * Beneficiary: Hadassah Medical Organization in Jerusalem

   * Evening highlights: presentations by Jo Aimee Ostrov, Hadassah major-gifts
chairwoman, and psychotherapist Jerilyn Wolman

GRAPHIC: Photo, Honoring a star, Don Wisler, president of Catholic Social
Services, presents the Star Award to Ruth Beckman, director of the Joint
Operation for Inner-City Needs. More than $25,000 was raised during the event.,
Lending a hand R.S.V.P, The turnout for a benefit assisting the Hadassah Medical
Organization pleases host Yana Schottenstein, left, and chairwomen Leslie
Wasserstrom, center, and Viki Norman. Much of the money is designated for
breast-cancer and gene-therapy research.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 2006


                              683 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                             June 17, 2006 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. A32

LENGTH: 873 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BYLINE: From Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Chicago Tribune and Post-Dispatch
reports

BODY:

   AUTOMOBILES

   Some workers at Illinois plant will get lower pay

   The Chrysler Group's assembly plant in Belvidere, Ill., will hire a large
number of workers for a new third shift who will get less pay and job security
than other United Auto Workers members.

   Chrysler spokeswoman Michele Tinson said "less than half" the 1,000 workers
for the third shift would be new employees hired as temporaries. The rest are
UAW members who transfer from other Chrysler plants or the "jobs bank," a
holding tank for laid-off union workers who receive base wages and benefits
indefinitely.

   Under the Chrysler plan, the temporary workers will be hired as UAW members
under two-year contracts starting at $18 per hour, about $9 less than other UAW
members. They will not be eligible for medical benefits for eight months or have
the same job security. They can be fired at any time and will not be eligible
for the jobs bank.

   BANKING

   First Bank buys firm with 2 Chicago area locations

   First Banks Inc. of Clayton is acquiring a bank with two locations in the
Chicago area for $13.9 million in cash.

   First Banks is buying TeamCo, a bank holding company that owns Oak Lawn Bank
of Oak Lawn, Ill., and a second banking office in Orland Park, Ill.

   As of March 31, TeamCo had assets of $68.6 million and $60.4 million in
deposits. As of the same date, First Banks had assets of $9.4 billion and
deposits of $7.9 billion. First Banks has 182 offices in Missouri, Illinois,
California and Texas.

   BIOTECHNOLOGY

   Sigma-Aldrich sues over research tool patent

   Sigma-Aldrich Corp. and Oxford BioMedica are suing Open Biosystems Inc. for
alleged patent infringement on a tool used in genetic research.

   St. Louis-based Sigma-Aldrich in October obtained an exclusive license on
Lentiviral LTR Deleted Vector technology from Oxford BioMedica, a British gene
therapy company. The two firms claim that Open Biosystems, of Huntsville, Ala.,
is marketing and selling a product to researchers that infringes on their
intellectual property.

   The lawsuit was filed in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of
Missouri.

   COAL

   U.S. sues Massey Energy over deadly mine fire

   The U.S. Department of Labor's Mine Safety and Health Administration has
filed an injunction against Massey Energy Co. for failing to turn over documents
related to an underground mine fire that killed two miners in January.

   The civil suit was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District
of West Virginia, the agency said Friday. The suit is against Massey's Aracoma
Coal Co. subsidiary over a fire Jan. 19 at Aracoma's Alma Mine No. 1 in
Melville, W.Va.

   FOOD

   Con-Agra loses its CFO

   ConAgra Foods Inc., the third-largest U.S. food company, said Chief Financial
Officer Frank S. Sklarsky plans to leave after less than two years on the job. A
search has begun for his successor.

   No date has been set for Sklarsky's departure, ConAgra, of Omaha, Neb., said
Friday. Sklarsky, 45, was hired in November 2004 after working for more than 20
years in corporate finance at DaimlerChrysler and Dell Inc.

   OPTION GRANTS

   Home Depot discloses below-market awards

   Home Depot Inc. said it awarded stock options to some executives at
below-market prices, making it the biggest company so far to disclose possible
irregularities in the way it paid executives with options.

   Home Depot, the world's largest home-improvement retailer, said in a
statement Friday that in three cases before December 2000 executives received
options with an exercise price that was lower than the market price on the day
they were approved. That made the options worth more than if they had been
approved on the grant date.

   FOOD

   Pasta maker sells plant

   American Italian Pasta Co. said Friday it plans to sell a manufacturing plant
and surrounding property in Kenosha, Wis., to ST Specialty Foods Inc. of
Brooklyn Park, Minn., for $6.25 million.

   The sale is expected to close in mid-July and net Kansas City-based American
Italian Pasta cash proceeds of $6 million.

   ENRON

   Sentencing is delayed

   A judge delayed sentencing former Enron Corp. executives Kenneth Lay and
Jeffrey Skilling until October to give their lawyers more time to prepare
arguments that the men should not spend the rest of their lives in prison.

   U.S. District Judge Sim Lake in Houston agreed Friday to push the sentencing
of former Enron Chairman Lay, 64, and former Chief Executive Skilling, 52, back
to Oct. 23 because of a scheduling conflict, defense lawyer Daniel Petrocelli
said.

   SEMICONDUCTORS

   Micron's Lexar buyout gets shareholder OK

   A majority of Lexar Media Inc. shareholders on Friday approved the flash
memory card maker's acquisition by Micron Technology Inc. in a sweetened,
all-stock deal valued at about $801 million. The merger that could strengthen
memory-chip maker Micron, as it gains Lexar's consumer products business and
patent portfolio.

   FOOD

   Whole Foods to stop selling live lobsters

   Customers craving fresh crustaceans will have to look beyond Whole Foods
Market Inc. after the natural-foods grocery chain decided to stop selling live
lobsters and crabs on the grounds that it's inhumane.

   The grocer, based in Austin, Texas, spent seven months studying the sale of
live lobsters from ship to supermarket aisle, trying to determine whether the
creatures suffer along the way.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2006


                              684 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             June 10, 2006 Saturday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Grimsley story is only the tip of the iceberg

BYLINE: TERENCE MOORE

BODY:

   Nothing is impossible, but this is pretty close: Knowing for sure that any
athlete you name isn't doing something other than eating all of his or her
vegetables between lifting, running, jumping and twisting to become prosperous.

   With apologies to our founding fathers, everybody involved with sports these
days is guilty until proved innocent when it comes to performance-enhancing
drugs, and for good reason.

   Let's just say that there isn't a better reason to think otherwise. You can
blame such skepticism on The Jason Grimsley Doctrine, which states: If an
obscure relief pitcher with modest physical looks can spend years using various
types of illegal substances, then we really have a mess beyond a mess throughout
sports, and that mess will last for an eternity.

   In case you haven't been paying attention, Grimsley surged out of nowhere to
become as famous (or infamous) as, oh, say, Barry Bonds. That's because Grimsley
just told on a lot of people. And, no, I'm not referring to the names of present
and former baseball players whom he delivered to the feds after they traced a
package of human growth hormone (HGH) to his home and confronted him at the
front door.

   Listen closely, because this goes further than just one guy's progression of
drug use in search of prominence. After all, Grimsley's story is that of many.
He used anabolic steroids until baseball began testing for them. Then he
switched to amphetamines. After they became a primary target for the game's
testing program, he became an HGH guy.

   Neither baseball nor anybody else has a definitive test for HGH. Not only
that, the best way to determine whether somebody is using HGH is to give them a
blood test that requires the use of antibodies, and antibodies are in short
supply. Even if there were a test that would detect the use of HGH or anything
else, it wouldn't matter. The serial cheaters would find another substance to
use, because they always have, and they always will.

   Take gene therapy, for instance. According to a Website called "Human Genome
Project Information," gene therapy is a technique for correcting defective genes
responsible for disease development. According to baseball insiders, gene
therapy is the next "something" that players will try to exploit to increase
their ability to hit, pitch, field and run.

   That means baseball will have to go someday from urine tests to blood tests
(if the players association ever will approve them) to DNA tests (which the
players association never will approve) to hiring their version of Dr.
Frankenstein in attempt to stay within a couple of test tubes of the cheaters'
technology.

   To be fair to baseball and to the modern athlete, this is an old story that
just has new characters. See the sham that was those athletes from the former
Soviet Bloc nations who won a slew of gold medals during the 1960s through the
collapse of the Berlin Wall. During the past few years, Communist leaders
admitted that they regularly gave kids as young as 11 years old so-called
"vitamin tablets" that actually were anabolic steroids. Now many of those
previous users are adults, and they are suffering from everything from bulimia
and tumors to heart defects and depression.

   Well, those who aren't dead.

   Former Braves infielder Ken Caminiti was among those in this country whose
use of performance-enhancing drugs contributed to his early death. The same was
true of football standout Lyle Alzado. Still, given the combination of money and
fame that blinds common sense, you'll continue to have an epidemic of users,
which means you'll continue to have an epidemic of doubters.

   For instance: Nobody can throw as hard as Roger Clemens at 43 without a
little help, and his head has expanded as much through the years as that
beleaguered slugger for the San Francisco Giants. All of these 300-pound linemen
in football didn't just arrive at the turn of the century on a really big space
ship. How can Marion Jones keep running that fast with legs over 30, a dinosaur
age for sprinters?

   We're back to the Jason Grimsley Doctrine, authored by somebody who entered
his 15th season in the majors this year with a 4.76 ERA and 41-56 record after
playing for eight different teams. Guess he figured he needed to take stuff to
remain at least mediocre.

   tlmoore@ajc.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: ROY DABNER / Associated PressJason Grimsley's situation leaves
the integrity of sports even further in doubt.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2006


                              685 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                              June 9, 2006 Friday
                  5 NORTHWEST CONNECTICUT/SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: CONNECTICUT; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: IN THE HOPE OF A CURE;
FRIENDS AND RELATIVES OF A PLAINVILLE TEEN FIGHTING A FATAL DISEASE HAVE KEPT UP
THEIR FUNDRAISING FOR RESEARCH FOR 9 YEARS

BYLINE: KEN BYRON; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: PLAINVILLE --

BODY:

   Fundraisers and the causes they support come and go. But in Plainville, the
plight of a teenager with a rare and fatal genetic disorder and the efforts to
help cure her have taken hold.

   Since 1997, a small group of people has united and raised money for research
that the group hopes will lead to a cure for the disorder and help for
13-year-old Rhianna Logan. She suffers from Sanfilippo syndrome.

   The condition affects about one in 24,000 children. People with the condition
cannot break down a complex blood sugar called heparin sulfate. The substance
builds up in the body, damaging the brain and vital organs. Sanfilippo's
degenerative effects include hyperactivity, mental retardation and early death.
Rhianna is 13 and cannot speak. She needs constant care and help with even basic
tasks.

   Life expectancy for people with the syndrome is 15 to 20 years.

   Since they got started, Rhianna's friends and supporters have raised
$292,000.

   ``For me, that's a lot of money coming from a small town like Plainville,''
said Rhianna's mother, Cindy Logan.

   Virtually all the money has gone to the Children's Medical Research
Foundation in Illinois, which funds research into Sanfilippo.

   Fundraising efforts have included simple things such as collection cups at
local businesses. For a number of years, a local hair salon ran a fundraiser in
which the proceeds from customers' haircuts were donated. The Bristol Auto Club
has put on several car shows that also raised money for the effort.

   The centerpiece of the fundraising efforts has been a yearly dinner dance,
dubbed ``Rockin' for Rhianna,'' and was first held in 1997. This year's event
will be on Saturday at the Our Lady of Mercy school.

   Organizers of the dance say they are surprised at the continuing support for
the event.

   ``I really didn't think it would last this long,'' said Mary Couture,
Rhianna's aunt. ``People get busy and things change. But we've been so well
accepted, and we've made such strides.''

   The 1997 dance was a shock for Alan Theriault, the Southington man who
organized it and has remained involved ever since. He said that he had hoped to
raise $5,000, but nearly 400 people showed up, and the dance took in $14,000.
Attendance since then has dropped to an average of 250 each year but Theriault
said he is still amazed at the event's loyal following.

   ``These things have a shelf life, but nine years later, people are still
supporting the dances,'' he said.

   Theriault got involved after he went into a store in town in 1997 and saw
Rhianna's picture on a cup that was among a number in local businesses for
people to put small donations into. Shortly after seeing that picture he read
about her in a newspaper article.

   The Children's Medical Research Foundation was started in 1995 by Susan and
Brad Wilson, whose daughter has Sanfilippo. Susan Wilson said they have given
$2.5 million to researchers since they started.

   Wilson said no professional fundraisers are used, either by the foundation
itself or people such as the Logans and their friends in Plainville. That way,
almost all the money raised can go to researchers.

   ``I know that money is good amount for a grassroots effort,'' Wilson said.
``But I still feel miserably inadequate, especially when I have five proposals
from researchers and can only fund three or four and I still have a sick
child.''

   Theriault feels likewise. Rather than look back with pride at what he has
helped accomplish and look forward to this year's dance, Theriault wishes it was
something he did not have to do.

   ``The goal when we started was not to have nine of these dances but to have a
cure,'' Theriault said. ``It's a bittersweet feeling -- it amazes me that people
still support our efforts, but I had hoped that we would have this problem
solved by now.''

   Wilson said the fundraising her foundation and others have done is having
tangible results.

   When she and her husband started it in 1995, there was only one researcher
doing work on the disorder. Since then seven doctors have gotten involved,
because in part there is now funding for their efforts. Wilson said there was
hardly anyone doing research a decade ago because no one was funding work on
Sanfilippo.

   Wilson said one of the researchers her foundation has supported is doing
promising work on gene therapy that may be tested on humans.

   For people such as Logan and Theriault, that means at least a bit of hope.

   ``What fascinates me is that that we're not raising millions, but that we're
still making a difference,'' Cindy Logan said.

   This year's Rockin' for Rhianna dance will be from 7 to 11 p.m. Saturday at
the Our Lady of Mercy School in Plainville. Tickets are $15 and available at the
Artisans Marketplace or by calling Theriault at 860-621-5822, Couture at
860-747-3118 or Donna Gabel at 860-673-2342.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: COLOR, CLOE POISSON / THE HARTFORD COURANT PHOTO: (B&W), CLOE
POISSON / THE HARTFORD COURANT
 PHOTO 1: EMILY ANDERSON, 12, left, and sister Molly, 15, right, help Rhianna
Logan, 13, of Plainville, count butterflies in a book they shared in the Logans'
back yard Thursday. Rhianna suffers a rare disorder, Sanfilippo syndrome. Life
expectancy for people with the disease is 15 to 20 years. Emily and Molly, of
Plainville, are among a group of girls who take turns visiting with Rhianna
after school every day. PHOTO 2: CYNTHIA LOGAN kisses her daughter, Rhianna, 13,
in the living room of their Plainville home Thursday. The ninth annual Rockin'
for Rhianna fundraising dance will be held Saturday to raise money for research.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2006


                              686 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 9, 2006 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1020 words

HEADLINE: Tiny NovaRx getting noticed;
Hard work seems to be paying off for cancer drug developer

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The tiny biotechnology company NovaRx created a modest stir this week at the
nation's largest showcase for promising new cancer drugs.

   The privately held San Diego company presented early but impressive patient
survival data for its experimental therapeutic "vaccine" to treat non-small cell
lung cancer at annual meeting of the American Society for Clinical Oncology,
known as ASCO.

   Data from a study of 75 patients with advanced stages of lung cancer showed
that 43 percent of them were alive two years after receiving NovaRx's drug,
dubbed Lucanix. That's four times the survival rate seen with chemotherapy, the
current standard of care.

   NovaRx, which employs 20, has flown quietly under the radar since it was
formed in 1997. So it was heady stuff to be given a slot for an oral
presentation at ASCO, the largest annual meeting of oncologists and the premier
event for pharmaceutical and biotech companies to present pivotal clinical trial
results.

   Lucanix is one of a growing number of therapeutic vaccines, or
immunotherapies, that are being tested to fight cancer or other diseases by
stimulating the body's immune system defenses. Several biotechs, including San
Diego's Favrille and Vical, as well as Genitope Corp., Cell Genesys, and Therion
Biologics Corp., have vaccines in late-stage development.

   So far, the field has been littered with failed clinical trials, and San
Diego biotechs have had their share of heartbreak. Among the local biotechs that
tried and so far failed to get a vaccine to work well in humans are Vical, as
well as the now-defunct or merged CancerVax, Epimmune, and Collateral
Therapeutics.

   "This is one of those areas that are pretty tricky," said John McCamant,
editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter. "We've been seeing good data from
the immunotherapy approach for many years, yet we still don't have a product on
the market."

   NovaRx hopes to change that if its final-stage Phase 3 study, which will be
launched later this year, yields positive results. And the lung cancer market is
wide open and begging for options: more than $9 billion is spent annually on
treatments for lung cancer, which is the leading cause of cancer death in the
United States.

   The biotech's vaccine consists of non-small cell lung cancer cell lines
derived from lung cancer patients. The cells are genetically engineered to block
production of TGF-beta, a substance that tumor cells produce to both fuel their
own growth and conceal themselves from the body's immune system.

   Once injected, NovaRx's deactivated tumor cells, bereft of their TGF-beta
invisibility cloak, alert the immune system to mount an attack against other
tumor cells circulating in the body.

   The technology behind the vaccine is based on the research of scientist Habib
Fakhrai, founder and chief executive of NovaRx. The Iranian-born researcher
began developing the idea in the early 1990s at San Diego's Sidney Kimmel Cancer
Center and, later, as director of the gene therapy laboratories at UCLA's School
of Medicine.

   Ivor Royston, the former CEO of Sidney Kimmel who first hired Fakhrai to head
its gene therapy unit, described him as a sharp scientist with "a passion to do
something to cure cancer."

   "Habib feels strongly that he has a new weapon for the treatment of cancer,"
said Royston, now a partner in San Diego venture capital firm Forward Ventures.
"He's passionate about the science and about helping patients."

   Fakhrai's TGF-beta research caused a stir in the mid-1990s, and its potential
application in treating tumors received prominent mention in Time magazine and
various scientific journals.

   The research also grabbed the attention of an unlikely backer, Emmet O'Neal
III, an Alabama steel tycoon who was looking for an investment that matched his
personal interest in cancer, which had claimed several family members.

   Fakhrai didn't know much about business and O'Neal didn't know much about
science, but the two men hit it off. In 1997, with an initial investment from
O'Neal, NovaRx was created.

   Since then, NovaRx has relied on O'Neal's money -- about $18 million invested
over the years -- and a few government grants to develop and test Lucanix.
O'Neal, who owns about 60 percent of the biotech, admits he's impatient to see
the vaccine enter final testing later this year.

   "I'm not used to things that take 10 to 12 years," O'Neal said with a rueful
laugh. "I don't regret making the investment, but if I'd known how things can
go, it would have probably scared me off.

   "I've been very impatient -- when I think of how many people die each year of
lung cancer ... " O'Neal said. "But I'm thrilled with where we are now."

   Fakhrai said his company is also driven to get the vaccine into final, Phase
3 testing. Drug companies usually have to complete three stages of human
clinical trials before seeking approval from the Food and Drug Administration to
market a new medicine.

   "Our startup probably pays less than other biotechs, but I have people coming
in at 8 a.m and staying until 10 p.m., for little more than a pat on the back,"
Fakhrai said. "The data is driving everybody here to go the extra mile. If it
was a ho-hum drug, no one would invest this much time."

   Some medical experts caution that the Lucanix data, while promising, come
with a caveat. The Phase 2 study presented at ASCO treated lung cancer patients
with the vaccine and compared them against a statistical norm, rather than the
more rigorous, head-to-head patient comparison found in a controlled, randomized
clinical trial.

   Comparing treated patients against historical results has tripped up other
drug companies because that kind of indirect analysis is subject to potential
patient selection bias.

   Carlsbad's CancerVax, which was developing a skin cancer vaccine called
Canvaxin, came to grief last year when its Phase 3 study failed to live up to
the promise of earlier studies. Those early studies compared patients treated
with Canvaxin against a retrospective database analysis of non-vaccine treated
patients.

   After the failure of its vaccine, CancerVax had to lay off most of its
employees and, earlier this year, merge with a German biotech.

GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. NovaRx founder Habib Fakhrai developed the
therapeutic vaccine technology behind the San Diego biotech's experimental lung
cancer treatment, Lucanix. 2. A mockup of the Lucanix vaccine kit, which NovaRx
hopes to sell if the drug successfully completes Phase 3 human clinical trials.
3. At NovaRx's Sorrento Mesa facility Luningning Rangel, Adam Smith and Dr. Lily
Chu (from left) prepared to place Lucanix vaccine cell components to be expanded
and multiplied into a cell cube reactor. 4. Habib Fakhrai 5. Adam Smith of
NovaRx held a vial of cell culture media that is used with the company's lung
cancer vaccine, Lucanix. Several biotechs have vaccines in late-stage
development.; PHOTOBY: 1-5. Howard Lipin / Union-Tribune photos

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2006


                              687 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             June 7, 2006 Wednesday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: Breast cancer studies show race a factor;
Disparity in treatment also noted

BYLINE: BILL HENDRICK

BODY:

   Breast cancer is less common among African-American women than among white
women, but African-Americans who get it are more likely to have a fast-spreading
cancer and a worse outcome, researchers said Tuesday at a meeting in Atlanta of
the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

   The study, which examined what factors may explain breast cancer occurence by
race and age, was conducted by oncologist Dr. Lisa A. Carey, geneticist Charles
Perou and their colleagues at the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill.
The study of tumors in 496 women diagnosed between 1993 and 1996 will be
published online today in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

   Carey said the significance of the finding is "complicated by many factors,
including the observation that differences in clinical outcomes often correlate
with race."

   Better treatment possible

   For years the medical community has known that lack of access to health care
plays a role in the lower survival rates for black women with breast cancer.

   In the United States, 40,000 women die annually from breast cancer. The
age-adjusted breast cancer death rate for white women is 28.3 deaths per
100,000, compared with 36.3 per 100,000 in African-Americans, Stacey said.

   "This disparity is particularly pronounced among women younger than 50 years,
in whom the death rate is 77 percent higher among African-American women
compared with white women," she said. "Biological differences among breast
cancers may reflect genetic influences, differences in lifestyle or nutritional
or environmental exposures."

   The younger African-American women in the study were found to be more likely
to get fast spreading "basal-like" breast tumors that are estrogen receptor or
"ER" negative.

   For treatment, patients in general are broken into groups --- those that are
ER positive and those that are ER negative. "ER negative disease has a worse
prognosis in general," co-author Perou said.

   The scientists found that ER negative disease, or the "basal-like breast
cancer subtype," was more prevalent among pre-menopausal African-American women,
at 39 percent, compared with post-menopausal African-American women, at 14
percent, and non-African American women of any age at 16 percent.

   "The high prevalence of basal-like tumors in younger African-American women
could contribute to their higher breast cancer mortality," the authors said.

   "A take-home message is we now have a much better idea of what type of
disease we need to be focusing on to help these young African-American women,"
Perou said. "The only current treatment is chemotherapy, whereas if you test
receptor positive, you might get chemo but you would certainly get a drug
targeting the estrogen receptor, and those drugs are highly effective."

   Many doctors contend the biggest difference in cancer between black women and
white women lies not in the ruthlessness of the tumors or a genetic difference,
but later diagnosis and lower quality treatment for blacks than white. The UNC
study did not examine possible socio-economic influence.

   Another viewpoint

   In another study released Tuesday examining treatment of breast cancer in
African-American and white women, Emory University scientists found that blacks
are more likely to die. They said differences in treatment between blacks and
whites "could be a major contributing factor to racial disparities in outcome."

   Emory researchers William Eley, Mary Jo Lund, Otis Brawley, Kevin Ward and
John Young studied all breast cancers in black and white residents of five metro
Atlanta counties. The study included 2,437 white women and 877 black women with
breast cancer.

   Disparities in treatment were "delay in first course treatment, type of
treatment, performance of cancer directed surgery, type of surgery and receipt
of chemotherapy, radiotherapy or hormonal therapy."

   Black women were more likely to experience delays in treatment, regardless of
how advanced their cancer was when it was diagnosed, and four- to five-fold more
likely to experience delays greater than 60 days, according to the Emory study.

   Only 61 percent of African-American women compared with 72 percent of whites
received radiation with breast conserving surgery. In addition, black women
eligible for hormonal therapy were less likely to receive it.

   Emory researchers concluded that race can affect quality of treatment for
women with breast cancer. "... Standards are not adequately or equivalently
implemented among black and white women," the study found, and "treatment
differences can adversely affect outcome ..."

   Tuesday was the final day of the five-day meeting of the American Society of
Clinical Oncologists, which was attended by about 25,000 physicians, scientists
and nurses from around the world.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2006


                              688 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              June 6, 2006 Tuesday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: Aggressive Defense in Molestation Case;
The attorney for a gene expert accused of abuse says he was framed by the
accuser's mother.

BYLINE: John Spano, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Reading the court file, it's hard to tell who stands accused.

   William French Anderson, the renowned USC gene therapy pioneer charged with
child sexual abuse, or his accuser and her mother, whom Anderson's lawyer
contends instigated the case to smear the scientific genius?

   After two years of waiting, and with his trial set for June 15, Anderson's
defense team has flooded Los Angeles County Superior Court with papers outlining
a remarkably aggressive -- and risky -- strategy.

   The mother, Anderson's friend, colleague, confidant and second in command at
USC Gene Therapy Laboratories, the lab he created, framed him to advance her own
career and fortune, Anderson's lawyer, Barry Tarlow said during a pretrial court
hearing Friday.

   The woman is dishonest, untrustworthy, manipulative and vindictive, Tarlow
alleged. She conspired with her daughter, now a college student, "to destroy
French Anderson and obtain access to Gene Therapy patents and create a business
she believed would unjustly enrich her by tens of millions of dollars,"
according to defense documents.

   Tarlow alleges that the mother, a native of China and a naturalized U.S.
citizen, conspired to steal Anderson's patents with the help of a company that
is owned by the Chinese army.

   Anderson, 70, a world-class martial-arts expert, is accused of molesting his
colleague's daughter starting when the accuser was 10 in 1997. The alleged abuse
took place during karate lessons at his San Marino home.

   Anderson earned a prominent place in medical history when he led a team that
cured a hereditary disease of the immune system in a 4-year-old girl in 1990.
Doctors added a missing gene to her own white blood cells and reinfused them
into her body. It was the first time that gene therapy had been successful in
humans.

   Anderson remains on leave from his duties as head of the lab. He is mildly
dyslexic, according to biographers, but holds more than a dozen patents and has
an IQ of 178. He is a crack pistol shot who is known for his generous support of
local police in San Marino.

   Against the defense theories, prosecutors said, they will present testimony
from several witnesses -- as well as the surreptitiously recorded words of the
defendant himself.

   There is the accuser, a scholar-athlete; a man who says Anderson molested him
under similar circumstances when he worked at the National Institutes of Health
in Maryland; and three of the accuser's high school friends, who prosecutors say
will testify that she told them before she went to police that Anderson had
molested her.

   A law passed after the first allegations of child molestation against pop
singer Michael Jackson allows prosecutors to introduce allegations of previous
abuse by Anderson, even though they did not result in a conviction. A teacher
will testify that the accuser wrote "discreetly" on several assignments
inquiring about what would happen if she reported that she had been molested,
prosecutors say.

   Finally, there is the tape of a three-minute conversation between Anderson
and the accuser. Police arranged for her to secretly record the conversation
outside the South Pasadena Public Library.

   Anderson, they said, is heard repeating seven times that he is sorry.

   "What can I say?" Anderson responded when the girl said she needed closure,
according to a transcript of the conversation entered in the court record. "I
don't know why -- some, something bad in me came out and I just don't know why."

   Anderson referred to that "something" as evil, but also professed eternal
love for the girl, then 16: "I love you for the rest of my life.

   "I told you, I will love you forever. To hurt somebody -- to damage somebody
you love -- is the worst thing you can do."

   The Times generally does not identify alleged sexual abuse victims to protect
their privacy.

   Tarlow, a well-known Southern California defense attorney, risks offending
jurors by attacking a young accuser whose testimony the panel will hear, legal
experts said.

   During the pretrial skirmish Friday, each side in the downtown courtroom of
Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge Michael E. Pastor verbally slashed the
other's case.

   Tarlow said the mother was "motivated by blind ambition and money" and lied
to frame Anderson.

   At the request of the prosecutor, Deputy Dist. Atty. Cathryn Brougham, Pastor
said he would limit attacks on the mother's character to issues that wouldn't
"distract" the jury. But the judge also said he would not "gut" the defense.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2006


                              689 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; CONVENTIONS; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 110 words

HEADLINE: Convention Calendar

BODY:

   These events are scheduled at the Baltimore Convention Center, Howard and
Pratt streets:

   June 4

   American Society of Gene Therapy -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 2,500+.
Contact number: 414-278-1341

   June 2-8

   American Society of Echocardiography -- convention. Estimated attendance:
2,500+. Contact number: 919-861-4537

   June 8-9

   Reality Check Plus -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 800+. Contact number:
410-837-2727

   June 11-14

   Special Library Association -- convention. Estimated attendance: 7,800+.
Contact number: 703-647-4937

   June 15-24

   National Baptist Congress of Christian Education -- convention. Estimated
attendance: 50,000+. Contact number: 215-895-4073, E. 2

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006


                              690 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A-7

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY SHOWS POTENTIAL IN PITT STUDY

BYLINE: Anita Srikameswaran, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   Gene therapy can prevent the onset of diabetes in mice prone to developing
the disease.

   The technique's success could lead to new knowledge about the development of
Type 1 diabetes and ways to treat it, said senior investigator Paul Robbins of
the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine. The findings were presented
yesterday in Baltimore at the annual meeting of the American Society of Gene
Therapy.

   "We actually deliver therapeutic genes in an animal model of diabetes and it
completely blocks diabetes," he said. "It's a fairly dramatic effect, so we're
excited about it."

   In the project, researchers led by Khaleel Rehman Khaja attached a gene that
makes interleukin-4, a cytokine than inhibits inflammation, to a harmless virus
called adeno-associated virus. It was designed to be active only in pancreatic
islet cells that make insulin.

   The gene therapy was administered to diabetes-prone mice, and the IL-4
appeared to interfere with the immune cell attack on insulin-producing cells.

   "It's protecting them from destruction," Dr. Robbins explained. But diabetes
development accelerated in mice that got a gene for another cytokine,
interleukin-10, researchers found.

   With the technique, "we can now deliver a variety of genes and see if they
would be therapeutic or, alternatively, see if those factors actually enhance
the rate of onset of diabetes," he said.

   The mouse model also makes it possible to see the impact of interventions at
different stages of the disease. It's a great technique, Dr. Robbins said, but
he cautioned that "it's not clear if we can use the same approach in humans."

   The project was one of several from Pitt being discussed at the gene therapy
conference, which ends tomorrow.

   "There really is a lot of progress being made in a number of different
areas," Dr. Robbins said. "There's a lot of very positive things coming out at
this meeting."

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2006


                              691 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              June 2, 2006 Friday

SECTION: BRIEFS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1299 words

HEADLINE: Business news in brief

BODY:


IN THE REGION

Goldman Sachs stops advising Mirant on bid for NRG

   Goldman Sachs is no longer advising power company Mirant Corp. on its efforts
to acquire Princeton energy producer NRG Energy Inc., the Wall Street firm said
yesterday. NRG has questioned whether Goldman Sachs Group Inc. improperly gave
confidential information about NRG to Mirant. Goldman Sachs, which denied the
allegation, also has done work for NRG. Atlanta-based Mirant has denied
receiving such material. "NRG was fully aware of Goldman's role as financial
adviser during the several months when the companies held friendly discussions,"
Goldman Sachs spokesman Peter Rose said yesterday. "NRG never during that period
challenged Goldman's capacity to act for Mirant during that period." When NRG
rebuffed the nearly $8 billion takeover bid, Mirant sued on Wednesday, charging
that NRG was unfairly blocking the acquisition. NRG replied that "Mirant's
proposal significantly undervalues NRG."- AP

Comcast high-speed Net users to get big files faster

   Comcast Corp. has begun rolling out a high-speed Internet feature that can
double customers' download speeds when they access big files. Customers do not
need to sign up for it. The PowerBoost feature will automatically work when
subscribers download music, video or Web pages with a lot of graphics that
typically take a longer time to view. PowerBoost will be free to customers of
Comcast's 6-megabits-per-second plan, priced at $42.95 a month, and its
$52.95-a-month plan, which features speeds of 8 Mbps. The company said the
feature works by taking advantage of excess capacity already in its system.-
Miriam Hill

Former Office Depot executive A.C. Moore's new CEO

   Specialty retailer A.C. Moore Arts & Crafts Inc., Berlin, said it hired Rick
Lepley as its new chief executive officer. Lepley, 56, was Office Depot Inc.'s
executive vice president of North American retail before retiring earlier this
year. He also will become an A.C. Moore director. He replaces John E. Parker, a
company cofounder who retired as CEO and director. The company also said Leslie
H. Gordon would retire as chief financial officer July 31. Gordon, who has been
the company's CFO since 1996, will provide transition assistance to the company
for a year after his retirement. The company said it would begin a search for
his replacement immediately.- AP

Acuity cites progress in tests of blindness treatment

   Acuity Pharmaceuticals, Philadelphia, said its lead compound that uses a
gene-blocking technology to treat the causes of adult blindness appeared safe
and showed signs of effectiveness in initial results in patients. Acuity
presented findings of a mid-stage, or Phase 2, clinical trial in 129 patients
yesterday at the American Society of Gene Therapy annual meeting in Baltimore.
Patients in the study at 28 U.S. locations had serious degenerating retinal
lesions, and some had failed previous treatment due to wet age-related macular
degeneration, a major cause of blindness, which afflicts 1.65 million Americans
and 11 million people worldwide, the company said. Acuity's bevasiranib,
formerly called Cand5, uses RNA interference to silence genes that promote
overgrowth of blood vessels that lead to vision loss. Acuity was founded in 2002
on technology developed at the University of Pennsylvania and Scheie Eye
Institute. - Linda Loyd

Calif. says Malvern unit's device cuts diesel emissions

   The California Air Resources Board has certified a device from Johnson
Matthey P.L.C. that the company says reduces engine emissions from diesel
vehicles by 50 percent to 77 percent. CARB has enacted the nation's most
stringent limits on tailpipe emissions in an effort to improve air quality in
smoggy California locations such as Los Angeles. London-based Johnson Matthey's
Environmental Catalysts & Technologies Group in Malvern developed the
pollution-cutting technology, and the company said its cleaner-burning catalyst
and filter system runs on the newly mandated ultra-low-sulfur diesel fuel. -
Akweli Parker

Fameco to manage additional Stop & Shop sites

   Stop & Shop Supermarket Co. L.L.C., a Quincy, Mass., unit of Ahold USA, has
retained Fameco Real Estate, Plymouth Meeting, to handle property management at
30 of its retail sites, said Larry Zipf, Fameco's senior vice president. The
deal involves one million square feet of retail space in New York and New
Jersey. Fameco is a real estate sales, investment and management firm. It has
been managing six Stop & Shop properties in Long Island and northern New Jersey
under a 2003 agreement. Fameco's facilities management business has grown from
1.5 million square feet a year ago to 6.5 million square feet, Zipf said. -
Henry J. Holcomb

ELSEWHERE

Home Depot works to repair investor relations

   The Home Depot Inc. did an about-face yesterday and said it would return to
allowing shareholders to ask general questions at its annual meetings. The
company also revealed that nearly one-third of shareholders had withheld their
support for the reelection of chief executive officer Bob Nardelli as chairman.
The Atlanta company also said it would ensure that all its directors attend
future annual meetings. The company was widely criticized after its May 25
annual meeting in Wilmington, Del., because Nardelli was the only member of the
board to attend. Nardelli did not allow a general question-and-answer session.
He ended the meeting after only 30 minutes, without addressing concerns some
shareholders raised about his hefty compensation despite Home Depot's lagging
stock price.- AP

NASD drops charges against Quattrone over IPOs

   Securities industry regulators have dropped all charges against former star
technology banker Frank Quattrone over how his investment bank allocated shares
of hot initial public offerings during the late-1990s Internet boom. The ruling
Wednesday by a hearing officer of the National Association of Securities
Dealers, the brokerage industry's self-policing organization, was the third
legal victory for Quattrone, a Philadelphia native. In March, the Securities and
Exchange Commission overturned a lifetime ban by the industry against Quattrone,
and a federal appeals court threw out his conviction on charges of obstructing
justice. Prosecutors could decide to pursue a third trial on those charges,
rather than to appeal the overturning of his conviction.- AP

Vonage says IPO customers must follow through

   Internet phone company Vonage Holdings Corp. said customers who agreed to buy
into its initial public offering last week must follow through on their
commitment to buy shares, even though they have fallen in value. Vonage had set
aside up to 13.5 percent of its $531 million offering for customers, an
unorthodox move aimed at increasing customer loyalty and creating publicity
ahead of its IPO. That move backfired when the stock dropped almost as soon as
it started trading. IPO participants committed to buy the stock at $17 a share.
Yesterday, the shares closed at $11.63, down 39 cents, on the New York Stock
Exchange. Under the terms of the program allowing customers to participate in
the IPO, "if a customer was allocated shares in the Customer Directed Share
Program, that customer is obligated to purchase their share allocation from the
underwriters," Vonage said in a statement late Wednesday.- AP

Pension insurer gets new acting executive director

   Vincent Snowbarger will serve as acting chief of a federal agency that
insures private pension plans for millions of Americans, the Labor Department
announced. Snowbarger has been deputy executive director of the Pension Benefit
Guaranty Corp. since November 2004. He will be acting executive director,
replacing Bradley Belt, whose last day on the job was Wednesday. Snowbarger also
is a former U.S. congressman who represented Kansas.- AP

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 2006


                              692 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday

LENGTH: 219 words

HEADLINE: Phila. firm reports positive findings from Phase 2 study of eye drug

BYLINE: Linda Loyd, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Acuity Pharmaceuticals in Philadelphia said today its lead compound that uses
a gene-blocking technology to treat the causes of adult blindness appeared safe
and showed signs of effectiveness in initial results in patients.

   Acuity presented findings of a mid-stage, or Phase 2, clinical trial in 129
patients today at the American Society of Gene Therapy annual meeting in
Baltimore.

   Patients in the study at 28 U.S. locations had serious degenerating retinal
lesions, and some had failed previous treatment due to wet age-related macular
degeneration, a major cause of blindness, which afflicts 1.65 million Americans
and 11 million people worldwide, the company said.

   Acuity's bevasiranib, formerly called Cand5, uses RNA interference to silence
genes that promote overgrowth of blood vessels that lead to vision loss.
Bevasiranib is administered directly into the eye, and showed "signs of efficacy
at all dose levels," the company said.

   Acuity was founded in 2002 on technology developed at the University of
Pennsylvania and Scheie Eye Institute. Acuity's lead compound is in human
clinical trials for two leading causes of adult vision loss, including diabetic
macular edema. The company plans to begin final Phase 3 clinical trials next
year.

   Contact staff writer Linda Loyd at 215-854-2831 or lloyd@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2006


                              693 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              May 29, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: TELEGRAPH; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1738 words

HEADLINE: Veterinary schools a bottleneck;
Field aids human health, but colleges lack openings

BYLINE: FRANK D. ROYLANCE, SUN REPORTER

BODY:

   The catastrophic injury that ended Barbaro's Triple Crown bid at Pimlico on
May 20 - and the extraordinary effort by University of Pennsylvania surgeons to
save him - have turned a spotlight on veterinary medicine in the United States.

   Enjoying little of the attention that doctors of human medicine receive,
veterinary researchers are using much of the same science to understand, prevent
and treat animal injuries, and to fight diseases that affect agriculture and the
food supply.

   Veterinarians are also working on such illnesses as avian flu, West Nile
virus, Lyme disease and mad cow disease in a joint effort with public health
officials to safeguard human health.

   "Veterinarians have been contributing to advances not just in veterinary
care, but also human medical care, for years and years," said Dr. Lawrence E.
Heider, executive director of the Association of American Veterinary Medical
Colleges.

   But the nation's 28 veterinary schools are at capacity and can't keep up with
the demand for new doctors. They admit about 2,600 new students each year, but
600 others must seek their training abroad, Heider said.

   "Right now, there is enormous demand for graduates from all vet schools,"
said Jeffrey Douglas, spokesman for the Virginia-Maryland Regional College of
Veterinary Medicine. "The profession is playing a huge role in society, but it
lacks the infrastructure and the money to do the job it needs to do."

   `We need support'

   Legislation before Congress would authorize $1.5 billion in grants over five
to 10 years to expand and strengthen veterinary training programs.

   "We need support for that," said Dr. Susan M. Stover, an equine researcher at
the University of California, Davis. "Vets are critical to human health and food
safety in ways that I don't think the public has the knowledge to have an
appreciation for."

   For many Americans, the sophisticated care that Barbaro received at Penn's
New Bolton Center was a revelation. But vet schools across the country provide
state-of-the-art treatment every day, even as they train young veterinarians and
conduct cutting-edge research.

   Stover's lab at UC Davis, under the authority of the California Horse Racing
Board, conducts animal autopsies - called necropsies - on about 250
thoroughbreds that die at California racetracks each year.

   Barbaro suffered "a particularly severe combination of injuries, but the most
catastrophic happened to be the most common injury we see in California
racehorses," Stover said.

   That injury is a "fetlock breakdown," the hyperextension and rupture of the
ligaments, tendons and bones that support the horse's fetlock, or ankle joint.
Most animals with such injuries are euthanized.

   The fetlock problem is a particular focus of Stover's research, and her
conclusions are sobering.

   "Inadvertently and unintentionally, ... I think we set them up for injury,"
she said of America's racehorses.

   In general, a horse's muscles and bones are "overbuilt" by nature to sustain
most of the load put on them. But racing pushes the envelope.

   The necropsies have revealed evidence of previous, milder injuries. The
tissues are temporarily weakened as they heal, and "there's a transient period
during the healing process when they become at risk of catastrophic injury," she
said.

   That recognition is actually good news, Stover said, because "we have an
opportunity to prevent and intervene, so that in the future we can reduce the
occurrence of these injuries."

   Advances in bone scans and magnetic resonance imaging, she said, "do allow us
to detect milder injuries earlier, so horses can be appropriately
rehabilitated."

   At the same time, Stover's lab is conducting epidemiological studies to
identify patterns in training and racing that put horses at greater risk. She is
also studying the dynamics of racetrack surfaces. They can be inconsistent from
track to track, increasing the risk to animals that have adapted to one surface,
only to be raced on another.

   Research frontiers

   On the other side of the continent, at Cornell University's School of
Veterinary Medicine, scientists are helping to decode the equine genome. They
are seeking new tools with which to fight such illnesses as equine herpes. The
highly contagious viral infection, which struck horses at Pimlico Race Course
this spring, can cause potentially fatal neurological complications.

   "We don't have good vaccines for herpes viruses in animals or people," said
Dr. Doug Antczak, director of Cornell's Baker Institute for Animal Health.

   Baker scientists developed vaccines for canine distemper and parvovirus that
are familiar to dog owners. They also have devised a test for a gene that causes
blindness in Irish setters 3 to 7 years old. Breeders can use it to avoid
matings that would produce puppies with the defect.

   Antczak said a genetic therapy for another form of canine blindness has been
so successful that Baker scientists are seeking grants from the National
Institutes of Health to test it in people with a rare form of blindness called
Leber's congenital amaurosis.

   Dr. Thomas Inzana, a veterinarian at the Virginia-Maryland Regional College
of Veterinary Medicine, has received a $1 million Defense Department grant to
develop a vaccine for the bacterium that causes tularemia - a potential
bioterror agent. That effort grew out of his vaccine work on a similar organism
that infects cattle.

   Meanwhile, a colleague at the regional college, Dr. Ansar Ahmed, is using
animal models to investigate whether estrogens used to increase milk and meat
production in cattle can be toxic to human fetuses whose mothers ingest the
products.

   Such crossover research "is very important to the future of veterinary
medicine, because that's where the funding is," said Thomas Caruso, director of
research initiatives at the college. He noted that the U.S. Department of
Agriculture gets 1 percent of the research funding that the National Institutes
of Health receives.

   Outside the research lab, clinical veterinary care is also becoming far more
sophisticated and high-tech. Many specialty animal hospitals are now equipped
with CT scanners, MRI devices and linear accelerators for imaging and cancer
treatment, Cornell's Antczak said.

   Neighborhood vets might send their most difficult cases to these hospitals -
animals they once referred to the state veterinary school.

   Vet schools in need

   "They can essentially do the same things for those clients that we can do
here [at Cornell]," Antczak said.

   On the downside for traditional research centers, this trend threatens
caseloads - and revenues - at vet school clinics. And it reduces veterinary
students' exposure to instructive clinical cases.

   Another problem is finding vets to fill all the clinical care, research,
government and corporate jobs that go begging. Heider, of the Association of
American Veterinary Medical Colleges, said the Bureau of Labor Statistics counts
1,500 unfilled positions for veterinarians. The bureau projects 10,500 more
openings by 2014.

   "Especially in research and teaching, we always need more people," Antczak
said.

   Educators agree that the bottleneck is in the vet schools. The nation's
veterinarians get their doctor of veterinary medicine degrees from 28
institutions. Some are private, such as those at Penn and Tufts University in
Boston. But most are at public "land-grant" colleges, supported by diminishing
state and federal tax dollars - and rising tuition.

   In 1978, Maryland and Virginia established the Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, whose main campus is at Virginia Polytechnic
Institute in Blacksburg. Virginia's affiliated hospital is the Marion duPont
Scott Equine Medical Center, in Leesburg, while Maryland's research facility is
in the Avrum Gudelsky Veterinary Center at College Park.

   Heider said vet school tuition nationally ranges from about $10,000 to
$35,000 a year - normally cheaper for in-state students. Graduates leave school
with an average debt of $78,000.

   Veterinary students frequently say it is easier to get into medical school
than into veterinary school, and Jeffrey Douglas, public information director at
Virginia-Maryland, agrees.

   "There are only so many seats in the entering classes," he said, estimating
that his school receives 700 to 800 applications each year for 90 openings in
the first-year class. Of those seats, 50 are reserved for Virginians, 30 for
Marylanders and the remaining 10 for out-of-state students.

   "One of the reasons we have so many applications is that there are so many
from around the country competing for the 10 national slots," Douglas said.

   Heider said the number of qualified students applying to veterinary schools
nationally each year is about 5,500, twice the number of openings available. As
a result, he said, "we are exporting U.S. citizens."

   About 100 first-year students go to seven accredited schools in Britain,
Australia and New Zealand. An additional 500 enroll in unaccredited veterinary
schools in the Caribbean.

   Nearly all come home again, but those from unaccredited programs must do
additional work to become licensed in the U.S.

   Despite the demand, there is no building boom at U.S. veterinary schools.

   Although some schools have boosted enrollment, "it's a huge investment to
create a new vet school, and the states have been strapped for cash for the last
decade," Antczak said.

   The last big wave of expansion was in the 1970s, when seven veterinary
colleges were established. Now, private industry may be moving in to fill the
gap.

   In 2004, an international chain of veterinary clinics called Banfield, The
Pet Hospital, joined with Western University of Health Sciences in Pomona,
Calif., to build a teaching hospital for the university's new vet school - the
first built in the United States since 1979.

   Veterinary schools are now looking to the federal government in the form of
legislation known as the Veterinary Workforce Expansion Act, now before
Congress. If passed and fully funded, it would provide $1.5 billion in
competitive grants to vet schools over five to 10 years.

   The schools would use the money to improve capacity, infrastructure and
programs to produce the clinical, research, government and corporate
veterinarians the nation needs, Douglas said.

   "We recognize it's not a real good state of affairs," Heider said. But "it's
a good time, we think, for students to have an interest. ... There are now, and
will be, very good job opportunities for veterinarians."

   frank.roylance@baltsun.com

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 1. The Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine has 90
openings each year and receives 700 to 800 applications. 2. Equine hospitals,
such as the Marion duPont Scott Equine Medical Center in Leesburg, Va., offer
sophisticated therapies.
 PHOTOS COURTESY OF VIRGINIA-MARYLAND REGIONAL COLLEGE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE
VIRGINIA-MARYLAND REGIONAL COLLEGE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2006


                              694 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; CONVENTIONS; Pg. 4C

LENGTH: 111 words

HEADLINE: Convention Calendar

BODY:

   These events are scheduled at the Baltimore Convention Center, Howard and
Pratt streets:

   May 30-June 4

   American Society of Gene Therapy -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 2,500+.
Contact number: 414-278-1341

   June 2-8

   American Society of Echocardiography -- convention. Estimated attendance:
2,500+. Contact number: 919-861-4537

   June 8-9

   Reality Check Plus -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 800+. Contact number:
410-837-2727

   June 11-14

   Special Library Association -- convention. Estimated attendance: 7,800+.
Contact number: 703-647-4937

   June 15-24

   National Baptist Congress of Christian Education -- convention. Estimated
attendance: 50,000+. Contact number: 215-895-4073, ext. 2

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2006


                              695 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2075 words

HEADLINE: The Man Whose Job Is Saving Barbaro

BYLINE: Mike Jensen, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   A sinus surgery lasted 21/2 hours. Four more were spent taking a bladder
stone out of a show horse. Dean Richardson was still at a friend's equine
hospital in Florida on May 20 as Barbaro, the Kentucky Derby winner, was saddled
for the Preakness Stakes.

   Richardson wasn't going to miss the race.

   "He had blood all over him, and he was doing it in flip-flops, so we hosed
him off," said Byron Reid, a veterinarian in Loxahatchee, Fla., just outside
West Palm Beach.

   The two men watched the Preakness on a six-inch screen in the hospital.

   "You could see enough," Richardson said. "That's the sad thing. It was just
crushing. My stomach started churning. As soon as I saw it, I knew it was a very
bad injury. I knew which horse it was."

   Richardson, 52, is the chief of surgery at the University of Pennsylvania's
school of veterinary medicine at New Bolton Center in Kennett Square. Though he
had done quite a few surgeries over the years for Barbaro's trainer, Michael
Matz, Richardson didn't get on the phone right away.

   "I was waiting for my phone to ring," Richardson said. "The people on site
have the work to do. Then the phone calls started coming."

   Within 30 minutes of Barbaro's devastating right hind leg fractures in the
first furlong in Maryland, a decision was made: Get him to New Bolton. That was
his best chance for survival. Thirty minutes after the horse had
"catastrophically" broken three bones, Barbaro's digital X-ray arrived in
Richardson's e-mail.

   "I knew it was going to be a bad fracture," the surgeon said. "When I saw the
radiograph, it was worse than I had hoped. I tried to sleep, but didn't succeed
real well."

   By Monday evening, a national newscast had the words Saving Barbaro behind
the anchorman's head. But few on Saturday evening had been convinced that saving
the colt was even likely.

   "Nobody was about to put this horse down at the racetrack without giving him
a chance at a hospital," Richardson said. "It just wasn't going to happen."

   All sorts of lightning-fast, high-stakes calculations had been made at
Pimlico Race Course. Jockey Edgar Prado had pulled up the horse expertly. By all
accounts, the veterinarians skillfully had applied a splint to the leg.
Richardson also saw something else.

   "The horse's tremendous athletic ability, to pull up," he said. "Look at that
tape, and the horse literally galloped on three legs for a few strides. He
didn't drive his bad leg into the ground hard. That saved his life."

   There wasn't much question Richardson was performing the surgery. Never mind
that he had worked on Matz's horses and gotten to know him well, or that
co-owner Gretchen Jackson is on the board of overseers of Penn's veterinary
school.

   New Bolton's pool-recovery system made the place ideal for the surgery, and
Richardson is one of a handful of surgeons, one former colleague said, equipped
to tackle the catastrophic injuries suffered by Barbaro.

   "I think all of us in this job who fix horses for a living know that Dean is
somewhere in another space," said Patricia Hogan of the New Jersey Equine
Clinic, who was his student researcher for a year.

   In fact, he wrote the book on a lot of this stuff.

   "All major textbooks that deal with equine-fracture repair, Dean is an
author," said Alan Ruggles, a surgeon at Rood & Riddle Equine Hospital in
Lexington, Ky.

   Roy and Gretchen Jackson offered immediately to rent a jet to get Richardson
back to Pennsylvania, but he didn't think that was a necessary expense.

   "That would be like grandstanding, I thought," Richardson said.

   He got on a US Airways flight out of West Palm Beach bound for Philadelphia
shortly before 8 a.m. last Sunday.

   "I got the back-row seat, next to the toilet," Richardson said. "If you want
a real news story, [the flight] was on time."

   As long as the horse's condition didn't demand earlier intervention, the
surgery wasn't going to be earlier than Sunday afternoon.

   "One of the big mistakes we used to make in the past: It's not generally a
good idea to take a very fit horse that just broke down on the racetrack, is
extremely stressed, and take them into a hospital, a strange environment, place
them under general anesthesia, and expect them to wake up and act like they're
halfway sane," Richardson said. "That's just putting the horse through way too
much trauma."

   Given a chance, he said, "they start understanding that, 'Hey, you know what,
I've only got three legs to walk on. Let me figure out how to deal with it.'
Then their chance of waking up from anesthesia and not injuring themselves is
quite a bit higher."

   The night he arrived at New Bolton, a helicopter buzzing overhead, Barbaro
had calmed down considerably. First-year resident Steven Zedler saw Barbaro lie
down for two naps that first night, both for about 45 minutes. The horse made
sure he put his good limb underneath him.

   "Horses have to lay down in order to get REM sleep," Zedler said, referring
to rapid-eye-movement stage of sleep. "One day, two days, it doesn't matter.
Long term, they start to get really sleepy and stumble occasionally. For him, it
was just perfect. Some [injured] horses won't do it."

   A 1974 graduate of Dartmouth, Richardson showed up at New Bolton in 1979 for
his internship right after graduating from Ohio State's veterinary school.

   "I knew the day I met him he would be the best intern I ever had," said Midge
Leitch, the surgeon in charge of Richardson's first rotation at New Bolton. "He
was - he is - one of the smartest people I've ever known. He has a tremendous
ability to recall and integrate information. I didn't know what kind of hands he
had."

   She said it was like finding a kindred spirit.

   "We started arguing at 5,000 decibels," Leitch said, "to the extent, in his
internship year, some of the students thought we hated each other because we
argued so vehemently."

   When Richardson was an intern, Leitch said, there were even staff members who
were more comfortable when he wasn't around. It was a good thing, she said, that
she had six years of experience on him.

   "I think if I hadn't that much clinical experience, I would have been
intimidated," Leitch said. "He is a powerful intellectual force, and it turns
out he has magical hands."

   He has a great sense of where the pieces go, she said, but what sets him
apart is his grasp of a fourth dimension. He can see possibilities.

   "He will work on cases that ordinarily would be unlikely to have successful
outcomes," Leitch said.

   Richardson was the reason she went into orthopedics, said Hogan, his former
researcher, who got a lot of attention herself for treating Smarty Jones after
his famous starting-gate injury in 2003. Hogan said Richardson's approval "still
means so much" 16 years after working with him.

   Now, Richardson lectures all over the world on equine orthopedics. His
research on gene therapy and cartilage repair is considered cutting-edge.

   "He's as tough on himself as on anybody else," Leitch said. "But he's a
little tougher, so he can also take it better than anybody else. He's into the
carrot and the stick. And if there isn't a carrot handy, by God, there's a
stick."

   There are some in his position who could - some who do - occasionally skip
Grand Rounds, the weekly Thursday 8 a.m. hourlong get-together when students
present their cases for critique. Richardson is there.

   "The students fear his questions," said Corinne Sweeney, the associate dean
for New Bolton Center and executive hospital director. "Some of them, you can
see, are so delighted when they see he is out of the country. When there are no
questions, somebody will say, 'Isn't Dean here?'... He even will critique their
grammar."

   He's renowned for remembering the name of every horse and every owner who
comes through New Bolton. But they got him once, a year or two back. One of his
buddies who is a surgeon made a referral, and somebody showed up with a lame
horse. Richardson gave a full evaluation, but kept saying, "This looks like my
horse." Finally, his residents and interns couldn't hold it together any longer
and admitted it. It was his horse.

   He rides his own horses, plays basketball once a week, gets angry at himself
too easily on the golf course, is an avid bird photographer, and not a bad cook.
His wife also is a veterinarian, in private practice. They live in Landenberg,
Chester County, and have a son attending an Ivy League school.

   Richardson is direct, if not always loud. On Thursday, during a relatively
simple procedure to straighten the crooked legs of a newborn foal, he showed a
first-year resident how to put wire under the head of a screw properly so it
wouldn't slip.

   "You have to make sure you pay attention to which way you twist it," he told
her, speaking evenly. "Remember, it doesn't have to be terribly tight."

   At the news conference just before his surgery on Barbaro, Richardson came
off as kind of brash. Asked what time the surgery would begin, Richardson said,
matter-of-factly, "As soon as you stop asking me questions."

   By that time, Barbaro already was receiving anesthesia.

   "I was pretty confident we were going to wake this horse up," Richardson
said. "I would have said the only reason we would put this horse down - the only
reason, period - would have been if I'd taken the splint off and the foot was
cold and there was an obvious loss of blood supply. I would have talked to the
Jacksons at that point and discussed the possibility that it might not be fair
to the horse to wake it up."

   Before the first incision was made, he knew the foot was warm and there were
strong pulses in there. The skin was very badly bruised. If it had broken, the
risk of infection would have increased dramatically.

   "There's serum literally kind of oozing through the surface of the skin,"
Richardson said. "That's very badly bruised. But the skin isn't broken. It's
about as close as it could be to being broken."

   The horse was under anesthesia for almost seven hours.

   "He maintained his normal body temperature throughout," said the chief
anesthesiologist, Bernd Driessen. "Most, over time, get cold... . Maybe we'll
find out sometime that, like Secretariat, he has an unusually large and powerful
heart."

   The tricky part of the surgery was repairing the pastern bone, which had
splintered into more than 20 pieces.

   "It would be like if you broke a china bowl and you try to put it back
together but you're missing a lot of pieces," Richardson said. "So you have to
fill in those areas with a bone graft, which was taken from his pelvis."

   He was putting screws into some pieces barely more than a centimeter wide.

   "We ended up doing what we'd planned; it was just harder than I'd hoped,"
Richardson said. "He had rubbed a lot of the bones together [after the
fractures]. There was a polishing of the bone. Instead of nice jagged pieces
fitting together, they become smooth and you can't put it together well."

   He put in 27 screws and a 16-hole steel plate, as seen the next morning in
newspaper illustrations all over the country. Operating-room nurse Erin Fabre -
who had been listening to the race via cell phone the day before in the OR -
said of Barbaro's operation: "It was one of the calmest surgeries I've been in."

   "Throughout this, it isn't Barbaro really there," Richardson said of the
surgery. "It's really not Barbaro. It's a horse with a very difficult fracture.
It's Barbaro when I'm talking to the media. It's Barbaro when you have to face
the consequences if you screw something up. But, you know, it's still the same
work."

   The horse is doing well. There are still risks of infection and other
problems, but the real hurdle - the one that caused Richardson to call the
prognosis "a coin flip" right after the surgery - is what happens weeks from now
when the cast is taken off for good. The Jacksons and Richardson agree that this
horse has to be comfortable.

   "In the long run, I think we all think it's a 50-50 shot," said Liberty
Getman, one of the residents who assisted Richardson during the surgery, holding
some of the smaller bone fragments while he inserted a screw.

   The only good that has come out of this, a number of Richardson's colleagues
around the country mentioned, is that a linchpin of their profession got some
recognition.

   Not that they intend to tell him that.

   "I talked to him Monday morning," said Ruggles, the Kentucky surgeon who had
trained under Richardson at New Bolton. "He's an extremely competitive golfer. I
told him, 'I shot 76. What did you do this weekend?' "

   Contact staff writer Mike Jensen at 215-854-4489 or mjensen@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                              696 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 2425 words

HEADLINE: Donations tie drug firms and nonprofits;
Many patient groups reveal few, if any, details on relationships with
pharmaceutical donors.

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   The American Diabetes Association, a leading patient health group, privately
enlisted an Eli Lilly & Co. executive to chart its growth strategy and write its
slogan.

   The National Alliance on Mental Illness, an outspoken patient advocate,
lobbies for treatment programs that also benefit its drug-company donors.

   The National Gaucher Foundation, a supporter of people suffering from a
horrific rare disease, gets nearly all its revenue from one drugmaker, Genzyme
Corp.

   Although patients seldom know it, many patient groups and drug companies
maintain close, multimillion-dollar relationships while disclosing limited or no
details about the ties.

   At a time when people are making more of their own health-care decisions,
such coziness raises questions about the impartiality of groups that patients
trust for unbiased information. It also poses a challenge for groups trying to
hold patients' trust and still raise money to serve them.

   An Inquirer examination of six groups, each a leading advocate for patients
in a disease area, found that the groups rarely disclose such ties when
commenting or lobbying about donors' drugs. They also tend to be slower to
publicize treatment problems than breakthroughs. And few openly questioned drug
prices.

   At the same time, the groups perform an important function by providing
services unavailable elsewhere, such as patient education and help in obtaining
medications or affording insurance.

   They also try to police themselves. For example, each declares it does not
endorse or reject products. All formally require that industry grants be
"unrestricted," meaning that there are no strings attached. One of them,
Children & Adults with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, or CHADD,
formally caps pharmaceutical donations.

   Combined, the six received at least $29 million from drug companies last
year, according to tax returns and annual reports. The amount ranged from 2
percent to 7 percent of revenue at the Arthritis Foundation, to 89 percent to 91
percent at the much smaller National Gaucher Foundation.

   Some health-care experts, although applauding the groups' work, are calling
for greater disclosure. And many patients expressed surprise at the ties.

   "I don't think that would make a difference as far as taking a drug," said
Gloria Antonucci, 65, leader of a Montgomery County pain-support group that
relies on Arthritis Foundation advice. "But I think it would make me, maybe, 250
percent more skeptical about what the group is saying."

   Jerome Kassirer, a Tufts University and Yale University medical school
professor and author of On the Take: How Medicine's Complicity With Big Business
Can Endanger Your Health, said better disclosure would guard against abuse.

   "These organizations are susceptible to industry influence because they have
trouble raising money themselves," Kassirer said.

   But not all nonprofits are alike, said Marc Boutin, executive vice president
of the National Health Council, a standard-setting coalition funded by
nonprofits and drug companies. He said leading nonprofits with "fire walls"
against donor influence were worlds apart from questionable organizations.

   "We are controlled by volunteers who are living with a condition and the
drugs they take, and I guarantee these people would not be influenced by a
donor," Boutin said.

Matter of credibility

   For drug companies, patient groups carry credibility that the industry
sometimes lacks to target patients and "opinion leaders" who drive
prescriptions, and hence, sales. Nonprofits also help patients stay on the
medicine and push insurers to pay for it.

   "Does it help us? Sure," said Matthew Emmens, Wayne-based chief executive
officer of Shire PLC, the No. 1 ADHD drugmaker and a major donor to CHADD.

   "In the industry, we feel we're doing a pretty good thing while making money,
which is even better," said Norm Smith, president of Langhorne-based Viewpoint
Consulting Inc. and veteran marketer for Merck & Co. Inc., Johnson & Johnson and
others.

   The donations are sometimes portrayed by the companies and nonprofits as
"giving back" to patients. But the funding usually comes from the companies'
marketing or sales divisions, not charity offices, company and nonprofit
officials said. Grants often rise with promotional spending as a drug hits the
market and fall when sales ebb.

   Donations from Merck and Pfizer Inc. to the Arthritis Foundation more than
doubled, to at least $1.65 million combined, in 2000 as they launched Vioxx and
Celebrex. The donations fell below $375,000 by 2004, when safety fears had
flattened sales, foundation reports show.

   Merck explicitly wove the foundation into sales strategies. A 2001 internal
memo, disclosed in product-liability trials, shows that Merck sought to use the
foundation's pain-management program to "demonstrate additional benefits" of its
products.

   Foundation president John Klippel said he was unaware of Merck's plan. But he
dismissed it as an example of mutual interests in treatment, not profits. "We
envision that as an educational program," he said. "Their marketing folks
envision it as marketing."

   When interests diverge, however, groups must be ready to face donor pressure.
Michael J. Fitzpatrick, president of the National Alliance on Mental Illness, or
NAMI, said one donor recently demanded that, in return for funding a TV
public-service announcement, the ad include the company's direct contact
information. Fitzpatrick said NAMI refused.

   The industry also benefits in Washington and state capitals, where nonprofits
lobby for issues such as expanded Medicaid drug coverage or treatment programs.
That can boost sales.

   All six groups are active lobbyists. NAMI, for example, urges and helps
states and localities to create special one-on-one "assertive" treatment
programs, which include making patients take their medicine.

   It acknowledged that drug-company donors may benefit but insisted that's not
the goal. "Nobody from the pharmaceutical industry tells us what to do," NAMI
president Fitzpatrick said.

Unusual corporate gift

   In 2000-2001, the American Diabetes Association did not disclose an unusual
gift from Lilly: a lent executive, Emerson "Randy" Hall Jr., who moved into its
Alexandria, Va., headquarters and coached it on growth strategies, all paid by
Lilly.

   Vaneeda Bennett, the ADA vice president for development, denied that the gift
compromised the group but conceded that it might look bad. "We always walk a
fine line on showing favoritism to one company or another. I would imagine other
corporate donors would look askance at it," Bennett said, adding that, if it
were offered again, "we'd ask for money."

   Hall, a Philadelphia native now retired and living in Princeton, said he
never tried to influence the group and merely helped it market itself, including
writing its slogan, "Cure. Care. Commitment." He estimated that his work,
including diabetes patient research he subsequently shared with Lilly, would
have cost "hundreds of thousands" from a contractor.

   Asked why it did not cite Hall on its tax returns or annual report, ADA
spokeswoman Diane Tuncer said: "There is not a requirement to do so."

   Nonprofit experts laud such executive "loans," as long as groups disclose
them and limit their authority.

   Another group, NAMI, did not disclose that Lilly marketing manager Gerald
Radke briefly ran its entire operation. Radke began in 1999 as a Lilly-paid
"management consultant," then left Lilly and served as NAMI's paid "interim
executive director" until mid-2001. The group acknowledged this only after being
shown Radke's resume listing the job.

   NAMI's president, Fitzpatrick, said he did not know why his predecessors did
not disclose Radke's work. He said using Radke "was a reasonable move to try to
increase capacity."

   "But there is a perception issue," he said. "So that makes it, in hindsight,
a difficult choice."

   Radke, of Harrisburg, declined to comment. After NAMI, he ran the
Pennsylvania Office of Mental Health and Substance Abuse, and now serves in the
state Health Department.

   Indianapolis-based Lilly, which donated at least $2.5 million to the ADA and
$3 million to NAMI between 2003 and 2005, called its executive loans mutually
beneficial. "The primary goal is to assist that organization in developing a
needed capacity or function, but it also often serves to assist in the career
development of the employee," a Lilly spokesman, Edward G. Sagebiel, said.

Avoiding favoritism

   Drug marketers battle hardest over safety and effectiveness, and nonprofits
say they strive to avoid favoring one product over another. The six appeared to
be cautious on safety scares and rarely took the lead sounding drug-safety
alerts, even as they highlighted news of drug breakthroughs and approvals they
say members demand, their materials show.

   "We don't position ourselves as a watchdog," said Bennett of the ADA.

   The ADA, which received 5 percent to 10 percent of its revenue last year from
drug companies, reported little initially in 2004 about suspected diabetes risks
from antidepressants. Instead, Tuncer, its spokeswoman, said it convened an
expert conference - funded by drug companies - and ended up echoing the
concerns.

   The Arthritis Foundation, which received 2 percent to 7 percent from drug
companies, said little in 2000 about early studies raising questions about
Vioxx. But when follow-up studies confirmed the concerns in 2001 and 2002, the
group highlighted the problems and called for more safety research. A year
later, Merck cut off all donations.

   Patrick Davish, a Merck spokesman, denied any link between the donation
cutoff and criticism, calling it just a "change in funding priorities."

   Klippel, the group's president, said he doubted there was a link but said it
would not matter anyway. "It's not to say they've not been unhappy with us from
time to time," he said. "But it would not influence me."

   The ADHD group, while calling itself a science-based information
clearinghouse, has not published some critical information about ADHD drugs,
including an FDA warning last September about suicide risk from Strattera, made
by one of its biggest donors, Lilly.

   Its chief executive, E. Clarke Ross, said the group's professional advisory
board took time to review all information before posting it. Although the group
is an outspoken proponent of ADHD drugs, he said, it has strict fire walls
against corporate influence. Indeed, it was alone among the six in publishing an
easy-to-find figure on pharmaceutical donations: 22 percent last year, or $1.01
million.

   "We have a number of conflict-of-interest practices that meet industry
standards," he said.

   NAMI, like most groups, lists only FDA-confirmed side effects and typically
refers people with any questions to the drugmaker.

   One outspoken NAMI critic, David Oaks of the support group MindFreedom,
described the group as an independent but willing pawn of industry.

   "We're not saying there is some conspiracy in a skyscraper by a
pharmaceutical executive rubbing his hands together," Oaks said. "It's that the
entire paradigm is owned by the drug companies, and that the hazards of the
drugs, like brain damage, are not discussed."

   NAMI's Fitzpatrick defended its information, but acknowledged that groups
were facing demands for fuller drug information. "I think we should be much more
like Consumer Reports. We should have transparency on both side effects and
benefits," he said.

Close ties on orphan drugs

   Ties between drug marketers and patient groups appear closest on so-called
orphan diseases, which involve relatively few patients, experts and drugmakers.
Financial disclosures by two groups show they used most of the deductible
donations to pay the medical bills and insurance premiums of patients using
donors' products. That, in effect, spreads around costs while leaving
pharmaceutical prices unchanged.

   The National Organization for Rare Disorders, a Connecticut-based coalition
that tries to spur development of orphan drugs, got $10.5 million - 68 percent
of its revenue - from drug companies last year. It helps pay patients' premiums
and bills, administers companies' free-drug programs and helps recruit patients
for their clinical trials.

   Founder Abbey S. Meyers said that donors did not shape her group's positions
and noted that the industry needed the groups as much as they needed it: "I
criticize them [donors] all the time. It has never come back to hurt us."

   The Gaucher group, according to tax returns, received $1.77 million of its $2
million in revenue last year from Boston-based Genzyme, and spent $1.69 million
on medical bills and insurance premiums of patients taking Genzyme's enzyme
therapy Cerezyme, which cost insurers as much as $350,000 a year.

   In contrast, the foundation took nothing from Actelion Pharmaceuticals US
Inc., of San Francisco, maker of a second-line treatment, Zavesca, to be used
when Cerezyme doesn't work. Actelion said the foundation rejected its no-strings
grants and gave little or only critical Zavesca information.

   "I don't want to say anything nefarious is going on. But it doesn't pass
scrutiny," said Actelion's president, Shal Jacobovitz. He portrayed the
foundation "almost as a commercial arm" of Genzyme.

   Ronda P. Buyers, executive director, denied that the group is biased toward
Genzyme. "We're two different organizations. We do get its money, which allows
us to do what we do," she said.

   Another company, Shire Human Genetic Therapies, formerly Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc., which is developing an alternative to Cerezyme, also called the
foundation unusually close with Genzyme, even though it had accepted Shire's
small donations.

   Genzyme "is aggressive, and it's all part of their marketing plan to have a
dominant position," said Matt Cabrey, a Shire spokesman in Wayne.

   David Meeker, president of Genzyme's lysosomal business unit, said Genzyme
had no control over the foundation. He acknowledged that the group was so
important for Cerezyme marketing that if it didn't exist, Genzyme would have
looked for another.

   "This is how we built our business," said Meeker, whose company took in $932
million last year from Cerezyme, high for an orphan drug. "It's also building a
community where patients can get the help they need. It's the ultimate win-win."

   Buyers, who did not respond to repeated follow-up calls after an initial
interview, said:

   "We cannot make them bring the price down. They do make a lot. But without
the drug, there would be all these people who would be in such horrible
positions. More people would die."

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                              697 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              May 26, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 952 words

HEADLINE: New science may rewrite record books of our sports

BYLINE: RICK MAESE

BODY:

   Barry Bonds is on the verge of passing Babe Ruth in career home runs, and he
will then take aim at one of sport's most hallowed records. Lying in the
crossfire is all that is sacred. From the press box to the bleachers, the
amateur ethicists are all screaming about historical injustice, yet no one is
taking any actual action.

   Something must be done, and it's pretty clear what: Time for Hank Aaron to
make a comeback.

   The idea sounds silly, right? Like a bad Disney movie? But you've got to
remember that the face of sports is constantly under the knife of a plastic
surgeon. If the past 25 years evolved through fitness and technology, you can
bet that science will have the biggest effect over the next quarter century.

   Right now, scientists are working on advancements that would allow your
favorite athletes to play well past their prime. Golden years need not be olden
years. The ancient pursuit of the fabled Fountain of Youth has taken explorers
from Asia to the Caribbean to Florida, but researches think they've found the
secret in a petri dish.

   "There are so many technologies that make it seem that very soon in the
not-so-distant future, we should be able to rejuvenate people," says Matthew
Sarad, CEO of Telomolecular Corp. "This will mean a lot of things, but it
certainly could have implications in the sports world."

   Telomolecular is one of two American companies that are trying to
commercialize this cutting-edge science, which they say has the potential to not
only stop the aging process - but reverse it. Theoretically, this would
biologically allow 20th century legends such as Michael Jordan, Joe Montana and
Wayne Gretzky to make 21st century comebacks.

   We're not talking about a new BALCO supplement or drinking a few more cups of
Gatorade a day. Scientists are exploring ways to treat the human body through
gene therapy. They've already determined that much of the aging process has been
linked to the tiny tips of chromosomes.

   These telomeres preserve the genes in chromosomes. When we're young,
telomeres have no problem maintaining the recipe for life. But as we age, the
blueprint gets fuzzy and the new cells all look like a black-and-white photo of
Wilfred Brimley.

   A good analogy is to imagine a car factory with an assembly line of
machinery. Every time a new part rolls off the line, the machinery that made
that part becomes less and less effective. So in time, the wheels, clutches and
brakes are no longer as strong as earlier versions.

   The telomeres are the machinery in our bodies responsible for churning out
the new parts. Scientists have found that by repairing aging telomeres, new
chromosomes, cells and eventually muscles and organs can retain the strength and
potency of youth. A 75-year-old cell - or muscle or person - can essentially
continue performing like that of a 25-year-old.

   At universities across the country, researchers are tinkering in petri
dishes. They've seen tissues live thousands of times beyond their life
expectancy.

   "It seems like we have all the pieces of the puzzle," Sarad says. "It's hard
to say how long it will take for this technology to be commercialized. But the
biggest piece, we've figured it out. The cause of 97 percent of human aging, we
can reverse right now in a petri dish."

   Now before you start signing up your spouse for immediate treatments or
circulating a petition to re-sign Cal Ripken, it's worth noting that we're still
talking about the horizon.

   Most of this science is aimed at curing diseases, not hitting homers. But as
has always been the case, science translates into many different arenas. So
scientists currently trying to use gene therapy to battle muscular dystrophy
will surely see their work cribbed by athletes looking for a boost.

   (Tests in rodents have already found muscle growth of 20 to 50 percent and
their strength has doubled. Here's why sports officials all over the globe are
already scrambling: You can't test for gene therapy. It's only detectable
through muscle biopsies.)

   These advancements will be reason enough for a second set of record books.
The Babe or Barry won't be comparable to the power and production around the
corner. Albert Pujols, LeBron James and Shaun Alexander will seem mortal.

   Sarad's group is focusing on aging components, not muscle growth. His group
hopes to begin testing in animals in the next eight months. The process is no
easy task. Scientists have to get into every nucleus of every cell, which is
kind of like trying to break into the Pentagon armed with only a plastic spoon.

   Still, the entire nanotechnology field has aged a millennia in just the past
couple of years. This science that seems ripped from a comic book will be here
sooner than you think.

   Sarad estimates that within eight years there will be technologies on the
open market that help regenerate some muscles, skin and tissues.

   "That could impact players who are reaching the end of their playing
careers," he says. "Make them healthier and younger and more viable."

   Beyond that, Sarad says the advancements will continue at an alarming rate.
"Within the next 25 years, we should understand how to rejuvenate people," he
says.

   Which is great news if you miss those old Orioles pitching staffs or would
give anything to see the Baltimore Colts play again.

   "It's an extraordinary time in the field of nanotechnology," is what Sarad
says, which means that just around the corner, an extraordinary time in the
field of sports awaits.

   The trick now is taking this new science from a small dish to a living being.
And then, of course, someone is going to have to call Hank. He might want to
start stretching. The sanctity of sports depends on it.

   rick.maese@baltsun.com

   Read Rick Maese's blog at baltimoresun.com/maeseblog

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2006


                              698 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: Mice Deaths Are Setback In Gene Test

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A large number of mice died unexpectedly in a test of a new technique for
inactivating genes that has been widely proclaimed a breakthrough, scientists
are reporting today.

     The finding could give rise to new caution about the technique, called RNA
interference, which is already widely used in laboratory experiments and is
starting to be tested in people as a means of treating diseases by silencing the
genes that cause them.

   But Dr. Mark A. Kay and colleagues at the Stanford University School of
Medicine report today in the journal Nature that the technique, also called RNAi
for short, caused liver poisoning and death in mice.

     ''It's a very striking result -- all of the fatalities observed and the
toxicity, which was unexpected,'' said Timothy W. Nilsen, director of the center
for RNA molecular biology at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland.
''It's really a note of concern for rapid therapeutic development of RNAi.''

     But Phillip Zamore, an RNAi expert at the University of Massachusetts, said
the Stanford scientists had used a variation of the technique that was ''no
longer state of the art'' and required a very high dose. The tests already
conducted in people involve a different technique and lower doses, said Dr.
Zamore, who is a co-founder of Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, a company in Cambridge,
Mass., that is developing drugs using RNAi.

     Dr. Kay himself said he thought the findings were ''not a showstopper by
any means'' for the field. ''It's like any drug,'' he said. ''The toxicity
depends on the dose.''

     RNA is the chemical cousin of DNA, which encodes hereditary instructions in
genes. RNA was once thought to be a mere messenger in the cell. But in a rush of
discoveries over the last few years, scientists have found that RNA plays a more
active role in controlling gene activity.

     They have found that cells make tiny snippets of RNA, called microRNA, that
silence particular genes. And they have learned how to harness that natural
mechanism to turn off any gene of their choosing by inserting the proper piece
of RNA into cells.

     But Dr. Kay said his experiment showed that if too much interfering RNA was
put into a cell, it could overtax the cell's ability to process its own
microRNA.

     ''The good news about RNAi is that it uses the cell's machinery to do its
work, and that is why it's so effective,'' Dr. Kay said. ''The bad news about
RNAi is that it uses the cell's machinery to do its work. If you overload the
system, you hijack the machinery from performing its normal duties.''

     Dr. Kay and his team, led by a postdoctoral researcher, Dirk Grimm, wanted
to cure mice of hepatitis B, not to kill them. They induced RNA interference in
the mice's liver cells, intending to silence one of the hepatitis virus's major
genes.

     In some cases this worked, and the virus was suppressed without side
effects. In other cases the mice got liver poisoning, and some of them died.

     The researchers tried the same thing in mice without hepatitis and then
they tried using RNA interference to turn off different mouse genes.

     Of 49 different RNA snippets meant to shut down six different genes, 36
caused liver injury and 23 led to death within two months. The RNA at the
highest concentration was most toxic.

     But some scientists said the problem appeared to be related to the
technique used by Dr. Kay, which is a type of gene therapy. The Stanford team
put DNA, not RNA, into the mouse liver cells. The DNA became part of the mice's
genetic makeup and the mouse cells then produced the gene-silencing RNA, which
was carried out of the nuclei into the body of the cells.

     The scientists hypothesized that a protein that transports RNA out of the
nucleus became overloaded.

     The other technique is to put the interfering RNA itself into cells. That
RNA does not need to be transported out of the cell nuclei, so that transporter
protein would not be overloaded, some scientists said.

     ''These data really represent the fundamental limitations of gene therapy,
not of RNAi,'' John Maraganore, chief executive of Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, said
of the report in Nature. The company has already reported that it safely tested
a nasal-spray RNA drug intended to treat a respiratory infection, on 65 healthy
volunteers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006


                              699 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A27 , SPECIAL INTERESTS Judy Sarasohn

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: Google Bolsters Its Washington Presence

BYLINE: Judy Sarasohn

BODY:

    Google, which along with other Internet companies is battling the telephone
and cable giants over "network neutrality," is doubling the size of its
Washington lobby staff.

    From one to two.

    Yet, it's a big hire for Google Inc. Jamie E. Brown, a special assistant to
President Bush for legislative affairs, will join the company next month as
federal relations counsel. She'll be working with Alan B. Davidson, head of the
office, a Democrat, and previously associate director of the Center for
Democracy and Technology, a public policy nonprofit that supports access to the
Internet, privacy rights and free expression.

    The company does have a couple of junior support people in the D.C. office
and some outside lobbyists. Jon Murchinson, a spokesman for Google, said the
company plans to build its Washington office but has no specific number in mind.

    Although the lobby-biz chatter is that Google needs to add some Republican
firepower in town, Murchison wouldn't talk partisan politics.

    "We hired her because she's going to be an asset" to our users, he said.
"Jamie has a track record of success in guiding important and complicated issues
through the legislative process, and she will be a strong advocate on behalf of
Google and our users."

    Ed Gillespie, the Republican of Quinn Gillespie & Associates, worked closely
with Brown on the  Senate confirmations of Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and
Justice Samuel A. Alito Jr. She participated in mock hearings to prepare them
and walked the Capitol halls with them.

    "She is one of the smartest, most energetic people I've ever worked with,"
Gillespie said. "She will be a huge asset to Google at a time when they need
some help on the Republican side."

    On "network neutrality," Google, Amazon.com Inc., Yahoo Inc. and others are
fighting Verizon Communications Inc., AT&T Inc. and other broadband behemoths
over access to new fiber-optic networks. Other issues that Google cares about on
the Hill involve copyright laws, privacy and foreign trade.

    Brown said in a statement: "I have been incredibly honored to be able to
serve the president in the White House, but I am thrilled about this opportunity
to join the excellent team at Google. This is an extraordinarily exciting and
important time for the Internet industry, with many policy questions being
debated and decided for the very first time."

   Speaking of veterans of the Bush administration . . . Kelley Gannon, who
traipsed around the world doing press advance for both Presidents Bush and more
recently worked for the chain-drugstore folks, has joined Fleishman-Hillard as a
senior vice president in the firm's public affairs practice.

    Gannon had been vice president of communications at the National Association
of Chain Drug Stores since 2003. She said her move to Fleishman was unrelated to
the shake-up at NACDS; her boss there, Craig L. Fuller, resigned last month.

    "I thoroughly enjoyed my time there. I felt like I needed a new phase in my
life," Gannon said.

    She will be providing "strategic counsel" and perhaps some lobbying,
depending on client needs. "I'm just happy to fill a client's need, be it
communications or lobbying," Gannon said.

    As Karen Judd Lewis nicked from her new employer's slogan, she "is free to
move about the country." Lewis, a former partner at the law and lobby firm of
Williams & Jensen, recently joined Dallas-based Southwest Airlines as senior
director for governmental affairs.

    Lewis says she likes the company's "values," its team approach and even the
sometimes lame sense of humor of its crews, which she says she shares. One of
her big priorities will be to fight for the repeal of the "Wright Amendment"  --
named for then-House Speaker Jim Wright (D-Tex.)  --  which restricts operations
at Dallas Love Field.

    In other moves about town . . . Kristi Kennedy, until recently legislative
director for Sen. Paul S. Sarbanes (D-Md.), has joined Bryan Cave Strategies'
strategic corporate consulting practice.

    Dan Cohen, has left Inamed Corp., a medical device manufacturing company,
and joined US Oncology Inc. He has opened a D.C. office for the nationwide
cancer treatment and research network. The company said the office will allow it
to "play a more active role in the day-to-day Capitol Hill activities and
regulatory policy development in key agencies that are critical to national
cancer policy." A former Hill staffer, Cohen had also worked at the American
Israel Public Affairs Committee.

    Patrick Brady has joined Widmeyer Communications as a vice president working
with the shop's health-care and public affairs clients. He previously worked for
Spectrum Science Communications and was executive director of Citizens for Long
Term Care, a coalition of national and local health-care providers, advocates,
insurers and others.

    Widmeyer recently signed up several new clients, including the American
Foundation for the Blind, Pfizer Inc. and the American Society of Gene Therapy.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006


                              700 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                               STATEWIDE EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: STUDY LINKS FLU VACCINE, ELDER HEALTH

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

BODY:

   Giving the elderly a higher dose of flu vaccine might be an easy way to save
lives, a team of researchers suggested Monday.

   Influenza kills about 36,000 Americans annually, the great majority of whom
are frail elderly.

   In a trial funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, part of the National Institutes of Health, researchers at Baylor
College of Medicine divided 202 adults older than 65 into four groups. The
groups received either a normal dose of vaccine, twice the normal dose, four
times the normal dose or a placebo.

   The researchers theorized that the higher doses would produce more antibodies
in the elderly, likely making them better able to fend off the flu.

   According to the study, published in the current issue of the Archives of
Internal Medicine, the group that received four times the normal dose of flu
vaccine produced 44 percent to 79 percent more antibodies than those receiving
the normal dose. The vaccine, made by sanofis pasteur, was well tolerated at all
dose levels, the study said.

   A Big, Fat Bias

   Just how much do people hate being fat? Between 15 percent and 30 percent
would rather be depressed or an alcoholic, walk away from their marriage or give
up the possibility of having children, according to a study by Yale University
researchers.

   One in 20 people said they would rather lose a limb than be fat. Four percent
said they would rather be blind.

   The study, published in this month's issue of the journal Obesity, included
responses from 4,000 people of varying weights.

   People of all weights exhibited an implicit bias against overweight people.
In timed word categorization tests, for instance, they were much more likely to
associate words like ``bad'' and ``lazy'' to fat people than thin people. Most
people also indicated they held explicit biases against fat people, for example,
answering yes to the question: ``Are fat people lazier than thin people?''

   Only the obese and very obese did not show an explicit anti-fat bias.

   ``It drives home the message that weight bias is powerful and pervasive,''
said Marlene Schwartz, associate director of Yale's Rudd Center for Food Policy
and Obesity and lead author of the study.

   New Sight For Chickens

   Using gene therapy, scientists at the University of Florida gave sight to
baby chickens with a disease that otherwise would have left them blind,
scientists announced Monday.

   The birds had the avian equivalent of the human disease Leber congenital
amaurosis type 1, or LCA1, a genetic defect that destroys the function of
photoreceptor cells in the retina.

   ``The visual capabilities of the treated animals far exceeded our
expectations,'' said Sue Semple-Rowland, associate professor of neuroscience and
author of the study, which appears today in the online journal Public Library of
Science-Medicine.

   The scientists used a virus containing a normal copy of the defective
photoreceptor gene and injected it through an egg shell into the developing
chicken embryo. Semple-Rowland said that after the first treated chick had
hatched, it began to peck at little dots on a piece of paper.

   The scientists noted that while the procedure slowed the degeneration of the
chicks' photo-receptors, it did not completely halt it.

   In theory, human infants who have been diagnosed with LCA1 might one day
benefit from similar gene therapies, although more work needs to be done to
perfect the technique, the scientists said.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                              701 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                              May 22, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; D05

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: Start-Up

BODY:

     Name: Omnia Biologics Inc.

    Location: Rockville.

    Funding: The company has raised more than $1.5 million from private
investors.

    Big idea: Omnia provides small-scale, clinical-grade manufacturing for
vaccines, gene therapeutics and biodefense products. The service is used by
researchers and small companies that need to produce small batches of drugs
under development so that they can be tested further. Dale VanderPutten, chief
executive and chief scientific officer, said small companies are caught in a
Catch-22: They need clinical data to get funding, but they need funding to get
clinical data. "We want to help our customers have the best possible chance at
developing that therapeutic for Parkinson's, ovarian cancer, or flu vaccine," he
said.

    Where the idea was hatched: "A continuing problem we saw all the time was
the lack of availability of small-scale production to make batches so you could
see if the product demonstrated the promise it had in the animal models,"
VanderPutten said. "We saw small companies and even larger companies killing
promising projects because of the lack of manufacturing."

    Big-name customers: Intradigm Corp., Lentigen Corp., AFG Biosolutions Inc.,
PhageVax Inc.

    Price: Varies widely depending on the complexity of production. VanderPutten
said he initially planned on a "soup-to-nuts" pricing menu, under which Omnia
would execute all steps involved in the production of a small batch of a drug.
But, he said, he was surprised to find customers asking for just one or two
steps, instead of the whole package, so the company now provides services a la
carte as well. "We try to work with companies as if we were the manufacturing
component of that small company," he said.

    Founded: The company was incorporated in 2002, and began operations in 2005.

    Who's in charge: VanderPutten.

    Employees: Seven.

    Web site: www.omniabiologics.com

    Partners: University of Maryland Bioprocess Scale-Up Facility.

    What the name means: VanderPutten said the company name was inspired by his
vision to produce many types of biological therapies.

    Where will you be in five years?: VanderPutten said he hopes to add
capacity. "We don't want to grow in a way that we add capacity so we're making
bigger and bigger lots. We never want to become that company."

    Quote: "We're a contract manufacturer. We're the people who dress up the
movie stars for the big ball. It's never our glory, but our customer's glory.
But it was Levi Strauss who made all the money in the gold rush."

      --  Andrea Caumont

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2006


                              702 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; CONVENTIONS; Pg. 4C

LENGTH: 182 words

HEADLINE: Convention Calendar

BODY:

   These events are scheduled at the Baltimore Convention Center, Howard and
Pratt streets:

   May 21-26

   American Geophysical Union -- convention. Estimated attendance: 3,000+.
Contact number: 202-777-7333, ext. 325

   May 22-24

   Towards Electronic Patient Records -- convention. Estimated attendance:
4,000+. Contact number: 617-964-3923, ext. 204

   May 24-27

   Azusa 100 -- convention. Estimated attendance: 5,000+. Contact number:
410-750-1735

   May 27-28

   BACNA -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 1,500+. Contact number: 410-467-2136

   May 30-June 4

   American Society of Gene Therapy -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 2,500+.
Contact number: 414-278-1341

   June 2-8

   American Society of Echocardiography -- convention. Estimated attendance:
2,500+. Contact number: 919-861-4537

   June 8-9

   Reality Check Plus -- meeting. Estimated attendance: 800+. Contact number:
410-837-2727

   June 11-14

   Special Libraries Association -- convention. Estimated attendance: 7,800+.
Contact number: 703-647-4937

   June 15-24

   National Baptist Congress of Christian Education -- convention. Estimated
attendance: 50,000+. Contact number: 215-895-4073, ext. 2

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2006


                              703 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             May 18, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 955 words

HEADLINE: LSU unveils plan for medical complex;
Downtown parcel near I-10 considered

BYLINE: By Jan Moller, and Laura Maggi, Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE  --  Louisiana State University is considering a 37-acre parcel
of land near Interstate 10 in downtown New Orleans for a new $1 billion complex
of teaching hospitals and medical research facilities that would be built in
collaboration with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, according to school
officials and a preliminary report released Wednesday.

   The report from a group studying how the collaboration would work does not
give a location for the new facility, but an LSU official speaking on condition
of anonymity said a prime site being considered is at Tulane and South Claiborne
avenues, near the current medical district where Charity and the VA Hospital are
located.

   LSU System President William Jenkins told the Louisiana Recovery Authority
that the site could eventually house a gene therapy research facility, a cancer
center and a business incubator for biotechnology companies.

   "This medical complex would save the state of Louisiana hundreds of millions
of dollars over the projected cost of replacing Charity Hospital alone while
providing world-class medical care to the needy and our veterans," Jenkins told
the Louisiana Recovery Authority board.

   The preliminary report calls for LSU to build a 10- to 12-story tower and the
VA to build an eight- to 10-story tower, which would be connected by a common
building that would house shared functions such as a physical plant, an
emergency room and certain labs and testing equipment. The new facility would
replace Charity and University hospitals, which were knocked out of commission
by Hurricane Katrina.

   Money in Bush budget

   Plans are to reopen University Hospital on a temporary basis later this year
until a permanent replacement is built.

   A final version of the report is expected to be finished by early June. It is
expected to contain detailed cost estimates and a legal framework spelling out
how the collaboration between LSU and the federal government would work.

   Once the plans are in place, money would still have to be appropriated by the
Legislature and Congress. President Bush's proposed 2007 budget includes $537
million to pay the federal share, while the state's contribution likely would
not come until next year at the earliest.

   Gov. Kathleen Blanco has spoken enthusiastically about the proposed
collaboration between LSU and the VA, and on Wednesday the idea was also
endorsed by the Recovery Authority board.

   But plans for the new hospital complex come at a time of uncertainty for the
overall Charity Hospital System, as the Legislature is under pressure from
private and nonprofit hospitals to redistribute the indigent-care dollars that
finance the charity system.

   The same report by PricewaterhouseCoopers that endorsed the new medical
complex in New Orleans also recommends reducing LSU's role in running the
state's unique network of public hospitals. The university's role should be
limited to overseeing teaching hospitals in Baton Rouge, New Orleans and
Shreveport, the report says.

   Cool reception

   But that idea got a cool reception Wednesday from the Recovery Authority's
board, which got its first extensive look at the 244-page study. Rather than
endorsing the full report, it voted to approve just three of its 15
recommendations.

   Dr. Mary Ella Sanders, head of the Recovery Authority's health task force,
said she would like Blanco to review the report and take needed action, raising
the question of whether the task force was appropriate for such a wide-ranging
issue involving a myriad of state agencies.

   "I'm honestly not sure that the LRA is the place for health -care reform,"
said Sanders, a radiation oncologist at the LSU Health Sciences Center in
Shreveport who served for almost three years as interim chancellor of the Health
Sciences Center in New Orleans.

   Andy Kopplin, executive director of the Recovery Authority, suggested that
the three recommendations adopted deal directly with health care problems caused
by the storms, which are obviously within the panel's jurisdiction.

   In addition to endorsing a new charity hospital for New Orleans, the Recovery
Authority agreed with PricewaterhouseCoopers' recommendations to bring back
nursing home beds and home-care services in the New Orleans area and devote more
resources to mental health services.

   Balks at full report

   A few Recovery Authority members balked at considering the full report,
saying they had not yet had a chance to read it. But others suggested that the
authority is the perfect venue to tackle the politically charged issue of
changing the way health care is delivered and financed in Louisiana.

   "Why would we want to endorse certain recommendations and not the entire
report?" asked John Landry, a retired businessman who is director of development
for the University of Louisiana at Lafayette. "That is our role, we are above
the fray and hopefully we can make objective recommendations."

   That sentiment was echoed by Barry Erwin, president of the Council for a
Better Louisiana, who asked the panel to again take up the report at a future
meeting. Erwin said the report offers a framework to start changing the health
care system, saying the Recovery Authority could push forward changes to the
system.

   After the meeting, Kopplin said the authority could end up reviewing the
report again, but said it made sense to focus support on the areas that need to
recover from the hurricanes.

   Kopplin also pointed out that U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary
Michael Leavitt has asked that the state focus on New Orleans as it begins
debating how to rework Louisiana's health care system.

   . . . . . . .

   Jan Moller can be reached at jmoller@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-5207.

   Laura Maggi can be reached at lmaggi@timespicayune.com or (225) 342-5590.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2006


                              704 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                              May 08, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED ; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 747 words

HEADLINE: A NEW STRATEGY FOR MEDICINE

BYLINE:  BY ROBERT H. RUBIN

BODY:

   THE AVERAGE person has only a cursory awareness of the great progress made in
the past 50 years in the prevention and treatment of life-threatening disease.
Drugs developed during this period have greatly improved the chances for
recovery from invasive infection, acute cardiovascular disease, and a variety of
endocrine and immunologic disorders. Today, new classes of molecules hold great
promise for the treatment of previously intractable disease. However, several
challenges must be met if these new molecules are to be clinically useful:

   An international shortage of clinical scientists, particularly clinical
pharmacologists, capable of transferring laboratory discoveries to the bedside
in the safest and most efficient manner.

   The absence of widespread arrangements for side-by-side collaboration among
academic, pharmaceutical industry, and government scientists to work together on
new medicines.

   The availability of measurement strategies to evaluate candidate therapies.

   For acute diseases, measurement of the safety and effectiveness of most new
treatments is relatively straightforward. Not so for the envisioned new
therapies that offer particular promise for chronic illnesses such as
degenerative neurologic disease, arteriosclerosis, schizophrenia, and certain
cancers. A new development strategy is needed to demonstrate the utility of
these new therapies. The importance of these issues is underlined by the
attention paid them by the National Institutes of Health's Roadmap and the Food
and Drug Administration's Critical Path for bringing new approaches to the
bedside.

   Everyone agrees that the most important individual to be considered in the
development of new therapies is the patient. Yet, patients today hear about new
drugs and, particularly, revolutionary drugs-in-the-making before they are
available. News flashes too often announce advances prematurely and
misleadingly, raising false hopes that some dread disorder can be cured or
eased.

   With all drugs we need to be assured they can safely do the job they are
intended to do.

   As we move forward, trying now to treat disorders long thought to be almost
untreatable, new drug development becomes significantly harder. We are entering
the realm of complex, degenerative processes for which we have little experience
in devising effective therapies or in testing them for acceptable use. How are
we going to pre-prove safety and efficacy of the biologically diverse therapies
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, stem cells, and gene therapy that are
emerging? What new approaches to assessing these novel interventions will be
required? We contend that new collaborations will be required among the
stakeholders.

   For too long, a barrage of ethical and legal conflicts have dominated the
interactions among pharmaceutical companies, academic research laboratories, and
such governmental agencies as the NIH and the FDA. To our embarrassment and
regret, serious conflict of interest issues and outright lawsuits have been
involved.

   But with so much at stake for seriously afflicted patients, we must develop
new 21st century models of collaboration that take advantage of the strengths of
each of the parties while adhering to the highest of ethical standards. We need
to become fully open about our singular and independent roles in the midst of
mutual scientific goals.

   Recently, we staged an intensive "immersion" course in clinical pharmacology
for the benefit of 20 medical fellows physicians in various specialties who are
enrolled in a special Clinical Investigator Training Program of the
Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology Division of Health Sciences and
Technology and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

   The pharmaceutical houses of Pfizer and Merck not only funded the immersion
course, but also sent their scientists to participate. More important, they made
it possible for senior scientists to teach alongside academic faculty for the
benefit of the trainees.

   The importance of this "experiment in collaboration" goes well beyond the
extraordinary success of the Clinical Investigator Training course. The
experiment provides tangible evidence that new forms of academic-industrial
collaboration are both possible and desirable. If we are to take on research not
only for the creation, but also the application, of new therapies, then
collaborative models will be necessary.

   It is in such new-style arenas of collaboration where tomorrow's therapies
will be generated and properly tested.

NOTES: Dr. Robert H. Rubin is a professor at Harvard Medical School and
associate director of the Division of Infectious Disease at Brigham and Women's
Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006


                              705 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                               May 8, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Editorial; A19

LENGTH: 897 words

HEADLINE: Wrongly Blaming The FDA

BYLINE: William Hubbard

BODY:

    Last month the Government Accountability Office released another report
criticizing the Food and Drug Administration's efforts to ensure the safety of
prescription drugs. It seems to have become great sport for public officials to
revel in FDA shortcomings. Time after time in recent years, FDA scientists have
warned of threats to the safety of the nation's food and drugs,  sought new
resources and tools to deal with those threats, and  been duly dismissed. Yet
when their predictions have come true, decision makers of all political stripes
rush to bemoan the agency's failures.

     Take drug safety. When the public clamored a decade ago for faster access
to new drugs, the FDA developed procedures to get lifesaving drugs on the market
in less time  --  for instance, by allowing much data about a drug's safety to
be gathered after the drug was approved. But there was a trade-off:  FDA
scientists would accept greater risk that safety problems could slip through,
while drug companies would continue to study the drugs for such problems (and
Congress would give the FDA authority to compel such study if needed).

     FDA scientists have done as they promised  --  new drugs have been sped to
market, and the FDA leads the world in approval times. But the companies often
fail to do the needed safety studies, and Congress has taken no steps to allow
the  agency to compel them. FDA scientists also recognized that rapid drug
approvals can miss important safety indicators and requested funding to create
state-of-the-art systems to monitor drug safety. The new dollars that the White
House proposed and Congress provided for this  come to a nice round number:
zero.

     These are not isolated examples. They are part of a pattern of neglect by
officials of both parties in the White House and Congress. FDA scientists warned
almost a decade ago that mad cow disease would inevitably strike in the United
States, and they sought help to prevent it. No help came, but the disease did.
The FDA was raising alarms about the dangers of bioterrorism as far back as the
Reagan administration. Again, no money, no attention. Also at that time, FDA
officials began pleading for resources  --  mostly to no avail  --  to inspect
the ever-increasing flood of foods imported from 130 countries, including Sudan,
Iran, Iraq and Colombia, to name a few examples. The list of problems identified
by the FDA, then ignored, goes on and on.

     For most of the FDA's 100-year history, presidents and congresses have
recognized its importance to public health by giving it the resources and
authority to respond to the rapid evolution in risks from the thousands of
products it regulates. But for some years now, the agency's budget has remained
essentially flat while major new responsibilities have been piled on. The
results of this weakening of the agency are easy to document: Food inspections
have dropped from a robust 50,000 in 1972 to about 5,000 today, meaning that
U.S. food processors are inspected on average about every 10 years. The chance
of a food product from overseas being inspected is infinitesimal. Most raw
materials for our drugs come from foreign producers  that are rarely inspected.
The rate of quality-control failures found in manufacturing facilities by FDA
inspectors has soared. Think your pacemaker, heart valve, microwave oven or
morning vitamin was inspected? Dream on.

    How much does Congress appropriate for the agency that has responsibility
for the safety of the whole country's supply of food, drugs, vaccines, medical
devices, cosmetics, animal foods and drugs, dietary supplements, and more? The
same amount as Fairfax County, Va., provides for its schools.

     The future could get worse. On the horizon are somatic cell and gene
therapies that might perform miracles for dying patients or might create
tragedies of a kind never seen before. There are  medical devices that make
today's "high tech" seem primitive and vaccines that could well be needed to
save much of our civil society. Soon to appear in your supermarket are foods
from genetically modified and cloned animals. A majority of our fruits and
vegetables will be foreign-grown in the near future.

     These developments and innovations hold the promise of transforming the
terrain of modern medicine and food production. FDA officials have been trying
mightily to get the attention of decision makers who can give them the ability
to adequately oversee these things. And, in a post-Sept. 11 world, there are new
challenges to the food and drug supply that I cannot even hint at publicly.

     Sens. Orrin Hatch and Edward Kennedy and a few other political leaders have
expressed concern about the effects of starving what has been the world's
foremost consumer protection agency. But most legislators are content to await
the emergence of problems rather than head them off.

     Maybe the FDA's scientists can keep their finger in the dike. Maybe we'll
be lucky and avoid a major crisis. But maybe the great Dodger baseball executive
Branch Rickey got it right: When asked how much luck played into his teams'
success, he scoffed that luck was a residue of design. If we keep failing the
FDA, and the FDA in turn fails, it's inevitable that our luck will run out.

    The writer retired last year after more than 25 years at the Food and Drug
Administration, the last 14 as associate commissioner.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2006


                              706 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                             April 30, 2006 Sunday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. G1

LENGTH: 1669 words

HEADLINE: Cleveland BioLabs betting on future of bioscience in Northeast Ohio;
First toss since 2000

BYLINE: Mary Vanac, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A proposed initial public offering by Cleveland BioLabs Inc. is generating
buzz in Northeast Ohio financing circles and beyond.

   The offering is the first bioscience IPO proposed in the region since 2000.
Two others were filed but withdrawn during that time.

   If the offering succeeds, Cleveland BioLabs would be the first local
bioscience company to go public since 1996.

   The Cleveland company, which is developing injectable drugs to ward off
radiation and chemical poisoning, also would be the first in the current class
of bioscience hopefuls to graduate to the stock market.

   What could the proposed offering mean for Northeast Ohio? For one, it could
be a psychological boost.

   "Is this good news for Cleveland? Sure it is," said Mike Jackson, an
investment banker who is managing director of KeyBanc Capital Markets in
Cleveland. Jackson leads the health care group there.

   Cleveland's resident dean of venture capital also approves.

   "I'm encouraged to see an IPO in biotech in Northeast Ohio," said David
Morgenthaler, founder of the venture capital and buyout firm that bears his
name.

   Although Morgenthaler Ventures - the venture capital part of the firm - is
based in Menlo Park, Calif., Morgenthaler keeps his office here.

   The offering could help put Northeast Ohio on the bioscience investing map.

   Already it is causing investors to ask questions about the region, said Jim
Scozzie, senior vice president of BioEnterprise Corp., the Cleveland nonprofit
that helps develop health care companies in the region and find investors for
them.

   An IPO also could help dispel the image of Ohio as a "fly-over state," said
Bob Schmidt, technology entrepreneur and chief executive of Cleveland Medical
Devices Inc. - a place that high-powered investors skip on their way to deals on
the East and West coasts.

   The offering "speaks volumes about our region," Scozzie said. "It's a major
step up to the next [financing] level."

   Baiju Shah, president of BioEnterprise, sees the offering as recognition of
increasing venture capital activity in town. So does John Lewis, vice president
of Omeris, the state's biotech development organization.

   "I think it's a good validation of the progress that Ohio and Northeast Ohio
has made in the last three or four years," Lewis said.

   "There was a chasm" for bioscience companies looking for investments of
$50,000 to $2 million, Lewis said. These amounts are considered "seed or
pre-seed," meaning they are the first investments from outside a company's
founders, friends and family.

   Third Frontier opens doors

   Ohio's Third Frontier effort has stepped into the gap, investing about $18
million in 19 seed and pre-seed funds that, in turn, invest in young companies,
Lewis said.

   Private equity and venture capital firms also have stepped in. In 2001, Ohio
had only nine funds that were at least partly dedicated to investing in health
care. Now it has 38, Shah said.

   "The level of activity has picked up dramatically," said Jonathan Murray,
managing director for Early Stage Partners, a Cleveland venture capital firm
that invests in young companies.

   "In the five years I've been doing this, I don't think I've seen a better
time for life sciences investments in this community. It kind of snuck up on
me," he said.

   "In some way, this IPO is a measure of the progress that the community's
made."

   Even so, the offering doesn't mean Northeast Ohio has "made it" as a
bioscience center.

   "We are still waiting for a very large success," Morgenthaler said. "We
haven't yet found the platform that will move the program forward."

   Still, IPOs are exciting and can be a spectacular way for ground-floor
investors to cash out of their investments.

   The IPO market took a beating in recent years. When the stock market bubble
burst in 2000, the market for speculative initial offerings went dark.

   That market is slowly lighting up again. Big investors - the ones who buy IPO
shares - are just regaining an appetite for risk.

   "Financial markets go through their cycles," Murray said.

   The window for bioscience IPOs appears to be open, KeyBanc's Jackson said.
That means investors are ready to buy - although many of them want to pay less
than what offering underwriters are asking.

   Of the roughly 24 bioscience company offerings in the past two years, 17
commanded a per-share price that was lower than the price range set by
underwriters, Jackson said.

   Firm has license from Cleveland Clinic

   Cleveland BioLabs, located in the BioEnterprise Building near University
Circle, is developing and commercializing drugs under an exclusive intellectual
property license with the Cleveland Clinic.

   Because its first drug could be used by astronauts and the military,
Cleveland BioLabs has won 10 government grant commitments totaling $2.7 million
in the past two years.

   But the company needs more money to finish developing the drug, which shuts
down cell metabolism so that a radioactive or chemical attack can't kill it. If
the offering is successful, it could net millions of dollars.

   In a February filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission, Cleveland
BioLabs said its offering might raise as much as $14 million. The company won't
get all of that because it expects some existing shareholders to sell their
shares during the offering.

   It is unclear from the filing how much the company could receive or how much
investors would have to pay per share.

   Cleveland BioLabs executives, such as Michael Fonstein, chief executive and
president, and Andrei Gudkov, chief scientific officer and co-inventor, were not
available for comment. They are observing a quiet period as the SEC considers
the company's registration filing.

   Other offerings have sought more

   The Cleveland BioLabs offering is very small - second-smallest among
bioscience company IPOs in the past two years, KeyBanc's Jackson said.

   By comparison, AtriCure Inc. of suburban Cincinnati raised $48 million in an
IPO last year. It was the first successful bioscience public offering in Ohio in
seven years,

   And Athersys Inc., the Cleveland company that developed a line of adult stem
cells as a commercial product called MultiStem, raised $16.2 million in a
private stock sale in 2002. That followed an IPO bid that Athersys withdrew in
early 2001.

   Interviewed recently about the use of MultiStem cells in a Georgia study,
Athersys chief executive Gil Van Bokkelen said he believes the market for
bioscience investments has opened up. He did not rule out another IPO try for
his own company.

   Cleveland BioLabs also is a young company that has yet to develop - let alone
test and gain Food and Drug Administration approval for - its first commercial
product.

   Begun in June 2003, the company has yet to break even or make a profit. It
got nearly 90 percent of its 2005 revenues from government grants, and raised $6
million in a private sale of preferred stock in March of that year.

   "Drug development is a slow, expensive, risky and highly volatile process,"
the company said in a recent amendment to its registration filing.

   With its IPO money, Cleveland BioLabs hopes to get fast-track FDA approval
for a nonmedical application of its first drug in 18 to 36 months.

   "There have been a lot of ups and downs" among local bioscience companies,
said Christopher Coburn, executive director of CCF Innovations, the Cleveland
Clinic unit that is responsible for commercializing medical devices, materials
and drugs invented by the institution's doctors and surgeons. CCF Innovations
helped launch Cleveland BioLabs.

   "There are some companies that . . . the community had high hopes for that
never quite got to this point. We think that this is exciting, and there will be
more."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: mvanac@plaind.com, 216-999-5302

   BOX 1

   A local history of public offerings

   Bioscience companies in Northeast Ohio have had trouble with initial public
offerings. Datatrak International Inc. had the industry's latest local IPO in
1996. Even if a company goes public, it often doesn't stay that way.

   Oct. 1995 Beachwood biotech company Gliatech Inc. raises $21.9 million in its
initial offering of 2.3 million shares.

   Feb. 1996 NCS HealthCare Inc. in Beachwood raises $70 million in its IPO. NCS
HealthCare provides drugs and services to nursing homes.

   June 1996 Datatrak, maker of software for the drug, biotech and medical
device industries, sells 3 million initial shares for $40.5 million.

   Sept. 1996 NCS HealthCare raises another $121 million in a secondary
offering.

   Late 1999 Declining government reimbursements for nursing homes push NCS
HealthCare close to insolvency. Company trims inventories and staff, and closes
a third of its pharmacies.

   March 2000 NetGenics Inc., maker of software for pharmaceutical research,
files for an IPO that could raise between $60.5 million and $71.5 million.

   Aug. 2000 Food and Drug Administration questions about testing of Gliatech's
only product, a surgical gel, kills its merger with Guilford Pharmaceuticals.

   Oct. 2000 Cleveland drug discovery and gene therapy firm Athersys Inc. files
for a $115 million IPO.

   Late 2000 NCS HealthCare starts hunting for restructuring and partnering
options.

   Feb. 2001 Gliatech stops making its surgical gel after a supplier recalls one
of its ingredients.

   April 2001 Athersys withdraws its IPO, citing "hostile" market conditions.

   April 2001 NCS HealthCare defaults on its long-term debt.

   Sept. 2001 NetGenics pulls its IPO because of market weakness.

   March 2002 NetGenics is sold to Lion Bioscience, a German maker of
drug-discovery tools, for $17.6 million in stock.

   May 2002 Gliatech cuts jobs, begins selling assets and files for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection.

   Jan. 2003 NCS HealthCare is acquired by Omnicare Inc. for $54 million after a
long takeover battle.

   Feb. 2006 Cleveland BioLabs files for a $14 million IPO.

   BOX 2

   IPO facts

   82 percent of pharmaceutical or biotechnology companies that have gone public
since 1995 are still operating as independent public corporations.

   It takes five to 10 years, on average, after an IPO to say a drug/biotech
company is a true success.

   SOURCE: KeyBanc Capital Markets

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION BY: JON KRAUSE

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2006


                              707 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                             April 28, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 937 words

HEADLINE: Building a better bacterium;
Stripped-down E. coli could help vaccine-makers

BYLINE: SUSANNE RUST, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   In what could be a boon to development of vaccines and targeted therapies, a
researcher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in collaboration with a team
of international researchers, has created a streamlined, hardy form of the E.
coli bacterium by reducing its DNA to its bare essentials.

    This feat could enable pharmaceutical companies to start manufacturing
reliable DNA-based vaccines and gene therapies that can be created in large
quantities.

    Using his extensive knowledge of E. coli in combination with a set of
sophisticated molecular tools, Frederick Blattner, a UW geneticist, stripped
more than 15% of the bacteria's genome away, revealing a benign but
laboratory-friendly organism that both research and industry are excited about.

    "The potential is quite good," said Anthony Green, distinguished scientist
at Puresyn Inc., a Pennsylvania pharmaceutical contract manufacturer that
specializes in plasmid and gene transfer products, who wasn't involved in the
study.

    "Not only will it allow us to have better, more reliable fermentation" of
bacteria, which is essential for large-scale, high-quality manufacturing, he
said, but it also will alleviate some potential, albeit theoretical, safety
issues that have shadowed the burgeoning industry.

    The paper appeared in this week's online edition of the journal Science.

    Blattner, who is considered one of the foremost E. coli researchers in the
world, first sequenced the bacteria's genome in 1997. It wasn't long after this
feat that he started comparing different strains - placing the circular genomes
of several strains side by side.

    It soon became apparent that many of the genes in these strains were
completely different, while other parts were nearly identical. Knowing a bit
about how bacteria reproduce and acquire new genes, he wondered if these starkly
different bits of DNA were essential for the well-being of this bacteria.

    One of the ways bacteria acquire and lose genes is through a process called
horizontal transfer: They meet up with other bacteria or viruses and exchange
bits of DNA. Were these differences, then, the result of bacterial "trades?"

    If that were the case, they might not be necessary for the basic functioning
of the E. coli.

    So, he started to whittle these "excess" genes away, eventually removing
more than 15% of the entire genome. He discovered that not only could he remove
genes that make the bacteria harmful or genes that didn't do much of anything,
but in so doing, he was able to uncover an organism that was particularly hardy
and prolific.

    "It's like turning a 6-cylinder engine into a 4-cylinder, without
sacrificing quality, but giving it better gas mileage," Green said.

    Indeed, without having to spend excess energy on features that aren't
necessary for its existence, it can reproduce a lot faster.

    And that's in part why drug manufacturers such as Green are so giddy.

    For years, researchers have been interested in the developing field of
synthetic biology - an area of science in which scientists dreamed of molding
the entire genomes of bacteria and viruses in new and unprecedented ways.

    In other words, "trying to get bacteria to jump through flaming hoops," said
George Weinstock, a researcher in the department of molecular and human genetics
at the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, who was not involved in the study

   Human applications

    The promise behind this field lies in its usefulness for DNA-targeted drug
manufacturing and treatment of disease. This strategy allows researchers to
create or clone tailor-made DNA sequences in the form of plasmids - circular
bacterial DNA - which they then could insert into the human body, conceivably
triggering the body to create the proteins it needs to fight or ward off
disease.

    Green said, "In theory, it should be more efficient to introduce the genes
that make a protein," as opposed to the protein itself, which is the way most
vaccines work today.

    Indeed, not only would it be more efficient once introduced into the body,
but it should streamline the manufacturing process, too.

    Growing large quantities of DNA for therapeutic applications, which is
essentially the role of E. coli in this kind of drug manufacturing, is difficult
and only recently being addressed.

    "Instead of going through eggs," as flu vaccine manufacturers do, and trying
to guess which strain is going to appear while still producing enough for that
season, vaccine-makers could have a "set of plasmids that have all the flu
serotypes," and get E. coli to spew out the vaccine in large amounts in a short
period of time, Green said.

    The problem has been that E. coli is prone to quality-control problems. For
one, it's somewhat of a slow cloner. For another, its ability to pick up genes
from unwanted bacteria and viruses has made it less than reliable in some cases
and theoretically harmful in others.

    Blattner's work should strip E. coli of these problems, Green said, enabling
it to produce high volumes of DNA with relatively little concern about
introducing harmful or unwanted DNA.

    And while this second concern is largely theoretical, Green said, it is one
of the issues hanging over the development of these kinds of medicines. Indeed,
no human DNA vaccines are on the market.

    "We've combined a purest idea with a practical application," Blattner said.

    The organism has been patented by Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation and
licensed to Blattner's company, Scarab Genomics.

   Copyright 2006, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2006


                              708 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            April 27, 2006 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 746 words

HEADLINE: Two special girls, one compelling reason to believe in miracles

BYLINE: BOB BRAUN, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Every father of a daughter knows a little girl is a miracle.

   "No, but these are really miracle kids," says Jim White of Chatham. Father of
two daughters, Carly, 5, and Hanna, 2.

   Miracle children because they are alive, healthy and active. In the natural
course of things for children like Carly and Hanna, they should be sliding
inevitably toward a horrible death at a young age.

   Why they are not, why they look and act like normal children, is still an un
solved mystery. In that mystery lies the distinct possibility that a cruel
disease that almost always kills its victims as children soon may be treatable.

   "We believe what these children can tell us will improve our ability to treat
the condition they have," says Paola Leone, a neuroscient ist and principal
researcher on a project studying Canavan disease generally and, specifically,
the unusual course of the condition in Carly and Hanna White.

    "They have it," says the director of the Cell and Gene Therapy Center at the
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in Camden, a division of the University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. "There is no question."

   Leone knows this because of testing that shows the absence of an enzyme that
breaks down an acid. The acid destroys myelin, the protective covering around
nerve cells. A victim's brain quickly deteriorates, leaving the child blind,
unable to move, subject to sei zures, helpless, dying.

   An organization called Jacob's Cure, begun by the mother of a Canavan victim,
has raised nearly $3 million to support Leone's research. It and other medical
sources refer to the disease as "fatal" or "always fatal" and note most victims
die between the ages of 3 and 10. These sources also say there is no cure.

   More than 95 percent of Canavan victims are born to Ashkenazi Jews. Neither
Jim nor his wife is Jewish. It's rare - only 1,000 cases are known to exist in
the country.

   Leone and other researchers working with her have been developing a treatment
protocol based on gene therapy.

   "Discovering Carly and Hanna has made us more hopeful," Leone says.

   The key, she says, is finding why the absence of the enzyme triggers the
buildup of the destructive acid. Carly and Hanna don't have the enzyme, but they
also don't have the fatal buildup of the acid. Their myelin, often called "white
matter," has not been destroyed; it's normal.

   Testing showed that the gene in their mother, Dee, may have mutated and the
result is a mutation in the children that explains why the children do not have
symptoms.

   Carly shows some signs of developmental delays but nothing near what Canavan
victims suffer. Her problems also are responding to special education and
therapy. Hanna appears completely symptom-free. In most cases, symptoms begin to
appear at 6 months; children often do not live to be Carly's age.

   "We didn't think Carly was developing completely normally," says Dee, 35, who
stays home to work with their daughters. "She was having trouble keeping her
eyes focused."

   But what alerted doctors to something more serious was the child's lack of
muscle tone. After many tests, the diagnosis came back.

   "We were devastated," says Jim, 41, a financial adviser. "We knew what the
condition was be cause we looked up all kinds of diseases on the Internet."

   By this time, Hanna already had been born. She was tested, too. She had it.

   "But it didn't make sense," Jim says. "Hanna had no symptoms."

   Information about the girls' symptom-less form of the disease made it to
Leone who, just a few years earlier, had decided to give up her research because
of a lack of funding. She changed her mind after Jordana Holovach of Rye, N.Y. -
the mother of the Jacob in Jacob's Cure - began raising money for Leone's
research and helped the scientist win a National Institutes of Health grant.

   "All that has been done in trying to find treatment for Canavan has been done
through Jacob's Cure," says Leone, who also is di rector of surgical research at
Cooper Hospital in Camden.

   Jacob himself is 10 now, but he suffers from many of the symptoms that Carly
and Hanna escaped.

    Jim and Dee White are hopeful about the future. So hopeful they decided to
have another child - expected in the summer.

   "We didn't find out about Carly until after Hanna was born - and that's such
a good thing because we might not have had Hanna," Jim says.

   "We always wanted a lot of children. Now we believe we can."

   Bob Braun's columns appear Monday and Thursday. He may be reached at
bobbraun@verizon.net or (973) 392-4281.

GRAPHIC: 1. Jim and Dee White with Carly, 5, and Hanna, 2. The sisters have a
rare and usually fatal disease.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              709 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 6; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 795 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Test To Give Clues On Treatment Of Hepatitis C

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Celera Genomics plans to announce today that it has developed a genetic test
it says can help predict which patients with hepatitis C will eventually suffer
liver scarring and so are in most need of treatment.

     The test, which looks at variations in seven genes, represents another step
toward personalized medicine, in which treatments are tailored to patients.
Various companies are selling or developing such tests, for purposes that
include detecting cancer early, monitoring heart transplants and choosing which
drugs may work best to treat cancer, AIDS and heart disease.

   In the case of hepatitis C, therapy is expensive and can cause severe
fatigue, fever, depression and other side effects.

     Although there is some disagreement about this, it has been estimated that
only 20 percent of the roughly three million Americans chronically infected with
the virus will develop cirrhosis, the severe scarring that can lead to liver
failure or liver cancer. But it has not been possible to predict which patients
are at greatest risk. Celera's new test is meant to gauge an individual
patient's odds.

     ''The current therapies to treat hepatitis C are fairly noxious,'' said Dr.
Scott L. Friedman, chief of the division of liver diseases at the Mount Sinai
School of Medicine in Manhattan, who collaborated with Celera to help develop
the test. ''One of the tough decisions we face as clinicians is who should be
treated with current antiviral therapies and who can afford to wait.''

     He said the test ''represents a potential breakthrough once it's validated
independently in large numbers of patients.''

     Celera will present data on its test Friday in Vienna at the annual meeting
of the European Association for the Study of the Liver.

     Kathy P. Ordonez, the president of Celera, said the company hoped to
license the test to a laboratory that could offer it as early as the end of this
year. Tests performed by a single laboratory do not require approval from the
Food and Drug Administration.

     Ms. Ordonez said pricing would be up to the laboratory, but she expected it
to cost $1,000 or a bit less.

     She said Celera would also seek F.D.A. approval so it could sell the test
widely, but that would take more time, particularly if the agency were to
require more data.

     Treatment of hepatitis C now involves weekly injections of alpha interferon
for periods of a few months to more than a year. The therapy, which also
includes the pill ribavirin, can cost more than $30,000 a year.

     Yet many people can live with the virus for decades without needing
treatment.

     Dr. David A. Brenner, the chairman of medicine at Columbia University's
College of Physicians and Surgeons and editor in chief of the journal
Gastroenterology, urged caution about Celera's announcement, saying other
researchers had tried to find genetic predictors of liver disease but the
findings had not held up.

     ''A lot of these papers look good in the first data set and the next data
set is not encouraging,'' he said. He added that while Celera seemed to have
gone about its study in the correct way, he did not think the test was ready to
be used to decide on patient treatment.

     Celera, based in Rockville, Md., developed its test by scanning the DNA of
about 1,000 people who had hepatitis C for 10 years or more, long enough that
many would have developed cirrhosis. The company looked at 25,000 genetic
variations in each patient and found seven that could best be used to calculate
a risk of developing cirrhosis.

     It then tested DNA samples from 448 other longtime patients and found that
the test fairly accurately predicted which of them had cirrhosis. Of those with
early-stage liver disease, patients with a high-risk gene pattern had about a
sixfold chance of developing cirrhosis compared with those with low-risk gene
patterns.

     Celera, whose stock trades as a subsidiary of the Applera Corporation, was
co-founded by the maverick scientist J. Craig Venter in 1998 and raced against
the publicly financed Human Genome Project to determine the complete sequence of
human DNA, with President Clinton declaring a tie in 2000.

     Since then, the company has floundered. The original business plan to sell
access to its DNA information failed because the public genome project offered
its information free. Celera switched to developing drugs, and Mr. Venter was
replaced. Earlier this year, Celera largely abandoned drug development to focus
instead on diagnostic tests, which can be brought to market more quickly and
make better use of the company's genetics expertise.

     Celera, which is losing money, had revenue of $31 million in the 2005
fiscal year. Its stock, which has traded in the range of $9 to more than $13 in
the last year, closed yesterday at $11.37, up a penny.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2006


                              710 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            April 26, 2006 Wednesday
                          FINAL Edition; ALL Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 417 words

HEADLINE: Ohio among winners of health-care capital

BYLINE: MARY VANAC, PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Ohio was fourth in a photo finish of Midwestern states that won health-care
venture capital in the first quarter.

   Five Ohio companies, including three in Northeast Ohio, won a total of $22
million from venture investors in the quarter ended March 31.

   That was down from $41.8 million a year ago, a period that included two
investments of more than $10 million each, according to the quarterly Midwest
Health Care Venture Investment Report by BioEnterprise Corp. in Cleveland.

   Missouri topped the recent quarter's list with $26.7 million, Illinois was
next with $25.7 million, and Minnesota came in third with $23.6 million. Venture
capital received by companies in 11 Midwestern states and western Pennsylvania
fell 11 percent from a year ago, according to the BioEnterprise report.

   Last month, Workflow.com, a spin-off of Hyland Software Inc. in Westlake,
received $3.7 million from angel investors, including the Hyland family. Angels
are individual investors, often retired executives.

   Packy Hyland, founder and former chief executive of Hyland Software, is CEO
of Workflow.com. That company broke away from Hyland about 18 months ago to
develop a Web-based application for Hyland's OnBase information management
software, said Jay Volk, Workflow.com's president.

   That application ended up being the management of clinical records and
information at medical practices.

   "What makes us unique is we allow doctors to use their own forms," Volk said.
Workflow.com uploads forms so doctors can use them on their desktop or tablet
computers.

   In February, Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. in Cleveland won a total of $6.1
million - $1.5 million this year with the possibility of $4.6 million more in
2007 - from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation to develop its gene therapy for that
disease.

   Also in February, Syncro Medical Innovations Inc., which plans to move to
Canfield from Macon, Ga., received $2.2 million from Norwich Ventures in
Cambridge, Mass.

   It was Syncro's first round of venture funding, President Gary Wakeford said
at the time. Syncro developed the Gabriel Post Pyloric Feeding Tube. The tube,
used for paralyzed or unconscious patients, has a magnet at its tip. A steering
magnet outside the body guides the tube down the esophagus, past the stomach and
into the small intestine.

   Several Midwest companies also registered for public stock offerings during
the first quarter, BioEnterprise said. Among the companies was Cleveland BioLabs
Inc.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: mvanac@plaind.com, 216-999-5302

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2006


                              711 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 25, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEW JERSEY; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: UMDNJ scientist aids study on brain repair

BYLINE: ANGELA STEWART, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   A research team that includes a New Jersey scientist has identified two
receptors that increase the number of restorative stem cells as a response to
brain injury.

   This knowledge, they contend, could lead to development of new drugs that
target the two stem cell receptors - called EGFR and Notch1, gp-130 - which are
key players in brain regeneration.

   The research, conducted by Steve Levison, co-author of the study and
professor of neuroscience at the UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School in Newark,
along with researchers from Penn State University and the San Raffaele Telethon
Institute for Gene Therapy in Milan, Italy, appears in the latest issue of The
Journal of Neuroscience.

   The researchers used a rat model to study a condition called perinatal
hypoxia/ischemia, a disruption of blood and oxygen flowing to the brain of a
newborn. The study revealed that a neonatal brain injury triggers a
proliferation of stem cells within the brain, doubling the number of these cells
after just three days. This regeneration response is choreographed by the two
specific receptors the researchers were able to identify.

    "We're beginning to identify some of the signals that are required to
stimulate this repair process from these resident stem cells," explained
Levison. "There is a small response that naturally occurs, so we need to expand
this natural response to injury so we can have more complete repair of the brain
after injury."

   He said the research could mean that in the future, transplanting new cells
into the body - from embryonic stem cells - may not be necessary to cure some
brain diseases.

   In infants who have suffered brain damage, Levison said it may be possible to
"go in and try to repair the brain while it is still developing," enabling the
infant to lead a more normal life.

   Wise Young, professor and chairman of the Department of Cell Biology and
Neuroscience at Rutgers University, called the research "exciting" because of
its potential implications in addressing conditions such as cerebral palsy.

   "This is really a very nice paper because it states very strongly that stem
cells play a role in neonatal brain damage repair," he said.

   Levison said he and his team believe their findings will be applicable to
conditions like cerebral palsy and multiple sclerosis.

   In addition, he said, adult stroke victims or individuals who have suffered
traumatic brain injuries also may benefit.

   "We're cautiously optimistic that this will really work some day," Levison
said.

     Angela Stewart writes about health care. She may be reached at
astewart@starledger.com or (973) 392-4178.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2007


                              712 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 24, 2006 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 936 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE;
IN THE LAB;
Saving muscles with genes;
Thwarted in efforts to treat muscular dystrophy, scientists are closing in on
developing a more effective gene-therapy delivery system.

BYLINE: Linda Marsa, Special to The Times

BODY:

   ANDREW KILBARGER was 4 years old when his preschool teacher realized
something was terribly wrong. He didn't run or jump, and he couldn't pedal a
bike. When his parents had him checked by his pediatrician, even the physician
was stunned by the diagnosis: Andrew had Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a rare,
inherited, degenerative muscle disorder that afflicts 30,000 in the U.S., almost
exclusively boys.

   Sufferers' faulty genes don't produce dystrophin, a vital structural protein
the body needs to build muscles. Without it, muscles deteriorate. By
adolescence, victims must use a wheelchair, and they usually die in their 20s
from respiratory or cardiac muscle failure.

   Last month, Andrew, who just turned 9, became the first patient in an
experimental gene therapy trial that may eventually help him escape this grim
fate. Doctors at Columbus Children's Hospital in Ohio injected dystrophin genes
in the muscle of one of his arms, and a sham injection into the other.

   After about six weeks, they'll take samples of muscle cells from each arm and
examine them for evidence of dystrophin production. They'll also assess muscle
strength and look for signs of any harmful reactions. Before the end of the
year, five other boys each will receive one injection of the dystrophin gene.

   "Gene therapy is the Holy Grail that could eventually cure this disorder,"
says Sharon Hesterlee, a neuroscientist and director of research development for
the Muscular Dystrophy Assn. in Tucson. "This study is the long-awaited first
step in that direction."

   The experiment is one of a number of studies being conducted around the
country that may finally make gene therapy -- introducing genes into a person's
body to treat disease -- a clinical reality. Twenty years ago, such experiments
held out the tantalizing possibility of a cure for dozens of inherited ills,
such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis: The defective genes
simply would be compensated for by adding functional ones.

   The technological hurdles proved daunting, however. "It turned out to be very
difficult to actually get the genes into cells where they would do any good,"
Hesterlee says. And in one well-publicized 1999 incident, an 18-year-old patient
died from a severe immune reaction to a virus that was used by doctors to ferry
foreign genes into his body.

   In recent years, scientists have reported success in curing two deadly immune
disorders. However, three of the children in one of the trials developed
leukemia when a cancer-causing gene was activated by the therapy, and one of
them died.

   Scientists now think they can surmount some of the obstacles surrounding gene
therapy. They've created specially modified viruses that can shuttle genes to
the proper place in the body (be it heart, liver or muscles) but don't provoke
an adverse immune response or toxicity. Starting with a harmless variant of a
common cold virus called adeno-associated virus, or AAV, researchers have
created customized gene carriers that home in on different parts of the body.

   "Essentially, we've engineered microscopic FedEx trucks with ZIP Codes that
go to specific targets," says R. Jude Samulski, director of the University of
North Carolina Gene Therapy Center in Chapel Hill who helped develop this
technology. "Some [carriers] prefer the liver, others the lungs, while some have
an affinity for muscles."

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by only one mutant gene, so it is a
good first candidate for gene therapy. However, the dystrophin gene -- which is
the largest gene in the human genome -- doesn't fit inside these viral
freighters. To solve that, research teams working independently at the
University of Washington in Seattle and the University of Pittsburgh developed
miniature versions of the dystrophin gene. These mini-genes were then shoehorned
inside an AAV "shuttle" designed to carry the gene to muscle cells.

   Results in animals have been encouraging. An October 2005 study conducted by
Chinese and American scientists, for example, showed that one injection of the
specially designed AAV carrier delivered the dystrophin genes to muscles and the
heart in hamsters suffering from a form of muscular dystrophy.

   The gene transfer improved their cardiac and muscle functions to normal
levels. It also significantly prolonged their lifespan: Treated animals survived
beyond the 48-week duration of the study, compared with an average of 37 weeks
for diseased hamsters that didn't receive gene therapy.

   The study in which Andrew Kilbarger is participating is an early, preliminary
step toward forging a cure for his disease. If this approach proves safe and
prompts the persistent production of dystrophin in muscle cells, researchers
will move ahead with a more ambitious study -- injecting the genes into the
bloodstream.

   "We have to deliver the genes to all the crucial muscles," says neurologist
Dr. Jerry R. Mendell, director of the Gene Therapy Center at Columbus Children's
Research Institute in Ohio, who is conducting the clinical trial.

   "Then we can have a system that will make a real difference for kids."

   *

   Treating the symptoms

   Currently, there is no specific treatment to halt or reverse the more than 30
types of muscular dystrophy. But doctors use drugs and other therapies to ease
symptoms. Corticosteroids such as prednisone slow muscle degeneration.
Anticonvulsants can control seizures, and immunosuppressants may delay some
damage to dying muscle cells. Orthopedic appliances are often used for support,
and corrective orthopedic surgery also can help. Other treatments include
physical, respiratory and speech therapy.

   *

   -- Linda Marsa

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: NEW TACK: R. Jude Samulski of the University of North Carolina
Medical School is a co-developer of a technique to fight Duchenne muscular
dystrophy.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Karen Tam For The Times

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2006


                              713 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                            April 22, 2006 Saturday
                              3 STAR R.O. EDITION

SECTION: B; Pg. 1 metfront

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: Hybrid virus may help fight cancer;
Local scientists find that it shows promise as a way to target tumors

BYLINE: ERIC BERGER, Staff

BODY:

   Using the cell-invading prowess of viruses and the hybrid concepts driving up
automobile fuel efficiency these days, local scientists have found a way to
light up cancerous tumors in mice like fireflies in the night.

   What sounds like a genetics parlor trick may be an important step toward
identifying cancer cells and zapping them before they spread and smother healthy
organs.

   By creating a hybrid out of two dissimilar viruses, researchers hope to be
able to illuminate tumor cells, making it easier for doctors to target cancers
and monitor treatments.

   It also could provide a kick-start to the unfulfilled promise of gene therapy
.

   "This really bridges a big gap," said Renata Pasqualini, a professor of
medicine and cancer biology at The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, co-leader of a study published in Friday's issue of the journal Cell.

   That gap - the successful delivery of genes into cells - has been the primary
reason medical researchers have failed to get gene therapy to live up to its
potential.

   Genes, the carriers of hereditary information, signal a body's cells when
it's time to manufacture certain proteins. These proteins carry out the basic
biologic functions of life.

   Scientists long have thought that inserting normal genes into cells to
replace the function of defective genes, such as restoring insulin production in
the case of diabetics, could treat diseases.

   But they have struggled to capitalize on the trove of information on the
25,000 human genes accumulated in the past decade, largely because of the
delivery problem.

   Viruses by nature attack human cells to introduce their genes into the host
cell for the purposes of replicating and spreading throughout the body.
Scientists already have tapped that ability.

   But viruses have proved to be imperfect carriers of "good" genes because they
attack human cells indiscriminately, both the healthy and cancerous. Moreover,
the body's immune system often is good at destroying these viruses before they
reach their targets.

   These shortcomings have led scientists to look a little further down the food
chain to viruses that infect bacteria. Such viruses are found everywhere, from
soil to the human gut.

   Bacterial viruses can be targeted very specifically to different types of
cells. But because they've evolved to infect bacteria, these viruses do a poor
job delivering good genes into human cells.

   What's a biologist to do? Combine the best features of both viruses into one.

   The hybrid virus created by Pasqualini and her colleagues at M.D. Anderson
infected nearly 100 percent of the targeted cancerous cells, and the genes they
delivered functioned for weeks or even months, a stunning success. The delivered
genes produced fluorescent proteins that the researchers could easily see with
imaging equipment.

   With the new technique, Pasqualini said, it could be possible for cancer
doctors and their patients to know almost immediately whether chemotherapy and
other treatments are having any effect on tumors.

   It's worth noting, however, that there have been past successes with small
animals that haven't translated into larger mammals or humans.

   "This is only a proof-of-concept" cautioned Dr. Wadih Arap, a co-leader of
the study along with Pasqualini.

   Still, the research has garnered the attention of other cancer scientists.
Not only does it appear to have solved the problems of targeting and delivery,
but the hybrid virus seems to evade the body's immune system long enough to
deliver its genetic payload.

   "I have a lot of excitement for this new approach," said Dr. Steven Libutti,
a senior investigator at the National Cancer Institute and head of its Tumor
Angiogenesis Section.

   Libutti and other researchers are testing the hybrid virus in dogs with
cancerous tumors. In the study, Libutti has begun using the hybrid virus to
transport genes that produce a protein-like material that's toxic to cells that
line blood vessels leading to tumors. Kill the blood vessels and the tumor
starves.

   Performing the study in large animals is the final step before the hybrid
virus can be tested in humans, possibly within a few years.

   "We've treated the first dog in this study without any toxicity," Libutti
said. "We should know soon whether the new approach works, but we're very
hopeful."

NOTES: eric.berger@chron.com

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2006


                              714 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            April 20, 2006 Thursday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: MAGEE-WOMENS GETS $4.5 MILLION FROM STATE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Gov. Ed Rendell yesterday presented a check for $4.5 million in state funds
to support Magee-Womens Research Institute's building expansion.

   With the 70,000-square-foot addition, the institute, which is located at
Halket and Craft streets in Oakland, will more than double its space, providing
room for more labs, offices and support services.

   Mr. Rendell noted that the efforts of state representatives Dan Frankel and
Tom Stevenson and state Sen. Jay Costa led to the state funding for the project
being increased from $3 million.

   His proposed $500 million Jonas Salk Legacy Fund, which would direct money to
medical research, could speed such expansion projects along, he added.

   There has been some opposition to establishing the fund.

   "The University of Pittsburgh has not given us support, but the University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center has," the governor said.

   Construction of the $31 million expansion project began last fall, said David
A. Smith, chairman of Magee-Womens Health Corp.'s board of directors. The
seven-story addition, designed by architectural firm Astorino and being built by
Massaro Corp., will connect to the existing building.

   "We will occupy the new addition by January 2007," Mr. Smith said.

   The governor said the role of Dr. Gerald Schatten, director of the
institute's Pittsburgh Development Center, in discredited South Korean stem cell
research did not influence the funding decision. Gene therapy research continued
despite problems in a University of Pennsylvania program that led to a patient's
death in 1999.

   "Nobody bats a hundred percent," Mr. Rendell said. "The fact, for whatever
reason, some of the research went askew doesn't mean we stop."

NOTES: Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or
412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2006


                              715 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Classified; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Paid Notice: Deaths
MADOFF, ROGER

BODY:

    MADOFF--Roger. Life is so unfair. We are heartbroken by the devastating loss
of such an extraordinary young man. We are saddened to think of all the
wonderful things he surely would have accomplished. He inspired us with his
courage and valiant struggle against tremendous odds. We shall hold him in our
hearts forever. Our love and deepest sympathy to his adoring parents, Marion and
Peter, wonderful sister Shana, loving wife Jennifer, devoted aunt and uncle Ruth
and Bernie, and the entire Madoff family. Ruth and Carl Shapiro Rhonda and
Michael Zinner Ellen and Robert Jaffe Linda and Daniel Waintrup

    $(6$)MADOFF--Roger. Our dear Roger, you fought bravely to the end, never
losing any of the wonderful spirit of you. That spirit, with the ongoing loving
support of Jen, Peter, Marion, Shana, Marty and Lois and the help of the
extraordinary medical team at Weill Cornell, held us all together. You will be
in our hearts forever. Bernie and Ruth Mark and Stephanie Andy and Debbie

    $(6$)MADOFF--Roger. The Board of Governors and the members of Glen Oaks Club
express our deepest sorrow to our esteemed members Peter and Marion Madoff on
the passing of their son Roger and extend our heartfelt sympathy to the entire
family. Board of Governors Alan Goldberg, President

    $(6$)MADOFF--Roger. We deeply mourn the loss of Roger, most dearly cherished
son of Marion and Peter, beloved husband of Jen and dear brother of Shana. Our
thoughts and love are with the entire Madoff family. Renee and Stanley Shapiro
and Family

    $(6$)MADOFF--Roger D. Roger, we love and will miss you forever. You will
always be in our hearts. Lois and Marty, Jasmin and Evan, and Grandpa Lee

    $(6$)MADOFF--Roger. Our sincerest condolences to the family of Roger Madoff
on this great loss. Barbara and Edward Netter Alliance for Cancer Gene Therapy

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2006


                              716 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 273 words

HEADLINE: Boston Scientific's Profit Declines, but Stock Gains

BYLINE: By Reuters

BODY:

   Boston Scientific, which expects to complete its acquisition of Guidant
shortly, said yesterday that its first-quarter earnings fell 7.3 percent on
slower sales of devices used to treat clogged coronary arteries.

     But the company, a maker of drug-coated stents, said sales surpassed Wall
Street expectations, and its shares rose 26 cents, to $21.74.

   A slowdown in the stent market had been expected, now that most patients
needing the devices have received them.

     Boston Scientific, based in Natick, Mass., is buying Guidant for about $27
billion to spur growth by expanding into the lucrative market for heart-rhythm
management devices.

     Executives said in a conference call that antitrust approval of the deal
from the Federal Trade Commission could come ''at any time.''

     Boston Scientific said its net earnings declined to $332 million, or 40
cents a share, from $358 million, or 42 cents a share, a year earlier. Net sales
were essentially flat at $1.62 billion. The earnings included special charges of
3 cents a share for stock-based compensation and a further 3 cents a share for
terminating a gene-therapy trial.

     Analysts on average had expected earnings of 44 cents a share, including
stock expenses, and revenue of $1.59 billion, according to Reuters Estimates.

     Sales were helped by strength in endoscopy products and implantable
pain-management devices, products the company makes in addition to stents.

     ''They had decent revenue,'' said Jeffrey J. Jonas, a portfolio manager of
the Gamco Medical Opportunities Fund. ''There was some weakness in their gross
margin, which was probably tied to their quality-control issues.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2006


                              717 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                            April 19, 2006 Wednesday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH WEDNESDAY; Pg. D-1

LENGTH: 1453 words

HEADLINE: BREATHING ROOM;
NEW THERAPIES ARE EXTENDING THE LIVES OF PATIENTS WITH CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: MARK ROTH, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   Twice a day, 6-year-old Madison Mathias puts on a black electronic vest,
climbs onto a comfy couch in her family room, and vibrates.

   Madison has cystic fibrosis, and the vest is designed to break up the mucus
deposits that can clog her lungs.

   It shakes her gently for 20 minutes at a time, turning her voice into a
lilting Gatling gun. Sometimes, 2-year-old Rachel will put on one of Madison's
old vests and climb up on the couch next to her in the their home in East
Liverpool, Ohio, emulating her big sister.

   The vibrating vest, introduced about a decade ago, is one of a host of recent
therapies that have contributed to a dramatic improvement in life expectancy for
cystic fibrosis patients.

   CF is an inherited defect that interferes with the body's ability to clear
mucus from the lungs, liver and digestive system.

   The lungs are the critical organs affected by the condition.

   Normally, said Dr. David Orenstein of Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, our
lungs are coated with a thin layer of mucus that sits on an even thinner layer
of water, which covers tiny hairlike cilia that line the airways.

   Every day, he said, "The crud you breathe in lands on this mucus, and then
through a beautiful protective mechanism, these cilia move in a coordinated
fashion -- it looks kind of like a wheat field with the wind blowing over it --
and they carry this blanket of mucus upward toward the back of the throat."

   In CF, though, the cilia can't move properly because not enough water gets to
the surface of the airways, "and so you end up with sticky mucus that is
difficult to clear and provides a haven for bacteria, so it's easy for infection
and inflammation" to set in, "and that leads to progressive damage of the
airways" that ultimately can kill those patients.

   Cystic fibrosis is still the most common lethal inherited disease among
Caucasians, but average life expectancy is now in the mid-30s, a huge
improvement over 20 years ago, when it was in the late teens.

   As Dr. Orenstein likes to tell CF families, life expectancy over the past
couple of decades "has increased by almost a year for every year that's gone
by."

   That is why Ashley Arrington of Cranberry can look forward to going to
Brigham Young University next year and living an untold number of years beyond.

   Ms. Arrington, an 18-year-old senior at Seneca Valley High School, said the
only thing she's nervous about is having to tell her college roommate why she
needs to wear the vibrating vest twice a day.

   "But it'll work out," she said confidently. "I personally don't like to be
very open about this. I don't see it as that big a deal, and I guess I don't
feel the need to share it with everyone."

   Targeted therapies

   The CF therapies developed over the last several years are designed to attack
the mucus layer and the problems that go with it.

   For Madison Mathias, that adds up to a demanding daily routine.

   Her mom, Kristen, gets her up at 6 a.m. each day so she can wear the vest
before she goes to school, a process that's repeated each evening. With daily
use, the amount of mucus shaken loose by the vest is so small it's hardly
noticeable.

   Twice a day, she also inhales a fine powder called Advair, a bronchodilator
that expands her airways.

   While CF's main target is the lungs, it also interferes with digestion, so
Madison takes digestive enzymes before her meals and takes antacids in the
morning and evening.

   And that's just when things are going well. When CF patients get serious
infections, the treatments can ramp up quickly.

   When Madison was 8 months old, she went into the hospital for 31/2 weeks with
a lung infection. Afterwards, she had to undergo eight treatments a day with a
nebulizer that sprayed a fine mist of medications into her lungs through a mask
over her face.

   She breathed in a bronchodilator; a steroid to reduce inflammation; an
antibiotic to cut infections; and a substance called DNase that thins the mucus.
"It seemed to last forever," Mrs. Mathias said.

   Some of these medications -- like DNase and the antibiotic TOBI -- have only
emerged in recent years, and are part of the reason life expectancy has
increased so rapidly.

   The ongoing development of therapies is one thing that has helped the Mathias
and Arrington families cope with the shock of finding out their firstborn
children had CF.

   Both Madison and Ashley started life with digestive problems, and were only
diagnosed with CF later.

   Ashley was born eight weeks premature in 1988 and needed immediate intestinal
surgery. Her mother, Lynne, said that "at the time, the chances were only one in
five that she would make it through the surgery, but she sailed right through"
and did fine until she got pneumonia when she was 5 months old.

   That is when she was diagnosed with CF, although her mother already had
suspected it "because every time I kissed her she was salty."

   The salty sweat of CF babies is a telltale marker of the genetic defect that
causes the disorder.

   Mucus builds up in CF patients' lungs because they lack the gene that
normally transports salt and water to the surface of the airways. The flip side
of the defect is that it pumps more salt than normal out of the body in the
sweat.

   Ashley was born before the invention of the vests, so her parents would spend
hours tapping her chest, back and sides with their hands to loosen the mucus.

   One of her earliest memories was going into Children's Hospital with a viral
infection when she was 4. She was put under a mist-filled plastic tent, which
she remembers because it made it hard for her to watch "Sesame Street."

   After she started school, it turned out Ashley was allergic to a fungus
called aspergillus, and ever since, she has taken high doses of an antifungal
medication.

   Having damaged lungs doesn't mean that CF patients have to avoid physical
activity, though. Dr. Orenstein has championed vigorous exercise for CF
children, and Ashley played soccer and swam in elementary school.

   "But by eighth grade I couldn't keep up anymore," she said, and so she
switched to the golf and Ultimate Frisbee teams.

   Madison Mathias has just started soccer herself, and she had no trouble
running in circles around the family room recently while her sister chased her.

   There was nothing forced about her sunny mood, either.

   Her father, Jim, said that "Madison's not a worrier. She can deal with just
about everything."

   Like Ashley, Madison had intestinal surgery shortly after birth, and wasn't
diagnosed with CF until a few days later. "When they told us it was cystic
fibrosis," Mrs. Mathias said, "we really didn't know what it was."

   She began to learn more by poring over a textbook Dr. Orenstein has authored
for patients and families.

   It was unsettling.

   "You read this stuff and it seems like you're crying all the time." When she
read then that Madison's life expectancy might be in her late 20s, "that was
just like, oh my goodness, I was already older then she was expected to live
to."

   But today, Madison's CF is simply a part of their lives, and Jim Mathias says
that "we're planning for her future the same as for Rachel. When the time comes
we want her to have the chance to go to college."

   The root of the problem

   As Madison and Ashley face their futures, doctors are trying to develop
therapies that go beyond treating symptoms and instead attack the underlying
problem.

   The genetic defect that causes CF was discovered in 1989, and researchers
initially were optimistic they would soon find a cure by inserting normal copies
of the gene into patients' bodies.

   But like other genetic therapy, that solution has proven elusive because of
the difficulty getting enough copies of the normal gene into patients.

   Dr. Jay Kolls, a researcher at Children's Hospital, is investigating another
novel treatment for CF that he hopes to test in humans in five to 10 years.

   Much of the damage to CF patients' lungs is caused by inflammation that
occurs when their bodies try to fight infection.

   Dr. Kolls is working to develop antibodies that would block the inflammation
triggers, which could extend the useful life of patients' lungs for many more
years.

   In North Carolina, a company founded by CF researchers has identified a
substance that might boost the body's ability to transport salt and water to the
airways without relying on the defective CF gene.

   "It is the first new drug that has the potential to greatly affect the course
of this lung disease by attacking the fundamental defect," said Dr. Richard
Boucher, one of the company's founders.

   These nascent therapies may stretch the clock for Ashley and Madison.

   But Ashley Arrington doesn't dwell on that.

   "I haven't really considered CF in my future. Whatever happens happens," she
said.

   "I'm not going to plan my future around it. I think that's always how we've
looked at it."

NOTES: Mark Roth can be reached at mroth@post-gazette.com or at 412-263-1130.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Alyssa Cwanger/Post-Gazette photos: Madison Mathias, 6, cuddles
up to her with her mom, Kristen, during one of her twice-daily treatments with
an electric vest whose vibrations loosen the mucus that accumulates in her lungs
because of cystic fibrosis.
PHOTO: CF hasn't kept Madison from being active; in fact she recently started
playing soccer. A burst of energy here sends her around the living room of her
family's home.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2006


                              718 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 Star Tribune
                              All Rights Reserved
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                            April 19, 2006 Wednesday
                                 Metro Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 178 words

HEADLINE: Boston Scientific's profit drops as stent sales lag

BYLINE: Janet Moore, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Boston Scientific Corp. reported a 7.3 percent dip in first-quarter earnings
Tuesday on slowing sales of its top product, a drug-coated heart stent that
props open clogged arteries.

   The Natick, Mass.-based medical device company, whose cardiovascular division
employs about 3,500 people in Maple Grove, said net income declined to $332
million, or 40 cents a share. Wall Street had expected 46 cents a share.

   Revenue was essentially flat at $1.62 billion.

   U.S. sales of the Taxus drug-coated stent fell 15 percent to $419 million.
Rival Johnson & Johnson said Tuesday that sales of its competing stent, the
Cypher, increased 15 percent. Taxus holds about 53.5 percent of the market.

   Results from the quarter included after-tax charges of $22 million for stock
options, because of new accounting rules, and a $27 million write-down from the
termination of a gene-therapy clinical trial.

   The company expects to receive approval from the Federal Trade Commission
this week to seal its $27 billion acquisition of Guidant Corp.

   Boston Scientific's stock closed at $21.74, up 26 cents.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2006


                              719 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Business Desk; Part C; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 846 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BOOKSHELF;
Futurist Sees Machines, Humans Merging in 2045

BYLINE: James Harkin, Special to The Times

BODY:

   Ray Kurzweil, an inventor and futurist, has stumbled on a discovery of
earth-shattering importance. It is the arrival of "singularity," and according
to him it will happen in 2045.

   "Gradually," he writes at the beginning of "The Singularity Is Near," "I've
become aware of a transforming event looming in the first half of the 21st
century ... the impending Singularity in our future is increasingly transforming
every institution and aspect of human life, from sexuality to spirituality."

   Singularity, Kurzweil says, is a development "representing a profound and
disruptive transformation in human capability" and a "radical upgrading of our
bodies' physical and mental systems."

   What are its elements? Kurzweil maintains that the first half of the 21st
century will be characterized by three overlapping revolutions: human genetics,
robotics or artificial intelligence, and nanotechnology.

   Biotechnology, advances in genomics and gene therapies will enable us to turn
off disease and aging and thus live for much longer. Because we soon will be
able to "reverse-engineer the brain" and simulate its functions, he claims,
technology will increasingly merge with human intelligence to create something
with greater capacity and speed. Nanotechnology, the science of small things,
will enable us "to redesign and rebuild -- molecule by molecule -- our bodies
and brains and the world with which we interact, going far beyond the
limitations of biology."

   Kurzweil knows a lot about new technology, and he knows how to make it sound
fun. He is dazzling in his enthusiasm for things to come, and he has a grasp of
the exciting developments pulsing through the intersection of science and
technology. He recognizes technology's power to improve the lot of humankind and
is skeptical of the doom-mongers who argue that it will lead to overpopulation
or mass unemployment.

   New technologies, Kurzweil recognizes, usually create new jobs for those
displaced by it. Cloning, for example, is not as scary as it is made to sound,
and might even offer solutions for world hunger, creating meat and other protein
sources in a factory without animals by cloning animal muscle tissue.

   But what is the evidence for "singularity" itself? Kurzweil has borrowed the
metaphor from mathematics and physics, where it means something that has reached
the stage of being infinite. He recognizes that singularity does not amount to
anything that might be described as "infinite" in the social sphere, but he
still believes that the metaphor is appropriate. Humans, he too often forgets,
have always sought to transcend biology.

   Kurzweil thinks we are turning into cyborgs -- part human, part machine --
but any old man with a walking stick might be seen as a cyborg too. Technology,
it is important to remember, conducts its way through society as a series of
quantitative heaves rather than a qualitative leap. He thinks that the
exponentially increasing processing power of computers can help us understand
the speed of social change. The changes he describes might look fast on paper,
but they filter through to social life at a snail's pace. Many of them do not
make it at all because of a lack of investment or human enthusiasm.

   Throughout his book Kurzweil capitalizes singularity. He even has a name for
someone who is a follower of the faith: "I regard someone who understands the
Singularity and who reflects on its implications for his or her own life as a
'singularitarian.' "

   He pays lip service to a kind of humanism -- "we will transcend biology, but
not our humanity" -- but sounds like a religious evangelist, or a New Ager who
has spent too long in front of a computer. Being human, Kurzweil rightly points
out, "means being part of a civilization that seeks to extend its boundaries."
Is a human modified by technology no longer human? he wonders. The doom-mongers
make it sound like a slippery slope, but Kurzweil envisages it as a kind of
Second Coming, a technological Noah's ark through which only true believers will
pass.

   Kurzweil pays tribute to the notion of human consciousness but seems to
regard it as a lost cause in the long run. His determination to keep humans
central to his vision is admirable but is not borne out by the thrust of his
work, which suggests that he takes his spiritual sustenance from the machine
part of the equation.

   For Kurzweil, all that remains is an ethical problem, of how humanity adapts
to the new post-singular world in which we have become outsmarted by machines.
His metaphor of singularity plays well in the science-fiction community, among
Hollywood scriptwriters in need of inspiration and among military spooks whose
job it is to think ahead of the curve -- Kurzweil is one of five members of the
science advisory group for the U.S. Army.

   For us ordinary mortals, it is singularly unhelpful.

   *

   This review appears via special arrangement with the Financial Times, where
it first appeared.

   *

   Looking ahead

   * The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology

   * By Ray Kurzweil

   * Duckworth Publishers, $29.99, 652 pages

   *

   Source: Publisher

   Los Angeles Times

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                              720 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A Section; A09

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: On Mouse Farms, Pursuit of Imperfection;
Made-to-Order Genetic Defects Help Scientists Battle Disease in Humans

BYLINE: Matt Crenson, Associated Press

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:

   When it comes to the price of mice, you pay extra for defects. For example,
three blind mice cost about $250.

     A mouse with arthritis runs close to $200; two pairs of epileptic mice can
cost 10 times that. And for your own custom mouse, with the genetic modification
of your choosing, expect to pay as much as $100,000.

     Mice have become a critical tool in the quest for new drugs and medical
treatments because their genes are remarkably similar to those of human beings.

     With proper manipulation  --  either by man or nature  --  a set of mouse
genes can produce an animal with just about any human ailment or a reasonable
facsimile of it. Strains of mice that succumb to Alzheimer's disease, obesity,
diabetes, cancer and other conditions are being used to study the illnesses and
potential treatments. As many as 25 million mice are used in experiments each
year.

     Where do they come from? Mouse farms.

    The Jackson Laboratory, a nonprofit supplier in Bar Harbor, Maine, ships
more than 2 million a year. Commercial breeder Charles River Laboratories Inc.
of Wilmington, Mass., makes about $500 million annually selling and caring for
lab animals, most of them mice.

     What was once a relatively simple business of breeding and shipping has
become an enterprise that requires cutting-edge technology and a mastery of
logistics.

     "It's not just putting two animals together anymore," said Terry Fisher, a
general manager at Charles River Laboratories.

     Mice gained their new significance not long after the completion of the
human genome project in 2001. Scientists rushed to finish sequencing the mouse's
DNA the following year, and when they put the two genetic codes side by side
they found something they'd always suspected: The genes of mice and humans are
virtually identical. The obvious differences between us and them lie not in the
genes but in where, when and how the genes are activated.

     "It means that the anatomy and physiology of a mouse is pretty darn similar
to what you see in a human," said Rick Woychik, director of the Jackson
Laboratory.

     For much of the 20th century, new strains of lab mice were created either
by selective breeding or by chance. If a sharp-eyed lab technician or graduate
student spotted an unusual animal that turned out to have a novel mutation, a
new line would be produced to study that particular gene.

     Now researchers  --  and increasingly biotechnology companies  --  can
create their own mutations, inserting or deleting genes at will.

     Companies such as Deltagen Inc. of San Carlos, Calif., will create a
"knockout" mouse that lacks a particular gene. Artemis Pharmaceuticals GmbH of
Cologne, Germany, offers to insert human genes into a mouse's genetic code.
PolyGene Transgenetics, a Swiss company, will insert genes whose output can be
turned up and down.

     Depending on the specific manipulation, it usually costs tens of thousand
of dollars to create a custom mouse. Once the line has been established,
individual animals are much less expensive.

     This year the National Institutes of Health spent $10 million to purchase
250 strains of knockout mice, along with detailed information about their
physiology, from Deltagen and Lexicon Genetics Inc. of the Woodlands, Tex. The
acquisition is the start of a much larger international effort to create a
knockout strain for every one of the mouse's 20,000 to 25,000 genes, said
Christopher Austin, director of the NIH's Chemical Genomics Center.

     Lexicon has knocked out 3,000 mouse genes already, and has designs on 2,000
more. With each knockout, the company performs tests to determine how the
function of the deleted gene correlates to human physiology in ophthalmology,
cardiology, immunology, cancer, metabolism and neurology.

     It remains to be seen whether a leap can be made from mice with knocked-out
genes to therapies for humans. In the past, discoveries that looked promising in
rodents have often failed in human patients.

     "These mice are not going to tell us everything, and sometimes they tell us
nothing. But as a starting point," Austin said, "mice play a central role."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                              721 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            April 12, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: FEAT; Pg. B04

LENGTH: 1226 words

HEADLINE: Book offers tips on "Heart Care for Life"

BODY:

   No two hearts are exactly alike. No two cases of heart disease are exactly
alike. And certainly, no two people who suffer from it are alike, nor are their
lifestyles. So why do so many of us, laypeople and sometimes even health care
professionals, talk about heart disease like it's a single entity? That's a
question Dr.

   Barry L. Zaret wants us to ponder. Zaret is a cardiologist and co-author
(along with Genell Subak-Sharpe) of "Heart Care for Life: Developing the Program
That Works Best for You." "Every case of heart disease is like a snowflake or a
fingerprint," he says. "You just won't find two exactly alike. So it follows
that no two treatment regimens are going to be exactly identical. What does this
mean for heart patients? I think the most important point is this: You know you
better than anyone else, including the most gifted, insightful physician in the
world. "So you need to take a critical role in the design of your own lifelong
program of care," he says. That is the main point of Zaret's book: patient
empowerment. "Heart Care for Life," which is filled with practical advice,
instructional case histories, questions to ask your doctor and more, rejects
short-term fixes and one-size-fits-all programs and urges patients to take
control of their own health. Though certain characteristics are common to each
form of heart disease and its treatments, these constants must be tempered
against individual variables. Here are a few of Zaret's insights: > Understand
the concept of constants and individual variables. Core values form the
constants of cardiovascular health and include issues related to medical and
surgical therapy, obesity, diet, exercise, stress, smoking and various forms of
diagnostic testing. Variables comprise the individual differences that define
specific patients and are critical in developing a workable lifelong heart
program. For example, a diet that does not take into account individual tastes,
food preferences and eating habits is generally a waste of time and effort.
Socioeconomic status, education, presence of other diseases, occupation,
interaction with one's spouse and family, and many other individual factors also
affect the success of any treatment. > Exercise. There is no excuse not to.
Virtually everyone can undertake an exercise program, regardless of age, health,
work schedule and other circumstances. The book describes a patient named Alice,
a 45-year-old mother of three, who believed exercise was dangerous after she had
two heart attacks. But an exercise physiologist designed a regimen for her that
started with walking 10 to 15 minutes a day. She started out walking to and from
school with her children and eventually began lifting weights with a group of
teachers in the school gym. "Alice is a prime example of a very busy person who
can find time to exercise, and more important, enjoy the experience," the
authors wrote. "No matter how busy you are, you can find the time to exercise
the recommended four or five times a week." > Find the weight loss approach that
works best for you. If you are overweight, as many heart patients are, you will
need to find a way to take in less energy than you expend. It is usually best to
combine a moderate reduction in calories with an increase in exercise. The key
is in determining how you're going to cut those calories. "Heart Care for Life"
offers several approaches to choose from: counting calories, cutting fats and
counting carbs. "Counting calories might work if you're a disciplined person who
responds well to rules and structure," Zaret says. "If you enjoy a mostly
vegetarian fare - lots of pasta, veggies, fruits, whole grains and beans -
cutting fats might be the way to go. Just choose what works for you. Diet is not
a sometimes thing: It's what you eat and drink every day of your life." > Take
control of stress. There is a lot of evidence suggesting that constant stress is
linked to heart disease. That said, there is no way to remove all stress from
your life. In fact, you wouldn't want to if you could. But there are things you
can do to modify the harmful effects of stress. Again, what you do depends on
your individual circumstances, lifestyle and mindset. "For some people, daily
exercise is enough to counter stress and at the same time improve heart health,"
Zaret says. "Others might consider psychotherapy. Still others might strive to
build a social network, adopt a pet, practice yoga or tai chi, or undergo
biofeedback or anger-management training." > Read up on the latest medical
advances. In addition to the aforementioned "lifestyle" components, you may also
benefit from prescription drugs, alternative therapies, surgical procedures or
any combination thereof. "Heart Care for Life" provides a thorough yet
reader-friendly guide to the latest and best treatments available. Only by
understanding what's out there can you work with your doctor to craft your own
program of care. "Do not underestimate the value of knowledge," Zaret says. "Too
many heart patients prefer to bury their heads in the sand and just follow
doctors' orders. But ignorance is not bliss. An educated patient is a confident
patient and one well-equipped for partnering with his or her physician." > Be
mindful of issues relating to your age, gender and race. "Heart Care for Life"
has a separate section on "Populations with Special Concerns." Why? Because a
55-year-old African-American woman starting hormone replacement therapy is very
different from an 85-year-old man. "Women tend to delay treating cardiovascular
disease, elderly people tend to have high blood pressure, African-Americans have
the world's highest death rate from heart attacks," Zaret says. "If you fall
into one or more of these categories, these are facts you need to know when
determining your treatment program. Again, and it can't be said too often,
knowledge is power." > Realize that emerging biologically based therapies offer
reason for hope. All human beings need to believe that a brighter future lies
ahead. Heart patients are certainly no exception. Zaret devotes a chapter to
three biologically based therapies being developed - growing new blood vessels,
stem cell therapy and gene therapy - and connects them to that sustaining sense
of hope we all need. "Work in these areas will expand and develop, while new
areas of potential treatment involving biologically based therapies will appear
on the scene," he says. "Clearly, there is substantial scientific reason for
patients and their families to feel hopeful that they, too, will benefit from
these discoveries and their applications to heart disease." About the Authors:
Dr. Barry L. Zaret is the Robert W. Berliner Professor of Medicine and professor
of radiology at Yale University School of Medicine. Zaret served as chief of the
section of cardiology at Yale from 1978 to 2004 and has been a pioneer in
developing the field of noninvasive diagnosis in cardiovascular disease, with an
emphasis on nuclear cardiology. Genell Subak-Sharpe is president of G.S. Sharpe
Communications Inc. and has produced or collaborated on more than 40 books in
health and medicine. About the Book: "Heart Care for Life: Developing the
Program That Works Best for You" By Dr. Barry L. Zaret and Genell Subak-Sharpe.
To be published in February By Yale University Press $26 hardcover, 288 pages

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2006


                              722 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                Copyright 2006 The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                        The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

                             April 11, 2006 Tuesday
                                  Main Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2F

LENGTH: 1568 words

HEADLINE: Daily Briefing;

BODY:

   AGRICULTURE: Pioneer Hi-Bred, rival to collaborate

   Seed company Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc. and Switzerland-based
biotechnology company Syngenta AG announced a joint venture Monday that will
license the sale of newly developed corn and soybean seed genetics and biotech
traits. The two companies announced the creation of GreenLeaf Genetics LLC, an
Omaha, Neb.-based company that will provide farmers in Canada and the United
States access to some newly developed seed with specific genetic traits for weed
and insect control and improved yield. Des Moines, Iowa-based Pioneer President
Dean Oestreich said the venture marks the first time two large biotech companies
have joined forces to expand the marketing of once closely held corn and soybean
seed innovations.

   AUTOMOTIVE: Chinese company plans to export cars

   Shanghai, China --- The Chinese joint venture partner of General Motors and
Volkswagen on Monday announced details of plans to sell its own cars in China
this year and export cars to Europe next year. The plans highlight how Chinese
companies, no longer satisfied with using cheap labor to manufacture car designs
from the United States, Germany and Japan, are determined to become
international competitors in their own right, and are relying on Western
technology to do so. Thanks to 50-50 joint ventures with GM and Volkswagen,
Shanghai Automotive Industry Corp. is China's second-largest automaker. But the
company announced on Monday that it had set up a wholly owned subsidiary, SAIC
Motor Corp. Ltd., that will not have a foreign partner and will invest $1.25
billion in building new research and development centers, a car assembly plant
and an engine factory.

   DEALS: Red Hat to buy competitor JBoss

   Red Hat Inc. agreed to buy JBoss Inc. in a transaction worth as much as $420
million, cementing its position as the world's biggest distributor of
Linux-based computer software. The stock and cash offer for closely held JBoss
includes an agreement to pay $70 million if certain goals are reached,
Raleigh-based Red Hat said in a statement. Red Hat will gain JBoss' software
that connects computer operating systems with applications. JBoss helps
independent software designers develop Linux-based products for customers such
as Travelocity.com Inc. and Nielsen Media Research. Sales in Red Hat's last
fiscal year jumped 42 percent to $278 million. Closely held JBoss is based in
Atlanta and Neuchatel, Switzerland, according to its Web site. It's owned by
employees and investors including Accel Partners, Intel Corp., Bain Capital and
Matrix Partners. The transaction includes $210 million in stock and $140 million
in cash, Red Hat said in the statement. The acquisition is expected to close
near the end of the first quarter and will slightly decrease profit in the
period ending in August.

   DEFENSE: Lockheed Martin union accepts deal

   Fort Worth, Texas --- Union workers at Lockheed Martin Aeronautics Co.
accepted a new contract with higher wages and a limited increase in employee
contributions to health care costs. The International Association of Machinists
and Aerospace Workers Local 776 approved the three-year deal Sunday with 82.5
percent of those present voting in favor, according to a union statement. The
3,700 union members build F-16, F-22 and F-35 fighter jets at the Fort Worth
plant.

   FINANCE: Interest rates rise in Treasury auction

   Interest rates on short-term Treasury bills rose in Monday's auction to the
highest levels in more than five years. The Treasury Department auctioned $14
billion in three-month bills at a discount rate of 4.570 percent, up from 4.535
percent last week. An additional $13 billion in six-month bills was auctioned at
a discount rate of 4.700 percent, up from 4.670 percent last week. The
three-month rate was the highest since three-month bills averaged 4.700 percent
on March 5, 2001. The six-month rate was the highest since 4.770 percent on Feb.
20, 2001. The discount rates reflect that the bills sell for less than face
value. For a $10,000 bill, the three-month price was $9,884.48, while a
six-month bill sold for $9,762.39. Separately, the Federal Reserve said Monday
that the average yield for one-year Treasury bills, a popular index for making
changes in adjustable-rate mortgages, rose to 4.85 percent from 4.82 percent the
previous week.

   Property insurers expect solid quarter

   Property casualty insurers are generally expected to have a strong first
quarter, based on good underwriting results, though losses from the 2005
hurricane season could put a damper on the party for some. Meanwhile, earnings
for the big life insurers may vary in part by their investment styles: Those
heavily in equities may do better than those whose investments are more
sensitive to rising interest rates. Even though investors expect strong
first-quarter earnings for insurers in general, there are enough potential
problems to hold the property/casualty stocks down for now --- and even after
first-quarter results are in. "The general theme will be probably very good
[for] underwriting results, with one caveat being if you are a company with
tornado losses or have a development on last year's hurricane losses," Fox-Pitt
Kelton analyst Gary Ransom said.

   HEALTH CARE: Heart therapy study halted

   Corautus Genetics Inc., prompted by safety concerns, halted a study of its
main experimental product, a treatment for heart disease using gene therapy. An
independent committee recommended against signing up more patients after finding
little chance that any benefit from the treatment would outweigh the risks,
Atlanta-based Corautus said in a statement. The therapy, VEGF-2, is designed to
strengthen hearts by stimulating growth of new blood vessels. Corautus and
Boston Scientific Corp., which provided the catheter used to deliver the
treatment to diseased heart muscles, had suspended enrollment of patients last
month. Reports of excess fluid in the sac around the heart prompted Boston
Scientific to ask for the trial to be put on hold, a spokesman for the company
said in an interview March 14. Corautus said it believed that three recent cases
of serious adverse reactions weren't associated with its treatment. The company
said it will follow safety data for a year from the 295 patients who had
enrolled before the halt and will collect data on the treatment's effectiveness
as well. The company had initially planned to enroll 404 patients.

   RETAIL: SEC investigates Zale's accounting

   Dallas --- Jewelry retailer Zale Corp. said Monday the Securities and
Exchange Commission has started a probe into its accounting, executive pay and
other matters. The SEC is looking into Zale's accounting for extended service
agreements, leases and accrued payroll as well as other matters, Zale said in a
statement. The SEC has subpoenaed materials related to the accounting issues as
well as executive pay and severance, earnings forecasts, stock trading and the
timing of certain vendor payments. Dallas-based Zale said it is cooperating with
the SEC's investigation while conducting its own review, and believes its
accounting "complied with generally accepted accounting principles."

   TECHNOLOGY: Xerox chief's bonus went down in '05

   Stamford, Conn. --- Xerox Corp. disclosed Monday that Chief Executive Anne
Mulcahy received a $1.19 million bonus and a $1.32 million salary for 2005. The
Stamford-based copier and printer maker said in a filing with the Securities and
Exchange Commission that Mulcahy got a $1.58 million bonus and $1.32 million
salary for 2004. According to Xerox, Mulcahy also got $197,825 in other annual
compensation for 2005, up from the $166,995 she got in the prior year. Xerox
said other annual compensation includes personal use of the company aircraft,
financial planning/tax preparation, tax-related reimbursements and reimbursement
for home security, among other things. Xerox also said Mulcahy realized about $3
million from the exercise of options.

   TELECOM: Swisscom faces possible fine

   Swiss authorities have threatened to fine telecommunications company Swisscom
AG $376 million for allegedly overcharging mobile-phone customers who receive
calls originating from other phone networks, the company said Monday.
Switzerland's Competition Commission alleges Swisscom misused its dominant
position in the Swiss mobile-phone market by demanding so-called termination
fees at excessively high rates, the Bern, Switzerland-based former monopoly said
in a statement.

   Cablevision to pay special dividend

   New York --- Cablevision Systems Corp. has declared a special dividend of $3
billion, or $10 per share, the cable TV operator said in a regulatory filing
Monday. The company had announced plans for the dividend earlier but put them on
hold after finding it would have created problems for its borrowing agreements,
which were apparently later resolved. The on-again, off-again distribution has
not received a warm welcome from Wall Street analysts, several of whom would
have preferred to see the company buy back its own shares rather than taking on
debt to pay a dividend. Oppenheimer analyst Tom Eagan said in a recent note that
the combined payout to the company's controlling shareholders, the Dolan family,
would amount to about $650 million. Charles Dolan is the company's chairman, and
his son, James, is the CEO. The Long Island, N.Y.-based cable TV company also
owns Madison Square Garden and three cable networks.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2006


                              723 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                             April 10, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Metro; B06

LENGTH: 3853 words

HEADLINE: Jane Carter Oncology Nurse ...

BODY:

   Jane Carter, 66, an oncology nurse at the National Cancer Institute, died
March 30 of lung cancer at her home in Reston.

    Ms. Carter came to the Washington area in 1983 and received a bachelor's
degree in nursing from George Mason University in 1986. She received a master's
degree in nursing from the University of Kansas in 1996. She was a registered
nurse.

    She was a nurse in the surgical unit of the old Arlington Hospital and later
worked at the Inova Emergency Care Center in Reston. She was also a visiting
nurse and a registered nurse with Hospice of Northern Virginia, now Capital
Hospice.

    She was an inpatient oncology clinical research nurse at the National Cancer
Institute from 1995 until her retirement in 2005.

    Ms. Carter was born in Worcester, Mass., and was an emergency medical
technician in New York in the 1960s. From 1973 to 1983, she was a public
information officer with the Tribal, Urban and Indian Health Service section of
the Arizona Department of Health Services.

    She was elected to Sigma Theta Tau, a national nursing honor society, and
volunteered at the Herndon Free Clinic. She was a member of the Unitarian
Universalist Church in Reston.

    Her marriage to Rodney Smith ended in divorce.

    Survivors include two children, Jennifer Word of Centreville and David Smith
of Greer, S.C.; two sisters, Ann Henderson of Adamstown and Molly Carter of
Riverhead, N.Y.; a brother, Thomas Carter of Nokesville; and three
grandchildren.

   Charlotte Goldsborough Fletcher, 90, former librarian of St. John's College
in Annapolis, died of pneumonia March 29 at Anne Arundel Medical Center.

    Miss Fletcher was born in Cambridge, Md., and graduated in 1939 from what
was then Hollins College in Roanoke. She also received a bachelor's degree in
library science from Columbia University.

    Miss Fletcher worked as a librarian for 45 years.

    After several years at the Enoch Pratt Free Library in Baltimore, she served
for three years as librarian of the Talbot County Free Library. In July 1944,
she began 36 years at the St. John's College Library in Annapolis, where she
remained a favorite with students and faculty until she retired in 1980.

    During the years before the Naval Academy-St. John's croquet matches, Miss
Fletcher kept her own croquet set at the library and was always willing to lend
it to students  --  often with the stipulation that she be invited to join them.
Although normally a gentle, soft-spoken person, on the croquet court she took no
prisoners. In addition to croquet, she instructed generations of students in the
esoteric art of bookbinding.

    Miss Fletcher was the author of numerous articles on Maryland history and on
the history of St. John's College, including five essays published in 1990
titled "St. John's Forever."

    In 2002, her book "Cato's Mirania, A Life of Provost Smith" was published by
the University Press of America. Historian Arthur Pierce Middleton wrote that
"Miss Fletcher's terse and well-documented book should go far to restore
[William Smith] to his rightful place in the panoply of our founding fathers."

    Miss Fletcher traveled widely with her sister, the late Mary Henry Fletcher,
as well as with groups from Hollins and with Elderhostel. At the time of her
death, she was planning a trip to Europe and was in the midst of writing a book
of short stories.

    She was an enthusiastic concert- and theatergoer and a talented watercolor
artist. She was also an expert gardener who delighted in sharing both her
knowledge and her plants. She was a member of the Annapolis Watercolor Society,
the Maryland Federation of Art, the Maryland Historical Society, The Caritas
Society and St. Anne's Episcopal Church in Annapolis.

     She had no immediate survivors.

   Charley S. Carter, 52, a National Institutes of Health genetic engineering
technician who in 1990 helped perform the first successful human gene therapy
treatment, died March 27 at his home in Rockville after a heart attack.

    The gene therapy case centered on 4-year-old Ashanthi DeSilva, who had
immunodeficiency, a rare genetic disease that is almost always fatal for
children.

    Researchers at NIH proposed a gene transfer, which meant taking targeted
cells from Ashanthi, putting curative genes in those cells, growing them in a
laboratory and infusing them back into her.

    As a technician at what was then NIH's Special Services Laboratory, Mr.
Carter's role was to help develop the techniques to make gene transfer possible.

    A photograph of Mr. Carter staring intently at a small plate of cells
appeared on the cover of a November 1991 edition of U.S. News & World Report as
part of the magazine's coverage of the procedure.

    Mr. Carter was born in Olney and raised in Rockville, where he graduated
from Rockville High School.

    Soon after receiving a bachelor's degree in microbiology from the University
of Maryland in 1978, he volunteered as a summer technician at the National
Institute of Dental Research. He developed an interest in cell biology the next
year after he was hired as an entry-level technician in the institute's lab.

    In 1982, he joined NIH's Clinical Center Blood Bank, now the Department of
Transfusion Medicine. He continued to work in its lab until his death.

    Mr. Carter helped build the lab into one of the world's leading facilities
for clinical research on cell therapy, combining a curiosity with mechanics,
technical skills and a "creative genius," said Dr. Harvey Klein, director of the
Department of Transfusion Medicine.

    Over the years, Mr. Carter shared his insights with young physicians on
fellowships at NIH and wrote or co-wrote more than 75 academic articles on cell
collection, culture, preservation and clinical research.

    "He was outgoing and generous," said Dr. Elizabeth Reid, head of the Cell
Processing Section in the Department of Transfusion Medicine. "He made it a real
point of getting people together. Sometimes in science it's hard to do that when
you have people here and there doing their own research."

    His numerous professional honors included the Clinical Center Director's
Award.

    In his spare time, he enjoyed rooting for the sports teams of his alma mater
and playing on softball teams.

    Survivors include his wife, Laura Carter, and their daughter, Kate, both of
Rockville; his mother, Margie Carter of Rockville; and two brothers.

   Angela Carman Potter, 90, a longtime Georgetown real estate agent who was a
member of a once-prominent family in the horse racing community, died of
complications from colitis April 2 at Washington Hospice. She lived in
Washington.

    Mrs. Potter, who was born in Washington, was a daughter of Richard F.
Carman, who along with his father, Richard F. Carman Sr., owned and bred
champion thoroughbreds. The Carmans, whose horse Meridian won the 1911 Kentucky
Derby, operated a stud farm in Silver Spring until it was destroyed by a fire in
1921.

    Mrs. Potter, who was about 5 years old at the time of the fire, moved with
her family to Coronado, Calif. She lived there until her teenage years, when she
returned to Washington to attend Georgetown Visitation Convent.

    The school was the alma mater of her mother and grandmother. She was a
lifelong member of the GVC Alumnae Association.

    As a young woman, Mrs. Potter worked as an administrative assistant in the
Treasury Department and managed the family antiques business, the Carman Studio,
on Wisconsin Avenue.

    For more than 50 years, she sold real estate, mainly in Georgetown, for
various brokerage firms, including J.C. Chatel and Thomas Sandoz & Sons.

    Her husband, George Potter, died in 1995 after 57 years of marriage.

    Survivors include three children, George Potter of Dublin, Anne Bodner of
Washington and Joseph Potter of Centreville; eight grandchildren; and three
great-grandchildren.

   Becky Ozkul, 54, a homemaker and church member, died of cancer April 3 at
Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring. She lived in Brookeville.

    She was a member of Covenant Life Church in Gaithersburg and had taught
classes for an interdenominational Bible study group.

    She was born in Hampton, Va., and attended Christopher Newport University in
Newport News. She married in 1977 and devoted herself to full-time homemaking.
She moved to Brookeville in 1980.

    Mrs. Ozkul enjoyed Bible teaching, equestrian sports, flower gardening and
entertaining.

    Survivors include her husband, Ahmet Ozkul of Brookeville; three children,
Erin Seray Ozkul, Mine Suzaan Ozkul and Devin Kahn Ozkul, all of Brookeville;
her mother, Catherine Hopkins of Henrico, N.C.; a sister; and two brothers.

   Lily Mobille Pappas, 83, a docent and librarian at the Hillwood Museum and
Gardens in Washington, died March 28 of a heart ailment at her home in Green
Bay, Wis. She had lived in Bethesda for more than 40 years before moving to
Wisconsin in January.

    Mrs. Pappas, who was the wife of a State Department diplomat, settled in
Bethesda in the mid-1960s. Her association with Hillwood, the former home of
Post cereal heiress Marjorie Merriweather Post, began in the early 1980s. She
was a volunteer docent and librarian at the museum, led tours of the house and
grounds and had extensive knowledge of the museum's collection of Faberge eggs
and Russian icons.

    Mrs. Pappas studied piano for many years and gave lessons at her home. She
also opened her home for private concerts by pianists participating in the
William Kapell International Piano Competition at the University of Maryland.

    Mrs. Pappas was born in South Bend, Ind., and grew up in Lorain, Ohio. She
was a graduate of Kent State University in Ohio and spoke English, Greek,
French, Spanish, Russian and Amharic, an Ethiopian language.

    She accompanied her husband on diplomatic tours in Lebanon, Ethiopia and
Zambia. She enjoyed photography and did substitute teaching at the American
School in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

    She was a member of St. Sophia Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Washington and
gave guided tours of the cathedral.

    Her husband of 30 years, Nicholas J. Pappas, died in 1984.

    Survivors include two children, James N. Pappas of Hopatcong, N.J., and
Marianthe Pappas Hale of Green Bay; and three grandchildren.

   Howard Adler Jr., 81, a well-known antitrust lawyer in Washington for more
than half a century, died April 7 at his home in the District. He had
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

    Mr. Adler represented clients in a number of civil and criminal cases across
the country and before the Justice Department and the Federal Trade Commission.
He was vice chairman in 1978-79 of the antitrust section of the American Bar
Association, and he was a co-author of a book on international merger laws, "The
Global Merger Notification Hand Book" (2003).

    From 1956 to 1985, Mr. Adler was a partner in Bergson, Borkland, Margolis
and Adler, one of the city's premier boutique antitrust practices.

    The firm tripled in size during the 1970s but dissolved in 1986, a casualty
of the economic and political realities of the era, as the Reagan administration
stopped prosecuting antitrust cases and the firm's work dried up.

    Mr. Adler went on to join the Washington office of Davis, Graham and Stubbs.
In 1996, he became counsel to the law firm of Baker and McKenzie, and in 2000,
to Ridberg, Sherbill and Aronson, a Bethesda law firm. He retired in 2002.

    A Chicago native, Mr. Adler served as a lieutenant in the Army Air Forces.
He received a master's degree in economics from the University of Chicago, and
in 1951 he graduated from its law school, where he was an editor of the Law
Review.

    Mr. Adler was a lawyer for two years in the criminal division of the Justice
Department. He was a law clerk in 1954-55 to Judge David L. Bazelon of the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. It was there that he met
his future wife, who was a law clerk for Judge Henry Edgerton.

    Later in his career, Mr. Adler was intensely involved in various matters
with JAMS, an organization devoted to mediation as an alternative to litigation.
He was honored in 2002 by the Maryland District Court for his services as a
volunteer in its alternative dispute resolution program.

    Mr. Adler was a sports fan, golfer and table tennis player. He loved
classical music, films and the theater and read history and biography.

    Survivors include his wife of 50 years, Mary Adler of Washington; three
daughters, Tina Adler of Bethesda, Karla Adler of Clarksburg, and Lisa Bramwell
of Weybridge, England; two sisters; and five grandchildren.

   Galen E. Royalty, 97, an independent contractor who built hundreds of houses
in Prince George's County, died April 4 of renal failure at the Royal Haven
assisted living facility in Winchester, Va. He had lived in Silver Spring until
earlier this year.

    Mr. Royalty was born in Terrill, Iowa, and left school at 14 to become a
migrant worker, hopping trains throughout the Midwest. He came to Washington in
1937 and worked for several years at IBM.

    A self-taught carpenter, he established G.E. Royalty Contractors in the late
1940s and built houses across Prince George's for the next 20 years. He managed
many houses as rental properties until two years ago.

    Mr. Royalty held patents on several mechanical devices designed to improve
water conservation and the efficiency of household maintenance and cleaning. He
also wrote many poems for his family and published a book of his poetry, "Chest
Nuts."

    Survivors include his wife of 67 years, Virginia Royalty of Winchester; six
children, James Royalty, Georgia Royalty and Barbara Daniels, all of Ellicott
City, Vivian Gelfeld of North Bethesda, John Royalty of Wheaton and Deborah
Royalty of Charles Town, W.Va.; 11 grandchildren; and 12 great-grandchildren.

   Helen Sulser, 79, a former Foreign Service officer turned spouse who also
volunteered in her Lincolnia Hills community, died March 25 of a heart ailment
at HealthPark Medical Center in Fort Myers, Fla. A resident of Alexandria, she
was spending the winter in Florida.

    Mrs. Sulser was born in Lowell, Mass., and joined the Foreign Service in
1950. While assigned to the U.S. Embassy in London, she met another Foreign
Service officer, whom she married. Afterward, she served with her husband in
several countries in Europe and in the United States until 1984.

    As a Foreign Service spouse, she was an expert chef and experienced party
giver.

    In retirement, Mrs. Sulser volunteered for Meals on Wheels and her community
Neighborhood Watch.

    She was a member of the Army Navy Country Club and a golfer, bowler and
bridge player. A classical music and opera fan, she was a patron of the National
Symphony and several opera groups, including the Washington Opera, Metropolitan
Opera and Glimmerglass Opera Festival in New York.

    A daughter, Carol Ann Knitter, died in 1999.

    Survivors include her husband of 54 years, Jack Sulser of Alexandria; two
children, J. David Sulser of Washington and Julie Baird of Charlottesville; a
brother; and six grandchildren.

   Louisa Beale Stimpert, 81, who managed women's programs in two federal
agencies, died March 26 of kidney cancer at her home in Freeport, Ill.

    Mrs. Stimpert lived in the Washington area from 1970 to 1988. She worked
first in the secretary's office of the old Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, composing correspondence. She later managed training and education
programs for women and minorities at the Federal Aviation Administration and
Bureau of Land Management.

    Mrs. Stimpert was born in Chicago and grew up in Tennessee and Louisiana.
She lived in Washington state, Kansas and Ohio before moving to Arlington
County.

    After attending six colleges over a period of more than 30 years, she
received her bachelor's degree from Case Western Reserve University in Ohio in
1971. In 1982, she received a master's degree in playwriting from Catholic
University.

    She wrote many plays and skits for office gatherings and volunteer
organizations. She was an usher at Arena Stage for several years.

    Mrs. Stimpert was a member of the League of Women Voters and National
Organization for Women, for which she served on national committees. She also
was an officer with a federal interagency commission on women's issues.

    She had lived in Illinois since 1988.

    Her husband of 49 years, Warren Stimpert, died in 1993.

    Survivors include four children, Michael Stimpert of Atlanta, Bronwen
Stimpert of Iowa City, Donald Stimpert of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, and Jane
Stimpert White of Stockton Heights, Ill.; one sister; three brothers; and 11
grandchildren.

   Eleanor Preston Ritchie, 98, the wife of a career Air Force officer who was
actively engaged in volunteerism in the Washington area, died March 27 at her
home in the District. She had abdominal ailments.

    Mrs. Ritchie was born in Englewood, N.J., and moved to the District as a
child with her father, Ord Preston, and her stepmother, Caroline Murray Preston.
She graduated from St. Timothy's School in 1925 in Stevenson, Md.

    She married in 1939 and led the life of an officer's wife. After her husband
retired in 1950, the couple settled in the District. For many years, she served
on the boards of St. John's Community Service, All Hallows Guild of the
Washington National Cathedral, the Washington Committee for Historic Mount
Vernon and the English-Speaking Union.

    She was a member of the Chevy Chase Club and the Sulgrave Club. She was
active in the St. John's Episcopal Church at Lafayette Square in the District.

    Mrs. Ritchie spent summers on Nantucket Island, where she and her husband
had a second home. There she pursued her love of painting and gardening.

    Her husband, Brig. Gen. William L. Ritchie Sr., died in 1980.

    Survivors include two children, William L. Ritchie Jr. of the District and
Louise Beale of Chevy Chase; a brother; and four grandchildren.

   Norman E. McDaniel, 84, a retired FBI agent, died of cancer March 29 at a
hospital in Ormond Beach, Fla.

    Mr. McDaniel worked for the FBI from 1947 to 1973. He started in North
Carolina and New York, transferred to the headquarters in Washington and became
assistant special agent in charge of field divisions in El Paso and Cincinnati
in the early 1960s.

    In 1965, he moved back to Washington and was promoted to inspector. He
served as executive assistant to an assistant director until his retirement. In
the mid-1970s, Mr. McDaniel worked as an investigator for the House ethics
committee, then was self-employed as an investigator until 1997. He lived in
McLean and Warrenton, Va. He moved to Florida in 1985.

     A native of South Bend, Ind., he graduated from Wabash College in Indiana
and served in the Marine Corps in the Pacific during World War II.

    He was a member of the Society of Former Special Agents of the FBI.

    A daughter, Jill D. Lee, died in 2005.

    Survivors include his wife, Maureen McDaniel of Ormond Beach; two children,
Eric B. McDaniel of Richmond and Kimberlea Payne Gilbertson of Warrenton; a
brother; a sister; and six grandchildren.

   John Sterling Aronoff, 41, a sports statistician and a graphics and
information specialist for several television networks, died April 5 from a
self-inflicted gunshot at his home in Portland, Ore.

    Mr. Aronoff was born in Washington, attended Montgomery College and
graduated from James Madison University in Harrisonburg, Va.

    He was drawn to the field of sports statistics through the work of his
father, Martin Aronoff, who has been a statistician of baseball, football and
basketball for CBS and other networks for more than 30 years.

    The younger Mr. Aronoff began his career with Channel 20, keeping statistics
of Baltimore Orioles games and "spotting," or identifying, key players for
announcers. He teamed with well-known sportscasters such as James Brown, Mike
Tirico and Mike Patrick.

    As the spotter responsible for player identifications on ESPN's Sunday night
football broadcasts, Mr. Aronoff was part of a broadcast crew that received an
Emmy Award. He was particularly skilled in preparing informational graphics
during the course of a game.

    In addition to ESPN, he worked for CBS, NBC and Turner Sports networks. His
assignments included the Wimbledon and French Open tennis tournaments and NBA
telecasts. He also kept statistics for the San Francisco Giants, the Oakland
Athletics and the Phoenix Suns.

    For the past six years, he had done informational graphics for the Golf
Channel.

    He lived in Washington until 1991, when he moved to San Francisco. He had
lived in Portland since 1993.

    His marriage Maria Tonello ended in divorce.

    Survivors include his father, of Washington.

   William R. Harlow Sr., 88, a retired commercial finance industry executive,
died April 7 at the Capital Hospice of Arlington County. The cause of death was
listed as "failure to thrive."

    Mr. Harlow, an Arlington resident, was a volunteer small-business adviser
with Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) for the past five years and
vice president of the Jefferson Homeowners Association in Arlington.

    He was born in Boston and worked in the Civilian Conservation Corps as a
young man. He joined the Navy during World War II, serving as an aviation
machinist mate first class, and flew in blimps on antisubmarine patrols over the
Atlantic.

    After the war, he worked in the commercial finance industry in
Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Ohio and Pennsylvania, becoming vice president of
Philco-Ford Corp. and later vice president of the ITT Diversified Credit Corp.
He retired in 1980 and moved to Savannah, Ga. He moved to Northern Virginia in
2000.

    His wife of 52 years, Margaret O'Reilly Harlow, died in 2000.

    Survivors include two children, Margaret A. Harlow of Alexandria and William
R. Harlow of McLean; and a sister.

   Alfred Whitehead Little, 76, a longtime administrator in Prince George's
County schools who retired in 1980 after about a decade as principal at Laurel
High School, died March 14 at his home in Silver Spring. He had cancer.

    In the early 1950s, Mr. Little began teaching industrial arts in county
schools. He later was principal of John Hanson, Eisenhower and Glenridge middle
schools.

    He was born in Chautauqua County, N.Y., and spent his high school years in
Tampa. After Coast Guard service, he graduated from the University of Maryland,
where he also received a master's degree in education.

    Mr. Little studied German, French and Spanish, attending a language school
in Guatemala for the last. He liked to take trips, sometimes with family, to
parts of the world in crisis, including Northern Ireland and Nicaragua.

    He served on the board of the Funeral Consumers Alliance of Maryland and was
on a Silver Spring citizens association workgroup trying to protect green space
in Montgomery County.

    He also enjoyed playing show tunes and cocktail jazz on the piano.

    His marriage to Audrey Heard Little ended in divorce.

    He is survived by his wife of 38 years, Moira Hanlon Little of Silver
Spring; two children from the first marriage, Kevin Little of Silver Spring and
Diane Little of Ocala, Fla.; a brother, Sherwin Little of Arlington County; a
sister, Helen Ammon of Largo, Fla.; and a granddaughter.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2006


                              724 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Chicago Sun Times

                              April 9, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 269  words

HEADLINE: Modified gene could block HIV: Man still healthy after a year without
AIDS medications

BYLINE: Sabin Russell, Scripps Howard News Service

BODY:

   Michael DeLane is celebrating a rare anniversary. It's been one year since he
stopped taking his AIDS drugs.

   Many patients have experimented with breaks from their AIDS medications, and
a few of them have been able to keep their virus levels in check for a year or
more.

   What makes DeLane's case important is that he is among a small group of
HIV-infected men and women participating in an unusual experiment. Half of them
have had their blood cells modified with a gene that blocks the virus.

   Today, the 41-year-old San Francisco man is in good health.

   If the experimental therapy proves successful, it could raise the prospect
that infected individuals could control the virus and maintain their health
without having to spend a lifetime taking costly and potentially toxic drugs.

   "It's possible that the stars are lining up on this one," said Dr. Jay
Lalezari, a University of California-San Francisco researcher who conducts
clinical trials for drugmakers and has enrolled patients in this study.

   But he cautioned that the experience of a single patient has little
scientific meaning. "The technology has proven itself in various ways, but we
won't know the results of this trial until February," he said.

   Parallel immune system

   The goal of the experiment -- which combines elements of genetic engineering,
gene therapy and stem cell science -- is to create a kind of parallel immune
system that is fortified against the AIDS virus.

   Although DeLane remains HIV-positive, the level of virus in his bloodstream
is undetectable. His T-cell count -- a measure of infection-fighting white blood
cells -- has more than doubled.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2006


                              725 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 7, 2006 Friday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Editorial Pages Desk; Part B; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 130 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS;
Funding is a key to cures for genetic diseases

BODY:

   Re "Gene Therapy Shows Hope in Immune Disease," April 3

   It is essential that gene therapy research for genetic disorders receives
funding and donations, because if there is success in one of these diseases,
there can possibly be a cure in other diseases. Right now, with gene therapy for
chronic granulomatous disease, or CGD, it is "wait and see" if this is an
absolute cure that doesn't develop into leukemia, as some fear.

   I have two sons with CGD, ages 25 and 29, and I know the terrible and painful
times they have. Currently, my 29-year-old weighs only 80 pounds, and if he
becomes ill again, I don't know if he'll make it. I pray for a cure for all
genetic diseases that may be helped through gene therapy.

   MARY HURLEY

   \o7President\f7

   \o7CGD Assn.

   \f7\o7San Marino

   \f7\o7

   \f7\o7

   \f7

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2006


                              726 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                              April 7, 2006 Friday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1348 words

HEADLINE: HIGH HOPES FOR AIDS THERAPY;
Experimental treatment fortifies the body's own stem cells with an enzyme that
could block the virus' relentless advance

BYLINE: Sabin Russell, Chronicle Medical Writer

BODY:

   Michael DeLane is about to celebrate a rare anniversary. On Saturday, it will
be one year since he stopped taking all his drugs for AIDS.

   Many patients have experimented with breaks from their AIDS medications, and
a few of these have been able to keep their virus levels in check for a year or
more.

   What makes DeLane's case important is that he is among a small group of
HIV-infected men and women participating in an unusual experiment. Half of them
have had their own blood cells modified with a gene that blocks the virus.

   Today, the 41-year-old San Francisco man is in good health and fine spirits.

   If the experimental therapy is proved successful, it could raise the prospect
that infected individuals could control the virus and maintain their health
without having to spend a lifetime taking costly and potentially toxic drugs.

   "It's possible that the stars are lining up on this one,'' said Dr. Jay
Lalezari, a UCSF researcher who conducts clinical trials for drugmakers and has
enrolled patients in this study. But he cautioned that the experience of a
single patient has little scientific meaning. "The technology has proven itself
in various ways, but we won't know the results of this trial until February,''
he said.

   The goal of this experiment -- which combines elements of genetic
engineering, gene therapy and stem cell science -- is to create a kind of
parallel immune system that is fortified against the AIDS virus.

   Like the 73 other participants in the clinical study, DeLane does not know
for certain whether he was among the half who received the modified gene or was
given a placebo. What he does know is that his T-cell count -- a measure of
infection-fighting white blood cells -- has more than doubled.

   Although he remains HIV-positive, the level of virus in his bloodstream is
currently undetectable.

   "It was such a burden to be lifted, to be no longer connected to the pills,''
said DeLane, a former Greenpeace activist now working as an administrator for
the UCSF Medical Group.

   DeLane was among the first to participate in the experiment, which he learned
about because he has closely monitored HIV science since he became infected in
August 2002.

   Similar experiments are being carried out at UCLA and in Sydney, where the
technique was developed by a small research company owned by Johnson & Johnson,
the New Brunswick, N.J., medical giant.

   Although DeLane was among the first to participate, the researchers have only
recently performed the treatment on the last of their volunteers. Preliminary
results of the trial won't be ready until February.

   Johnson & Johnson spokesman Marc Monseau declined to discuss the treatment.
"The trial is ongoing, and we prefer not to comment about ongoing trials,'' he
said.

   The secret of this new gene-therapy approach to controlling HIV is an enzyme
called a ribozyme. It is a custom-built chemical "scissors," designed by
Australian researchers, that cuts up one of HIV's nine genes just as the virus
tries to replicate itself. Certain types of white blood cells are the natural
target of HIV. But researchers believe that if these same cells are equipped
with this man-made enzyme, they cannot be infected.

   Because the body does not naturally produce this ribozyme, researchers had to
come up with a way to cause blood cells to manufacture it. The answer was found
in the emerging science of stem cells.

   The stem cells chosen for this experiment are not the controversial kind
found in human embryos, but grow naturally in bone marrow and float about in the
bloodstream. They are literally the mother of all blood cells -- they morph into
the many kinds of white cells that fight infection -- and are the favorite
target of HIV.

   Participants in the gene therapy experiment follow a procedure developed by
the Australian scientists, led by Johnson & Johnson researcher Geoff Symonds.

   First, the volunteers spend two eight-hour shifts hooked to a machine that
filters out stem cells and returns the rest of their blood to their arm.

   Next, the harvested stem cells are infected in the laboratory with a harmless
mouse virus engineered to carry the ribozyme gene. The genes are a blueprint
that tell the cell how to make the enzyme. Three days after the gene is
transferred to the stem cells, they are returned to the patient's bloodstream.
In subsequent weeks, these stem cells produce a variety of infection-fighting
white blood cells, each containing the ribozyme that can ward off HIV. (In the
experiment, only half the subjects receive stem cells containing the gene. The
rest receive unaltered stem cells as a placebo.)

   The hope is that when HIV attempts to infect these fortified blood cells, the
virus will be destroyed. As time goes by, these fortified blood cells would
eventually outlive the natural blood cells -- and the patient would be left with
a rebuilt immune system resistant to HIV.

   DeLane was infused with either the treated blood cells or a placebo at a
Stanford University Medical Center clinic in June 2004. He strongly believes
that he received the treated cells, because for several months after the
procedure his blood counts fluctuated wildly, as if a battle were going on in
his immune system. Forty weeks after the infusion, he stopped taking antiviral
drugs.

   The Chronicle has learned that DeLane is not the only patient in the stem
cell study to maintain undetectably low levels of virus, although the number is
a closely guarded secret.

   Word that some participants were doing well has been circulating among AIDS
activists for several months. DeLane's experience with the Stanford trial is the
first to be publicized -- but only because he chose to share the test results
with reporters.

   Perhaps the most intriguing development in his case was in February when the
level of virus in his bloodstream jumped into the detectable range -- the first
sign that perhaps the therapy was failing. But in March, the so-called "viral
load" test slipped back into the undetectable range -- suggesting that DeLane's
immune system, newly fortified or not, beat back the infection without any help
from AIDS drugs.

   "It's a fascinating case,'' said Dr. Steve Deeks, a UCSF researcher. Deeks
was not involved in the clinical trial, but is an expert on the reaction of the
immune system in HIV patients who stop taking their medications.

   Deeks said it is possible that DeLane is one of those patients who can
naturally control the virus without drugs, and his encouraging results may have
nothing to do with the therapy. "Long-term control of the virus in the absence
of treatment is rare, but it does happen,'' said Deeks.

   Scientists involved in the study remain cautiously optimistic. Dr. Ronald
Mitsuyasu, director of the UCLA Center for Clinical AIDS Research, is running
the study in Los Angeles and collaborated with the Australian team on the first
pilot test of the new therapy. It showed that the procedure was safe, and that
the anti-HIV ribozyme installed in stem cells turned up in the many white blood
cells that derived from them.

   Researchers have improved the technique of transferring the gene to stem
cells so that 90 percent of the harvested stem cells are returned carrying the
ribozyme.

   The AIDS scientist said he does not believe this type of therapy will ever
fully replace effective antiviral drugs. However, "if we are intelligent in how
we use the drugs with these immune therapy approaches, it could lead to
extremely effective control of HIV,'' Mitsuyasu said.

   --------------------------------------------------------

   Stem cell HIV treatment

   1 Aphoresis

   Blood is removed from the body, filtered to remove stem cells and returned to
the body. The process takes up to 16 hours.

   2 Modifying stemcells

   Retrieved stem cells are "infected" with a harmless mouse virus carrying a
ribozyme gene.

   3 Fortified stemcells

   Three days later, the stem cells fortified with the ribozyme gene are
reintroduced into the patient.

   4 Cell change

   Fortified stem cells differentiate into white blood cells such as monocytes,
neutrophils, T-cells, B-cells. All can now produce the ribozyme, which blocks
HIV infection.

   Source: Chronicle research

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), GRAPHIC
(1) Michael DeLane is an HIV-positive study participant. / Kim Komenich / The
Chronicle, (2) Michael DeLane has been off his AIDS drugs for a year. He won't
know whether he received the ribozyme or a placebo until 2007. / Kim Komenich /
The Chronicle, GRAPHIC: John Blanchard / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2006


                              727 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                              April 3, 2006 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: MAIN NEWS; National Desk; Part A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: The Nation;
Gene Therapy Shows Hope in Immune Disease;
Scientists say two men with a rare disorder are cured using a technique feared
to be unsafe.

BYLINE: Denise Gellene, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   After a year of scant progress in the once-promising field of gene therapy,
German scientists said Sunday that they had successfully used the experimental
technique to cure two patients with a rare immune disorder.

   The patients suffered from chronic granulomatous disease, or CGD, an
inherited illness that leaves its victims susceptible to life-threatening
infections.

   The disease, which affects about 1,500 people in the U.S., is caused by a
defect in a gene needed to destroy harmful bacteria. Few patients survive into
middle age.

   Since the German patients received the therapy 18 months ago, they have been
free of bacterial and fungal infections, according to a study published online
by the journal Nature Medicine.

   "Everyone in the field had crossed their fingers and had high hopes there
would be a clinical benefit," said Dr. Harry L. Malech, head of genetic
immunology at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, who was
not involved in the study. "This is an important proof of principle."

   The success comes one year after three children in a French gene therapy
experiment developed leukemia and one died. The setback cast a pall over gene
therapy research and led authorities in the U.S. to temporarily suspend 27
clinical trials.

   Scientists said they hoped the German study would help restore faith in a
promising technology.

   "A new disease has been cured by gene therapy," said Dr. Donald Kohn of
Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, who was not involved in the research. "Gene
therapy is making progress."

   Scientists started researching gene therapy more than a decade ago to treat
genetic diseases, such as sickle cell anemia and cystic fibrosis. They believed
that giving patients a healthy gene would not merely treat their symptoms but
would cure their disease.

   The process involves using a virus to insert the new gene into a patient's
cells.

   A major success of gene therapy was curing a group of French children of a
rare disease known as severe combined immunodeficiency disease.

   But the breakthrough turned into one of its biggest setbacks when some of the
children developed leukemia. Scientists believe the corrected gene inadvertently
activated a nearby gene that sparked the cancer.

   In the latest study, a group led by Manuel Grez of the Institute for
Biomedical Research in Frankfurt put a healthy version of the CGD gene into a
modified mouse leukemia virus.

   The virus was then used to insert the gene into white blood cells called
neutrophils that had been removed from each patient.

   Before returning the cells to the patients, researchers destroyed some of the
defective immune cells with a low dose of chemotherapy.

   Scientists said that within 50 days of receiving the infusion, about 20% of
the patients' neutrophils were the healthy version. That surprised researchers
because just 5% was needed to cure the disease.

   Before the trial, the patients had required frequent infusions of antibiotics
to keep chronic infections at bay. One patient, a 26-year-old man, had a
long-lasting liver abscess. The second patient was a 25-year-old man with a
chronic lung infection.

   After gene therapy, those infections cleared, Grez said. He was optimistic
about the future of the treatments, saying "our study may open the way to treat
several other diseases of the blood."

   But the speedy proliferation of neutrophils has raised some concerns. The
study reported that the cells continued to reproduce rapidly, eventually making
up 60% of the patients' bacteria-fighting white blood cells.

   The rapid reproduction, if unchecked, could lead to leukemia.

   The growth was "very dramatic," said Dr. Mary C. Dinauer of Indiana
University School of Medicine, who was not involved in the research. "People
have concerns. You can get too much of a good thing."

   Dr. Christof von Kalle, a researcher from the German Cancer Research Center
and a coauthor of the German study, said that patients were being closely
monitored and that there had been no signs of cancer.

   He said the corrected cells seemed to have stopped their encroachment.
Scientists said it could take several years to find out whether cancer would
develop in the patients.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                              728 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Column 2; Magazine; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 5143 words

HEADLINE: A DepressionSwitch?

BYLINE: By David Dobbs.

   David Dobbs writes on science, medicine and culture. His last article for the
magazine was about autopsy.

BODY:

   Deanna Cole-Benjamin never figured to be a test case for a radical new brain
surgery for depression. Her youth contained no traumas; her adult life, as she
describes it, was blessed. At 22 she joined Gary Benjamin, a career financial
officer in the Canadian Army, in a marriage that brought her happiness and, in
the 1990's, three children. They lived in a comfortable house in Kingston, a
pleasant university town on Lake Ontario's north shore, and Deanna, a
public-health nurse, loved her work. But in the last months of 2000, apropos of
nothing -- no life changes, no losses -- she slid into a depression of
extraordinary depth and duration.

   ''It began with a feeling of not really feeling as connected to things as
usual,'' she told me one evening at the family's dining-room table. ''Then it
was like this wall fell around me. I felt sadder and sadder and then just
numb.''

     Her doctor prescribed progressively stronger antidepressants, but they
scarcely touched her. A couple of weeks before Christmas, she stopped going to
work. The simplest acts -- deciding what to wear, making breakfast -- required
immense will. Then one day, alone in the house after Gary had taken the kids to
school and gone to work, she felt so desperate to escape her pain that she drove
to her doctor's office and told him she didn't think she could go on anymore.

     ''He took one look,'' she told me later, ''and said that he wanted me to
stay right there in the office. Then he called Gary, and Gary came to the
office, and he told us he wanted Gary to take me straight to the hospital.''

     They drove to the Providence Continuing Care Center's mental-health
hospital, still known locally as the Kingston Psychiatric Hospital, or K.P.H.,
its name when it was built in the 1950's. ''It's a dingy, archaic place,''
Deanna said, ''typical of older mental hospitals.'' There, in the locked ward
that also contained psychotic patients, she would spend the next 10 months
straight and about 85 percent of the three years after that. Her depression
would prove resistant to every class of antidepressant, numerous combinations of
antidepressants and anti-anxiety drugs, intensive psychotherapy and about a
hundred sessions of electroconvulsive therapy. Patients who have failed that
many treatments usually don't emerge from their depressions.

     Finally, in the spring of 2004, Deanna's psychiatrist at the hospital, Dr.
Gebrehiwot Abraham, received a fax from a University of Toronto research team
asking if he had an appropriate candidate for a clinical trial of a new,
experimental surgery for treatment-resistant depression. The operation borrowed
a procedure called deep brain stimulation, or D.B.S., which is used to treat
Parkinson's. It involves planting electrodes in a region near the center of the
brain called Area 25 and sending in a steady stream of low voltage from a
pacemaker in the chest. One of the study's leaders, Dr. Helen Mayberg, a
neurologist, had detected in depressed patients what she suspected was a crucial
dysfunction in Area 25's activity. She hypothesized that the electrodes might
modulate the area and ease the depression.

     The procedure, Dr. Abraham told Deanna and Gary, had worked safely in
thousands of Parkinson's patients. But it would carry some risk of neural
complications (it was, after all, brain surgery), it would be uncomfortable and
it might not work.

     ''We were in tears,'' said Deanna, who is now 41. ''We felt we'd tried
everything and nothing worked. But we talked about it and decided, 'Well, what
have we got to lose?'''

     What she hoped to lose, of course, was her depression. But depression,
which 5 to 10 percent of Americans suffer in any given year and about 15 percent
will suffer in their lifetimes, can be hard to lose. Drugs, as shown in a
comprehensive study released last month by the National Institute of Mental
Health, are effective in only half of patients with major depression.
Psychotherapy does no better. For those people who are not helped by therapy or
drugs, electroconvulsive therapy, or ECT, can bring relief. But few of those
cures are complete. These therapies usually ease rather than cure depression
while sometimes bringing side effects like insomnia or memory loss, and their
potency often proves fleeting; as many as half to two-thirds of those
successfully treated relapse within two years. Neither neuroscientists nor
psychiatrists can say exactly what depression is. Neurologically and
psychologically, what Hippocrates called the ''black bile'' and Susan Sontag
''melancholy minus its charms'' presents an almost impossibly complicated
puzzle.

     The expectations for the Toronto team's D.B.S. study were accordingly
modest. When I later asked Mayberg's collaborator Dr. Andres Lozano, the
neurosurgeon who performed the operations, what he had expected, he replied,
''Nothing.''

     As it turned out, 8 of the 12 patients he operated on, including Deanna,
felt their depressions lift while suffering minimal side effects -- an
incredible rate of effectiveness in patients so immovably depressed. Nor did
they just vaguely recover. Their scores on the Hamilton depression scale, a
standard used to measure the severity of depression, fell from the
soul-deadening high 20's to the single digits -- essentially normal. They've
re-engaged their families, resumed jobs and friendships, started businesses,
taken up hobbies old and new, replanted dying gardens. They've regained the
resilience that distinguishes the healthy from the depressed.

     These results brought a marvelous surprise to both the patients and the
doctors involved -- and nervous anticipation about whether their luck will hold.
Though a few of the patients are more than two years out from the surgery, none
completely trust their cure. No one can tell them for sure that it will last,
and they worry. The study doctors and the wider medical community, meanwhile,
are guarded about whether D.B.S. will prove so effective in larger trials. ''I
can't emphasize enough that we need a large, randomized study to confirm this as
a treatment,'' says Valerie Voon, a University of Toronto psychiatrist who was
with the team for the first six patients and who is now a research fellow at the
National Institutes of Health.

     Those caveats notwithstanding, many scientists following the trial say they
believe it will change how psychiatrists define and treat mood disorders.
Mayberg, who speaks of a ''paradigm shift,'' notes that she developed the trial
to evaluate not a treatment but a hypothesis. In that sense the trial succeeded.
Mayberg's focus on Area 25 tests the emerging ''network'' model of mood
disorders, a new way of looking at psychiatric conditions that isn't restricted
by the neurochemical model of mood that has dominated over the past quarter
century or so. Rather, it incorporates neurochemistry into the concept of the
brain as a circuit board or wiring diagram. The network model carries profound
implications for research and, ultimately, treatment. The Prozac revolution
showed everyone that tweaking neurochemistry can dampen and sometimes extinguish
depression -- but only through a generalized approach, hitting the entire brain.
(''Carpet-bombing,'' one neuroscientist calls it.) And the 50 percent success
rate of antidepressant drugs suggests that they aren't hitting depression's
central mechanism. The network approach, on the other hand, focuses on specific
nodes, pathways and gateways that might be approached with various treatments --
electrical, surgical or pharmacological. This small trial appears to confirm
this model so emphatically that it's already changing the neuropsychiatric view
of the brain and the direction of research.

     ''People often ask me about the significance of small first studies like
this,'' says Dr. Thomas Insel, who as director of the National Institute of
Mental Health enjoys an unparalleled view of the discipline. ''I usually tell
them: 'Don't bother. We don't know enough.' But this is different. Here we know
enough to say this is something significant. I really do believe this is the
beginning of a new way of understanding depression.''

     When she started her research in the late 1980's, Helen Mayberg, too,
looked at neurochemistry. ''That's where biological psychiatry was then,'' she
told me. ''It was about the brain as a bowl of soup. You whip up a chemical, add
it and stir. An alchemist point of view. But I soon realized I wanted to find
out where things were changing.''

     Lively, smart and quick-witted, Mayberg talks of brain science with
contagious excitement. She possesses just the kind of presence someone having a
hole drilled in his head would welcome -- authoritative but warm. Mayberg
originally considered becoming a psychiatrist, but she didn't like the
discipline's resistance at the time (it was the 1970's) to neurological
explanations of mood. So she became a behavioral neurologist, doing a residency
at Columbia University and then moving to Johns Hopkins.

     Setting aside the bowl-of-soup model did not mean deciding that
neurochemicals weren't important. Rather it meant deciding that neurochemistry,
and particularly the chemistry dictating how individual neurons communicate with
one another, was probably driven by traffic between different brain areas, and
that identifying the patterns in that traffic might yield new understanding.
(Or, using another metaphor, if the brain is an orchestra, then the
neurochemical approach focuses on how well individual players listen and respond
to the players adjacent to them; the network approach, like a conductor, focuses
on how the orchestra's sections -- strings, winds, brass, etc. -- coordinate and
balance volume and tone. When both are working well, you've got music.)

     Imaging tools for tracking these relationships, like PET scans and later
functional magnetic resonance imagery, were just maturing as Mayberg pursued her
work. Neuroscientists were soon using these tools to help identify networks
involved in mental processes ranging from distinguishing facial expressions to
experiencing alarm or pleasure. Each of these networks engages different brain
areas in different combinations. The areas active in recognizing a fearful
expression, for instance, won't match those for recalling old memories, though
some areas might overlap. Defining the network involved in any given process
requires figuring out not just which parts are involved but also which parts are
most vital and how one affects another.

     By the 1990's, Mayberg was trying to define the network that goes awry in
depression. She and other researchers soon established that depression involved
abnormal patterns of activity in a network that includes limbic areas (a cluster
of evolutionarily older brain areas around the top of the brain stem), which
control basic emotions and drives like fear, lust and hunger, and the newer
cortex and subcortex responsible for thought, memory, motivation and reward.

     Several researchers were working on this. But Mayberg, and, separately, Dr.
Wayne Drevets, then at Washington University and now at the N.I.M.H.,
increasingly homed in on Area 25, which seemed crucial in both its behavior and
its position in this network. They found that Area 25 was smaller in most
depressed patients; that it lighted up in every form of depression and also in
nondepressed people who intentionally pondered sad things; that it dimmed when
depression was successfully treated; and that it was heavily wired to brain
areas modulating fear, learning, memory, sleep, libido, motivation, reward and
other functions that went fritzy in the depressed. It seemed to be a sort of
junction box, in short, whose malfunction might be ''necessary and sufficient,''
as Mayberg put it, to turn the world dim. Maybe it could provide a switch that
would brighten the dark.

     To work the switch, Mayberg needed a knife. In 1999 she moved from the
University of Texas at San Antonio to the University of Toronto, where she met
Lozano, who had become expert at using deep brain stimulation for treating
Parkinson's, the neurological affliction that causes tremors and rigidity as
well as cognitive and emotional declines. By the time he and Mayberg met, he'd
slipped electrodes into the brains of almost 300 patients.

     Depression is more elusive than Parkinson's. But approaching Area 25 with
D.B.S. allowed the researchers to use a known tool. Neurosurgeons found as early
as the 1950's that they could treat Parkinson's by destroying a small portion of
the hyperactive globus pallidus, a brain area that is crucial to movement. The
treatment illustrated one of the brain's many oddities: some areas can cause
more trouble when they are excessively active than when they have no activity at
all. In the early 1990's, surgeons increasingly began to use D.B.S. to quiet the
globus pallidus by sending it steady, rapid pulses of low voltage. Patients'
tremors would instantly ease or cease; their rigidity and uncontrollable body
movements would fade over a week or two. Killing the current revived the
symptoms. Surgeons have now implanted D.B.S. electrodes in some 30,000
Parkinson's patients worldwide. The procedure is not a cure-all. It helps some
patients less than others, does little to alleviate Parkinson's cognitive and
emotional decay and occasionally creates complications including infection,
bleeding and memory loss. Its biggest problem may be its success. So many
medical centers now do it that some do it badly or on poorly qualified patients.
But done well, it usually works.

     Mayberg knew all this from the literature and learned more in conversations
with Lozano. She grew increasingly convinced that applying D.B.S. to Area 25
might control depression.

     ''So one day,'' she told me, ''I went to Lozano and said: 'I want to turn
off Area 25. Can we put a stimulator there and see if that does it?' And he
goes, 'Why not?' ''

     Occasionally, Deanna felt good enough to go home. This feeling seldom
lasted more than a few days. ''You could tell she was getting bad again when she
couldn't sleep,'' Gary said. ''That was the red flag. She'd be around the house
all night, watching TV, up worried, cleaning. Then she'd get worse each day. Her
eyes got that sunken look. Those were the scariest times, when she was getting
like that and I would drop the kids at school and go to work and know she was
home alone.''

     During the bad periods, which was much of the time, Deanna thought about
suicide almost constantly. Through the windows of the locked ward she could see
Lake Ontario, cold and immense. While she was there, one patient managed to
reach the lake, beyond the parking lot and a grove of trees, and drown himself.
Deanna thought obsessively of doing the same.

     ''I imagined that all the time,'' she said. ''That I would walk out there
and walk into the lake and that would be it.''

     As the months and years passed and all treatments failed, it began to feel
as if there were only one way out.

     ''It started to seem like, this is not going to stop,'' Gary said. ''This
is our life now. There were times I thought that it was going to end'' -- he

     looked across the table at Deanna -- ''only when you committed suicide.''

     ''The worst part for me,'' Deanna said, ''was not being able to feel
anything for my children. To hug them, to have them hug me, and feel nothing.
That was devastating. An awful, awful place to be.''

     The D.B.S. operation involves an intrusion that is delicate but brutal. The
patients are kept awake so they can describe any changes, and the only drug
administered is a local anesthetic. The surgical team shaves much of the
patient's head and attaches to the skull, with four screws drilled through skin
into bone, the stereotactic frame that will hold the head steady against the
operating table and serve as a navigational aid. Mounting the frame takes only
about 10 minutes. But because it involves driving screws into the skull (''You
can't truly feel it,'' as one patient said, ''but you can hear it and see it and
smell it''), and because it leaves you with a steel frame around the head, many
patients find this the most distressing part of the whole business.

     Gary found the frame more than he could take. He kissed his wife and went
elsewhere, hoping she wouldn't be a vegetable when he next saw her. Then Deanna
was rolled to an M.R.I. machine, where scans would be taken; the scans would
help guide Lozano in placing the electrodes.

     During the hour or so while the computer processed the scans, Deanna
chatted with Mayberg. The day before, she told Mayberg, on video, that what she
most wanted was to hold her children and feel it.

     When the scans were ready, she went to the operating room. She was placed
on a table, which was tilted back like a La-Z-Boy. Lozano and his team bolted
the stereotactic frame to the table, as it was described to me later. There was
some scrubbing on her head, some chitchat among the surgical team, much fiddling
with sterile drapes and instruments. Then Lozano fit a half-inch burred bit into
a drill, turned it on and started drilling. He drilled right into the top of
Deanna's skull, which brought a rattling sensation and a sound like that made by
an air wrench removing the lugs off a car's wheel. Then he did it again.

     Now Lozano threaded a guide tube -- ''It's a straight shot,'' he said
later, ''really quite easy'' -- down between crevices and seams to one side of
Area 25, which is in two small lobes at the midline of the brain. He slid the
first electrode and its lead down the tube, then repeated this for the other
side. All this took nearly two hours. After he double-checked his locations, he
wired the leads to a pacemaker and gave Mayberg a nod. They could turn it on
anytime now.

     Mayberg had squeezed into a spot at Deanna's side some time before. She had
told Deanna that if anything felt different, she should say so. Mayberg wasn't
going to tell her when the device was activated. ''Don't try to decide what's
important,'' Mayberg told her. ''If your nose itches, I want to know.'' Now and
then the two would chat. But so far Deanna hadn't said much.

     ''So we turn it on,'' Mayberg told me later, ''and all of a sudden she says
to me, 'It's very strange,' she says, 'I know you've been with me in the
operating room this whole time. I know you care about me. But it's not that. I
don't know what you just did. But I'm looking at you, and it's like I just feel
suddenly more connected to you.' ''

     Mayberg, stunned, signaled with her hand to the others, out of Deanna's
view, to turn the stimulator off.

     ''And they turn it off,'' Mayberg said, ''and she goes: 'God, it's just so
odd. You just went away again. I guess it wasn't really anything.'

     ''It was subtle like a brick,'' Mayberg told me. ''There's no reason for
her to say that. Zero. And all through those tapes I have of her, every time
she's in the clinic beforehand, she always talks about this disconnect, this
closeness and sense of affiliation she misses, that was so agonizingly painful
for her to lose. And there it was. It was back in an instant.''

     Deanna later described it in similar terms. ''It was literally like a
switch being turned on that had been held down for years,'' she said. ''All of a
sudden they hit the spot, and I feel so calm and so peaceful. It was
overwhelming to be able to process emotion on somebody's face. I'd been numb to
that for so long.''

     It worked that way for other patients too. For those for whom it worked,
the first surges of mood and sensation were peculiar to their natures. Patient
4, for instance, was fond of taking walks, and she had previously told Mayberg
that she knew she was getting ill when whole landscapes turned dim, as if ''half
the pixels went dark.'' Her first comment when the stimulator went on was to ask
what they'd done to the lights, for everything seemed much brighter. Patient 5,
an elite bicycle racer before his depression, told me that a pulling that he had
long felt in his legs and gut, ''as if death were pulling me downward,'' had
instantly ceased. Patient 1, who in predepression days was an avid gardener,
amazed the operating room by announcing that she suddenly felt as if she were
walking through a field of wildflowers. Two days after going home, she put a
scarf over her shaved, stitched head, found her tools and went out to reclaim
her long-neglected gardens.

     Not all was light and flowers. On a purely biological level, the
improvement made by D.B.S. sometimes amplified the side effects of the high
doses of medication the patients had been taking. Doctors don't quite understand
this phenomenon, but they see it happen in other instances too; it is as if the
patient, deadened, is again made sensate. Deanna broke out in hives and felt
nauseated; her hands shook. These symptoms eased when she (as several of the
patients have done) reduced her meds -- slowly, so as not to introduce new
variables. She now takes standard doses of Effexor, an antidepressant, and
Seroquel, an anti-psychotic drug.

     The cure also brought challenges at home. As with other disabilities, any
partner turned caretaker gets used to calling the shots, and rearranging power,
dependencies and expectations after a sudden recovery can prove hard. One
patient, the cyclist, faced this challenge starkly, for he had started a
relationship and married while he was depressed. ''Frankly,'' he told me, ''I'm
not sure we've quite finished working this out.'' All the patients have
benefited from coordinated assistance from psychiatrists, social workers and
occupational therapists who try to smooth the transition.

     ''That help is crucial,'' says Mayberg, who is now a professor of
psychiatry and neurology at Emory University in Atlanta. ''We're just fixing the
circuit. The patient's life still needs work. It's like fixing a knee. They need
that high-quality physical and supportive therapy afterward if they're really
going to move around again.''

     This transition is not back to a former self and family but to a new one.
Gary Benjamin says he sees similar things in military families. ''These soldiers
get sent away for six months, they come back and all they want to do is return
to their old home. But their old home isn't there, because everybody's changed.
It takes some tough rearranging sometimes.''

     For a change so profound, these seem acceptable adjustments. And the
treatment so far seems remarkably free of side effects. No one has suffered
significant neural complications, probably because, unlike ECT, which sends 70
to 150 volts through the entire brain, these electrodes deliver only about 4
volts to an area about the size of a pea.

     But what will happen when larger groups are treated? The team is continuing
to operate on depressed patients, with a goal of 20. And would the successes
stay high and the side effects low in a large, placebo-controlled trial? Neither
Mayberg nor any of the other collaborators cares to guess. Other treatments have
started this well and fizzled. For instance, vagus nerve stimulation, which
sends a low current to the brain via a major nerve with connections to various
brain areas, appeared to help about half of the patients in a small, initial,
uncontrolled trial, but failed its only placebo-controlled trial. (In a
controversial move, the Food and Drug Administration overruled its own reviewers
and approved the device as a depression treatment anyway.)

     ''What if you do a hundred patients,'' I asked Mayberg one day, ''and they
do no better than placebo?''

     ''I suppose that's possible,'' she said. But she doesn't think that will be
the case. The several authorities I talked to agree that the high success rate
so far, along with the soundness of the theoretical base and D.B.S.'s track
record with Parkinson's, suggests that this isn't just a lucky run.

     ''This just makes so much sense,'' says Dr. Antonio Damasio, director of
the University of Southern California's Brain and Creativity Institute and a
renowned neurologist, ''and the weight of the results is so sizable. I would be
surprised if they had no results with a larger body of patients.''

     On the other hand, even if it works, no one sees this becoming the new
Prozac. The procedure costs too much (around $40,000) to use on anyone who
hasn't tried everything else. The appropriate candidates for D.B.S. probably
number in the thousands, not the millions. Perhaps the most sensible worry is
that if the thing works, doctors might use it too freely, as they tend to do
with successful new treatments; witness the problematic boom in D.B.S. for
Parkinson's.

     In the end, the procedure's greatest clinical value may lie in inspiring
less intrusive ways of tweaking key nodes -- localized delivery of drug or gene
therapies, or other means still to come. Such possibilities probably lie at
least a decade away.

     Regardless of how it pans out in the clinic, Mayberg and Lozano's D.B.S.
study is already changing how neuroscientists and psychiatrists think about
depression. One possibility, for instance, is that refining the networks that go
awry in depression may reveal neurological subtypes of depression that can be
diagnosed and treated differently. For example, Mayberg has already found that
patients who respond well to Prozac usually show a change in their brain scans
only a week after they start medication -- even though they don't feel a
difference for 3 to 10 weeks (a long and sometimes dangerous wait). She's done
preliminary work suggesting she might be able to identify such Prozac-friendly
patients before they even start the drug. If she or others can replicate and
elaborate on this diagnostic ability, doctors might be able to characterize a
patient's depression and choose a best-odds therapy -- Prozac for one patient,
talk therapy for a second, both for a third -- at the very beginning of
treatment, savings weeks or months of trial and error.

     The network model -- which some scientists also call a ''systems'' model --
also offers an organizing principle for research. Andreas Meyer-Lindenberg, a
researcher with the N.I.M.H., points out that research on depression has so far
followed clues left by drugs that were found to be effective only by chance.
''We'd find a drug that helped depression, figure out how it works and make
hypotheses from that about how the brain works,'' he says. The effectiveness of
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (S.S.R.I.'s) like Prozac, for instance,
inspired piles of research showing that mood regulation depends heavily on the
availability of the neurotransmitter serotonin. (Neurotransmitters are chemicals
that help carry messages across the spaces between neurons; S.S.R.I.'s treat
depression by making more serotonin available in those spaces.)

     This focus on neurotransmitters is the ''bowl of soup'' approach that
Mayberg speaks of, and it has formed the bulk of depression research for more
than two decades. Defining the networks the neurotransmitters move within,
however -- and in particular identifying Area 25 as a key gateway within the
depression network -- will let researchers bring their neurochemical knowledge
to bear on specific targets.

     ''With this D.B.S. work,'' Meyer-Lindenberg says, ''they have characterized
in detail a system'' -- or network -- ''underlying a major disorder. It's not a
simplistic thing where you're saying it's all about this one area and you inject
a current and everything's fine. It's a very complicated system. But this D.B.S.
work shows us that amid this complicated system there is a place of overlap, a
common denominator'' -- Area 25 -- ''that's a very attractive treatment
target.'' Here, Meyer-Lindenberg says, researchers can try to apply the
knowledge they've gained about neurochemistry and genetics. The network theory
presents a framework around which to apply these perspectives.

     Meyer-Lindenberg's own work shows the power of this approach. Last June he
published a study on the serotonin transporter gene, or sert gene, which helps
determine serotonin availability. Other research had shown that people with the
''short'' version of the sert gene run more depression risk. Meyer-Lindenberg
found a way to identify how various brain areas were affected by having that
short version. Then he took 112 patients, half with the long version and half
with the short, scanned their brains and asked the computer to find areas that
scanned differently in the two groups. The area showing the most difference was
Area 25.

     Along with redirecting research, the quieting of Area 25 may also change
our conception of depression from a condition in which something is lacking --
self-esteem, resilience, optimism, energy, serotonin, you name it -- to one in
which an active agent makes a person sick.

     ''Most people think of depression as a deficit state,'' Mayberg says.
''You're low, you're negative. But in fact, talk to a depressed person, and you
have this bizarre combination of numbness and what William James called 'an
active anguish.' 'A sort of psychical neuralgia,' he said, 'wholly unknown to
healthy life.' You're numb but you hurt. You can't think, but you are in pain.
Now, how does your psyche hurt? What a weird choice of words. But it's not an
arbitrary choice. It's there. These people are feeling a particular,
indescribable kind of pain.''

     This anguish, Mayberg suggests, is the manifestation of a neural circuit
run amok. For doctors, establishing this should focus research and care. For
those of us who've never known depression, recognizing it may help us see
depression not as a dead absence but as a live affliction. We might even stop
indulging the romantic notion of depression as intrinsic to one's identity. For
this notion, too, was tested by Mayberg's experiment. When a steady, 4-volt
thrum calmed these patients' anguish, they did not lose their identities. They
regained them, feeling again the engagements with the world that most define
them: flowers for the gardener, lightness for the cyclist and, for Deanna, a
long-missed connection to others.

     When Deanna, Gary and I finally finished talking, they insisted on driving
me to my hotel. Halfway through town, Gary pulled off the main road, drove up a
long, sinuous driveway and parked in a lot facing a dark, rambling building.

     ''This is the hospital,'' Gary said. ''You see where Deanna stayed.''

     In the winter dark, the secure ward, off to the left, was easily discerned.
It was a low wing, the only one with a few lights still on inside. Outside,
bright flood lamps illuminated an exercise yard ringed by 20-foot-tall cyclone
fencing topped with razor wire.

     ''And there's the lake,'' Gary said, motioning behind us. Through trees I
could make out its blackness.

     We sat several minutes, but no one said much.

     ''Well,'' Gary said, putting the minivan in gear. ''We'd better get home.''



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Deanna Cole-Benjamin, rescued from years of numbing depression
by a brain implant.
 From left, the Cole-Benjamin family, reconnected: Gary, Francesca, 8, Deanna,
Reid, 14, and Sydney, 12. (Photographs by Tanyth Berkeley for The New York
Times)

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                              729 of 783 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2006 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                   March 31, 2006 Friday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: GILBERT REPUBLIC; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: BIO FIRMS WATCH COVANCE;
OTHER COMPANIES COULD FOLLOW SUIT AND LOCATE IN CHANDLER

BYLINE: By Luci Scott, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Chandler's decision on whether to welcome drug-testing company Covance could
affect the city's ability to attract other bioscience companies, according to
one of the Valley's leading economic development officials.

   At least three businesses could follow Covance where it locates, said Troy
Ignelzi, vice president, emerging technologies, of the Greater Phoenix Economic
Council.

   He spoke Wednesday at an Economic Update Forum sponsored by the Chandler
Chamber of Commerce.

   Covance has bought 38 acres on the west side of Price Road between Germann
and Queen Creek roads. It will need to ask the city for rezoning but has not
yet. The company has raised the ire of animal-rights advocates because it uses
animals in testing.

   Animal-rights advocates don't want Covance in Chandler. They say the company
would be a health threat to the community and that it abuses animals. The
company denies those charges.

   "Two companies are definitely watching Covance," Ignelzi said after the
luncheon. "I know of certain bio-related companies that would come because of
Covance. They are companies that would be able to utilize the service of a
Covance."

   He declined to name the companies but said they worked in the area of gene
therapy.

   Ignelzi said a developer also has said if Covance arrives, the developer
would build a structure up to 60,000 square feet to house related companies.

   He would not name the developer.

   He said if Chandler denies rezoning for Covance it would send a negative
message to the bioscience community.

   "If Chandler says they want to do bio ... but the community would turn
(Covance) away, it's a contradiction," Ignelzi said.

   Speaking in general about economic development, he also told the audience the
Valley is losing out on encouraging businesses to move here because of a lack of
vacant space.

   "We have about 180 prospects in our database and we won't get more than half
of them because we don't have the real estate on the market right now," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2006


                              730 of 783 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2006 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                  March 30, 2006 Thursday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: CHANDLER REPUBLIC; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: BIO FIRMS WATCH COVANCE

BYLINE: By Luci Scott, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   Chandler's decision on whether to welcome drug-testing company Covance could
affect the city's ability to attract other bioscience companies, according to
one of the Valley's leading economic development officials.

   At least three businesses could follow Covance where it locates, said Troy
Ignelzi, vice president, emerging technologies, of the Greater Phoenix Economic
Council.

   He spoke Wednesday at an Economic Update Forum sponsored by the Chandler
Chamber of Commerce.

   Covance has bought 38 acres on the west side of Price Road between Germann
and Queen Creek roads. It will need to ask the city for rezoning but has not
yet. The company has raised the ire of animal-rights advocates because it uses
animals in testing.

   Animal-rights advocates don't want Covance in Chandler. They say the company
would be a health threat to the community and that it abuses animals. The
company denies those charges.

   "Two companies are definitely watching Covance," Ignelzi said after the
luncheon. "I know of certain bio-related companies that would come because of
Covance. They are companies that would be able to utilize the service of a
Covance."

   He declined to name the companies but said they worked in the area of gene
therapy.

   Ignelzi said a developer also has said if Covance arrives the developer would
build a structure up to 60,000 square feet to house related bioscience
companies.

   He would not name the developer.

   He said if Chandler denies rezoning for Covance it would send a negative
message to the bioscience community.

   "If Chandler says they want to do bio ... but the community would turn
(Covance) away, it's a contradiction," Ignelzi said.

   Speaking in general about economic development, he also told the audience the
Valley is losing out on encouraging businesses to move here because of a lack of
vacant space.

   "We have about 180 prospects in our database and we won't get more than half
of them because we don't have the real estate on the market right now," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                              731 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            March 29, 2006 Wednesday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 1014 words

HEADLINE: Boy, 8, is pioneer for gene therapy;
Trial may help treat muscular dystrophy

BYLINE: Misti Crane, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   Sometimes the next frontier in medical science depends on an 8-year-old boy
with a stuffed leopard clenched in his hand.

   So it went Monday when Andrew Kilbarger checked into Children's Hospital,
followed by two cameramen, including one who coaxed him into walking into the
hospital twice in sincere hope that Andrew would smile for the second take.

   He didn't.

   He kept his head down, his chin firm and his leopard close, repeatedly
squeezing its paw to make it roar.

   Yesterday, after a series of interviews and taping for the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, he became the first person to receive experimental gene therapy
that aims to restore the muscles of boys suffering with a debilitating and
incurable disease.

   Dr. Jerry Mendell, a neurologist, injected three shots of the agent, called
Biostrophin, into one of Andrew's arms and three placebo shots into the other.

   Inside Andrew's muscles, a honeycomb-like system of tissue that supports the
muscle cells is missing. Without dystrophin, the gene missing in boys with
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the muscle becomes Jell-O-like. Most are in
wheelchairs by 12 and die by 20.

   The therapy is designed to replace integral parts of the missing gene. In
mice, hamsters and dogs, the results have been remarkable.

   This study does not have the potential to reverse Andrew's muscular
dystrophy, although it could improve muscle function in the bicep that receives
the Biostrophin.

   Huddled over their laptops at their lunch table at Children's Monday, Jude
and Jade Samulski described the two decades of work leading up to Andrew's
injections.

   Jude is Jade's uncle and a virologist at the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill. For 20 years, he's been working on a mechanism to carry the missing
gene into the body. The vessel - he calls it a shuttle - is a re-engineered
virus, harmless and efficient at finding its way into tissue.

   His partner in the effort, Xiao Xiao, a researcher at the University of
Pittsburgh, figured out how to shrink the dystrophin gene to its essential
elements so it would fit into the virus, which is big enough to carry about 40
percent of the gene.

   Once combined, the miniaturized gene travels inside the shuttle to the
muscle, ideally replacing what is missing.

   Jade Samulski, who serves as director of program management, helped the duo
come up with a name for their company: Asklepios Biopharmaceutical, after the
Greek god of healing.

   On their computer screens, the Samulskis showed video of rodents, before and
after. A mouse, hunched and slow, shuffled around its cage. A month after
treatment, it moved briskly and reached up the side of the cage, stretching its
body.

   In another video, a previously diseased hamster is shown post-injection
running on a treadmill and keeping pace with a healthy hamster.

   "This is like the pinnacle of all this research. It's pretty exciting," Jude
Samulski said Monday. The team has been working 12- to 15-hour days seven days a
week for more than two years hoping to see Biostrophin tested in humans.

   Andrew is one of six boys 8 to 12 years old who Mendell will inject in the
next nine months.

   Children's is the only hospital working on the study, which is designed to
prove to the Food and Drug Administration that the experimental gene therapy is
safe.

   The boys will be monitored to see whether there are any reactions, including
redness and swelling. Six weeks after each boy is injected, Mendell will take
samples of his muscles.

   Researchers are hopeful it will lead to tests in which doctors inject the
gene therapy into the bloodstream at higher doses, perhaps in the legs.

   "Then, we could really improve the quality of life," said Mendell, who leads
the neuromuscular research program and gene therapy center at the Columbus
Children's Research Institute.

   Eventually, bloodstream injections would theoretically deliver the gene to
all the muscles, including the heart, he said.

   The research is supported by $1.6 million from the Muscular Dystrophy
Association.

   Since Andrew's parents, Mike and Julie, learned he had the disease in 2001,
they've raised $80,000 for the MDA.

   For the Kilbargers, who live in Lancaster, the experiment is a chance to
contribute more than money to further research that might improve the outlook
for boys with the disease.

   They understand it's just the start of studies that could go on for years
before a treatment could be approved.

   "We don't hit the moon our first trip. Somebody has to step up. Somebody has
to be the first one," Mrs. Kilbarger said.

   "Andrew's only stipulation was that Mommy stay with him the whole time. That
and a few Matchbox cars."

   mcrane@dispatch.com

   Box Story: Understanding MD

   Muscular dystrophy, which affects boys almost exclusively, is a genetic
disorder characterized by progressive muscle deterioration and weakness. Here
are the two most common types:

   DUCHENNE

   * Description: Boys begin to show signs of muscle weakness as soon as age 3.
The disease gradually weakens skeletal muscles in the arms, legs and trunk. By
the early teens or earlier, the boy's heart and respiratory muscles might be
affected.

   * Symptoms and prognosis: The first symptoms are difficulty walking and
climbing stairs and frequent falling. Starting between ages 3 and 7, the child's
gait becomes waddling and he has difficulty rising from a sitting position.
Weakness in the shoulder muscles follows. In most cases, the heart muscle
enlarges and weakens.

   Eventually, an abnormally curved spine develops and - by age 10 or 12 - most
children are in a wheelchair. Increasing weakness makes patients susceptible to
pneumonia and other illnesses. Most die by age 20.

   BECKER

   * Description: Onset of this much milder version usually is in the teens or
early adulthood and the course of the disease is slower and less predictable.

   * Symptoms and prognosis: Weakness is less severe than in Duchenne and
appears later, about age 12. Few adolescents are limited to a wheelchair, and
the average age of death is 42.

   Sources: Muscular Dystrophy Association, Merck Manual of Medical Information
Sources: Muscular Dystrophy Association, Merck Manual of Medical Information

GRAPHIC: Photo, RENEE SAUER - DISPATCH, Andrew Kilbarger gets a kiss from his
mom, Julie, at Children's Hospital. The 8-year-old Lancaster boy has muscular
dystrophy and is the first person to receive experimental gene theraphy.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2006


                              732 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             March 27, 2006 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1224 words

HEADLINE: ...but still sad;
The future holds more than pills

BYLINE: Marianne Szegedy-Maszak, Special to The Times

BODY:

   Some people -- no matter what they take, no matter how many therapy sessions
they might attend -- simply do not respond to antidepressants.

   For them, a number of other options besides medication are available. Some
are still in development; others have been around for years.

   Steve, a postal carrier in Texas, has spent most of his life trying
desperately to control the agonies that depression exacted. He knew that even as
a child he was troubled, that an irreducible darkness skirted around the edges
of his mind. But in 1998, after the breakup of a relationship, he "went over the
edge" and tried to kill himself.

   Thus began a revolving-door experience with medication and psychiatric
hospitals, one after another for a year. The cycle was relentless: new
medication, a few weeks of fragile hope, then suicidal despair and a hospital
trip.

   "They changed my medicine, added more, changed what I had again and put me
back into the hospital," recalls the 41-year-old, who didn't want his full name
used.

   Of the 18.8 million people who suffer from depression, Steve is one of the
30% whose depression is known as "treatment resistant." His psychiatrist finally
suggested "shock treatment," technically known as electroconvulsive therapy, or
ECT.

   Research on the brain as an electrical organ, one that actually responds to
magnetic treatments, has led to improvements in such therapies, and their use is
on the rise.

   In 1980, 30,000 people received ECT; in 2001, nearly 100,000. Although there
are still side effects -- headaches and memory problems primarily -- seizures,
bitten tongues and broken bones are largely a thing of the past. And the
response rate, especially for treatment of drug-resistant depression, is as high
as 70%.

   Steve still takes "about five or six medications, I can't even remember all
of them" to keep him stabilized after the shock therapy. But he takes them to
prevent a rapid deterioration after the more effective therapeutic jolt from the
ECT.

   And he considers the dry mouth and 40 extra pounds from the medications to be
far less debilitating than the fact that, by themselves, the medicine simply
didn't work.

   His combination of patience, therapy, medication and ECT -- and sheer grit --
has not only kept him alive, but also propelled him toward a new life. He is now
taking online college courses, not only to possibly advance himself, but to
occupy a mind that has been so destructively rebellious.

   ECT is only the beginning of the depression treatments that doctors and
researchers are exploring. The following are some of the most promising:

   Rapid transcranial magnetic stimulation: Much like the way a defibrillator
works in the heart, this form of stimulation uses a powerful magnet to deliver
an electric jolt to the brain. In clinical trials, many patients who failed to
respond to several other treatments improved within a week of the first round of
RTMS sessions, and the vast majority were significantly better after two weeks
of daily 20-minute sessions.

   Vagus nerve stimulation: This treatment, originally designed to reduce
epileptic seizures, uses constant stimulation via a device surgically inserted
under the chest wall, much like a pacemaker. It's connected to the left vagus
nerve in the neck, a nerve that threads throughout the body, including the
brain. The electrical impulses that the device sends out stimulate the
production of serotonin and other brain chemicals. Some people with chronic,
treatment-resistant depression have responded well to the procedure, but the
cost is high: The device itself runs about $12,000, and surgery can be nearly
$15,000.

   Deep brain stimulation: This is the most invasive treatment for depression,
requiring an electrode implanted directly into a particular part of the brain.
It was originally used to treat movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease
by targeting one area of the brain. But researchers found -- by serendipity --
that if the electrode was slightly misplaced, it could either cause or alleviate
the symptoms of depression, including hopelessness and suicidal thinking.

   Selegiline patch: This is a new delivery system for an old antidepressant,
one of the monoamine oxidase inhibitors. Although an often-effective treatment
for depression, the MAOIs required patients to avoid foods and medicines -- such
as pickles, wine and decongestants -- that contained high levels of the amino
acid tyronine. That substance can interact with the antidepressant and cause a
sharp increase in blood pressure that can, potentially, cause a stroke. Often,
patients simply got tired of having to be so cautious and discontinued the
drugs.

   The new patch, however, bypasses the stomach altogether. As the American
Journal of Psychiatry reported while the patch was being tested in 2002: It "was
an effective and well-tolerated treatment for adult outpatients with major
depression. The typical side effects commonly seen with traditional monoamine
oxidase inhibitor antidepressants were not observed." In February, the FDA
approved the patch, with the brand name Ensam.

   Genetics: Although the future may hold promise for gene therapy in treating
mood disorders, psychiatrists generally put it in the category "of blue sky
stuff," says Dr. Fred Goodwin, former head of the National Institute of Mental
Health. But some progress is being made in determining the genetic
predisposition for a response to antidepressant medications.

   In a study that will appear in May in the American Journal of Human Genetics,
researchers at the National Institutes of Health discovered that some people
have two copies of a gene related to the brain's mood-regulating system. They
are 18% more likely to respond to an antidepressant medication than those who
have two copies of another, much more common, gene that is also related to mood
regulation.

   This means that in the future, it may be possible to target antidepressant
treatment to particular patients with the genetic predisposition to respond to
those particular medications, thereby reducing the long trial and error period
that so compromises depression treatment.

   Quantitative electroencephalogram: Figuring out who might respond to what
drugs has been a basic problem in depression treatment. Dr. Andrew Leuchter and
his colleagues at UCLA are using the QEEG -- a noninvasive and easy to use brain
mapping technique -- to tease out the various types of depression and the
response to a range of antidepressants.

   At nine sites throughout the country, depressed patients are having their
brains mapped before treatment, 48 hours after receiving their first dose of an
antidepressant and several weeks later. Researchers will then see how the
medication works over time and how people describe the progress, and possibly
the lifting, of their depression.

   The researchers hope to eventually determine within a week if a particular
treatment works or not, thereby increasing the likelihood of quickly finding the
right medicine.

   Future drugs: In the past, antidepressant drugs focused primarily on the
neurotransmitters serotonin and norepinephrine, but pharmaceutical companies are
now looking at drugs that target other neurotransmitters, such as the stress
hormone corticotropin-releasing factor, or CRF.

   Depressed people often have abnormally high levels of this stress hormone,
and drugs that block it have been found to alter moods.

CORRECTION-DATE: April 03, 2006

CORRECTION:

   Antidepressants: A March 27 Health section article on new treatments for
depression incorrectly stated that people taking MAOI antidepressants should
avoid foods high in tyronine. It should have said they should avoid foods high
in tyramine.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                              733 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-2

LENGTH: 244 words

HEADLINE: PROMISING SYNTHETIC DNA STAR OF SYMPOSIUM.

BYLINE: Anita Srikameswaran, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette

BODY:

   A little-known synthetic molecule that holds great promise for gene therapy,
diagnostics, nanotechnology and other applications will be the subject of a
public symposium today.

   The world's experts on peptide nucleic acids, hybrids of protein and DNA,
will be at the Mellon Institute in Oakland for two days of presentations.

   "Pittsburgh has the largest contingent of researchers working on this in the
world," said organizer Danith Ly of Carnegie Mellon University. "That's why we
decided to hold the symposium," which is the first of its kind since scientists
in Denmark first made the hybrids 15 years ago.

   A peptide nucleic acid, or PNA, is a synthetic mimic of DNA or RNA and binds
to the naturally occurring molecules by following the same biochemical rules
laid out by James Watson and Francis Crick, who figured out the structure of
deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA, on Feb. 28, 1953, in Cambridge, England.

   Much of the work with PNA has been done in test tubes, Dr. Ly said.

   "One of the major challenges is how to get these things inside the cells," he
said. Some progress has been made to resolve that problem, which will be
discussed at the seminar.

   About 70 people are expected to attend the symposium, which begins at 9: 45
a.m. today and will continue tomorrow.

   "Not many people in industry or in medical fields know about [PNA]," Dr. Ly
said. "The whole idea behind the symposium is to bring researchers from academia
and industry to discuss the potential use of PNA."

NOTES: Anita Srikameswaran can be reached at anitas@post-gazette.com or
412-263-3858.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                              734 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                             March 20, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: ULTRA-TINY KNITTING THREAD HELPS RESTORE BRAIN FUNCTION

BYLINE:  BY CAREY GOLDBERG, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   In work that may hold promise for victims of spinal cord and brain injuries,
researchers report that they have managed to restore sight to blinded hamsters
using a process they call nanoknitting.

   The work represents the first time that nanotechnology engineering on an
ultra-tiny scale has been used to fix brain damage, said Rutledge Ellis-Behnke,
a neuroscientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the lead
researcher on the paper.

   It will be years before the knitting technique can be tried in humans, and it
must still prove its worth in other animal experiments. But Ellis-Behnke said he
hopes it can someday serve as part of a multipronged therapy to help regenerate
nerve connections in the millions of people who suffer strokes, spinal cord
damage, and brain injuries, particularly those whose brain injuries leave them
"no longer the person that was before."

   "Our goal is to try to reconnect disconnected parts to restore that person as
much as possible," he said.

   The researchers injected nanofibers into the gap created by cutting the
neural pathway that enables vision. These fibers linked themselves together into
a tiny scaffold that apparently helped heal the brain tissue and let axons the
transmission lines that connect neurons regrow.

   The knitting technique offers a possible way to overcome a formidable
problem: When neural connections in the brain or spinal cord are damaged, they
don't tend to heal, which can result in lifelong brain damage and paralysis.
When a neuron is cut, Ellis-Behnke said, it sprouts a "growth tip," like a tree
whose branch has been cut, but then the growth stalls. Researchers are trying to
figure out why, and what they can do to spur more growth.

   In the current work, Ellis-Behnke theorizes that either the nanoparticles
block signals that trigger an immune response or they coat the growing tip of
the axon, blocking the signals that tell them not to grow.

   In recent years, scientists have chipped away at the problem of regenerating
neural connections. There is growing consensus that there will be no magic
bullet that addresses all these problems. In stead, scientists are investigating
multiple strategies, each designed to address a different challenge.

   Some examples of recent progress, as singled out in a report just released by
the nonprofit Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives:

   Using an enzyme to encourage growth of the neuron and special cells to guide
and structurally support that growth improved the recovery of rats with severed
spinal cords.

   A mix of stem cells and gene therapy targeted at rebuilding myelin also
improved the recovery of rats with injured spinal cords.

   A growing understanding of what blocks regrowth including a protein called
"Nogo" has led to several possible countermeasures.

   Also, scientists have been experimenting with "growth factors" to boost nerve
regrowth in adults.

   Ellis-Behnke's work, published online last week in the Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, adds another possible tool, said several scientists
familiar with the work but not involved with it.

   The neuroknitting appears "very helpful" for brain repair, and "I think if
they can do it in the spinal cord, it may be wonderful," said Tatfong Ng, a
researcher at the Schepens Eye Research Institute in Boston.

   The knitting "could be very useful in combination with other treatments,"
said Wolfram Tetzlaff, associate director of discovery science ICORD, the
International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries in British Columbia, which
focuses on spinal cord injuries.

   However, he said, the hamster work involved a "clean knife cut" across the
optic nerve, and "this is not how injuries typically present themselves."
Usually, neural connections torn by a stroke or a car accident, for example,
tend to be much messier and thus harder to bridge.

   Repairing clean cuts could be extremely useful, though, for stemming the harm
from brain surgery, in which a surgeon's scalpel leaves collateral damage every
time it cuts into the brain. Ellis-Behnke, who also works for the University of
Hong Kong Medical Facility, says he believes that within three to five years, it
could be possible to start experiments with the nanoknitting material during
human brain surgery.

   "Every time you cut the brain, you're disconnecting things, and that
disconnection has never healed in the past," he said. "We're not only healing
it, we're getting regeneration, and we're getting return of function."

   One appealing feature of the nanomaterial is that it is biodegradable and
apparently poses no danger of contamination or inflammation inside the brain or
spinal cord.

   The nanoknitting work did not totally cure the blind hamsters. But the
nanomaterial, injected within an hour after the visual pathway was cut in 16
adult hamsters, appeared to reduce the gap within the first 24 hours, and the
axons regrew through the center of the cut.

   When tested, three-quarters of those hamsters could see, as judged by whether
they turned toward a nearby seed. None of the 31 blinded adult hamsters who had
not received the nanosolution regained their sight.

   For all the drama of restored vision, Ellis-Behnke emphasized that
nanoknitting "is not a panacea."

   "We think it will take several other things, and we don't even know if this
is the best," he said.

   One of his next areas of research, he said: Exploring whether the
nanomaterial can be helpful long after the nerve damage has occurred, which
would make it useful to people who already suffer from spinal cord or brain
damage.

   Carey Goldberg can be reached at goldberg@globe.com.

   SIDEBAR:

   REGAINING SIGHT

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO CHART

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2006


                              735 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: Legal sphere finds market in stem-cell research
Experts see plenty of potential in this growing scientific field

BYLINE: KATE COSCARELLI, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   Since its beginnings, stem-cell research has at tracted attention from
doctors, politicians and religious activists.

   Now that the field is moving from theoretical musings to practical
applications, you can add one more group: lawyers.

   From trial lawyers duking it out over attempts to establish stem-cell
research institutes in California and Missouri to patent attorneys helping New
Jersey scientists protect their discoveries, the legal world is increasingly
seeking a piece of the action. With private industry and public funding dumping
millions into stem-cell research, many are already speculating that the
dividends for law firms could be huge.

   "The future is pretty bright," says Tom Turano, the co-chairman of the newly
formed stem-cell technology practice group at Kirkpatrick & Lockhart Nicholson
Graham, which has offices in Newark. "We are really at the beginning of
something here."

   The potential for legal work in the stem-cell field is vast, experts say.
Intellectual property lawyers help make sure discoveries are protected and in
position to be developed into marketable products. Venture-capital attorneys
build deals. Other lawyers are hired to lobby legislators. Immigration at
torneys smooth the way for foreign scientists to work in laboratories here. And
experts in insurance law fight over what therapies should be covered.

   "Lawyers are vital to getting this off the lab bench," says Ray Thek of
Lowenstein Sandler in Roseland, who has done stem-cell work for a doctor at
Hackensack University Medical Center.

   But diving into the specialized field is no small investment, says Joel
Henning, a senior vice president of Hildebrandt International, a Somerset-based
legal consulting company. That could keep many small firms and even some big
ones out of the field.

   "At this time, it is pretty exotic," says Henning, who works in the
consultancy's Chicago office. "It is limited in the number of clients that are
going to be into it. (But) more firms will get interested as time goes on."

   The Kirkpatrick firm is one that got interested - fast. Last month, the firm
created a nine-lawyer group out of its existing staff in an effort to make sure
a cross-section of lawyers were keeping up to speed on developments in the
field.

   "The science moves much faster than the law," says Turano, who re cently
helped patent a mutated gene that will eventually help scientists create an
affordable diagnos tic test to detect a rare connective tissue disease.

   "Sometimes, by the time the law gets around to (an issue), nobody cares about
it," he said. "The group was formed specifically for the purpose of trying to
stay ahead of the curve."

   New Jersey is already a hot spot for stem-cell research. In December, it
became the first state in the country to award public money for research with
human embryonic stem cells when it handed out $5 million to 17 scientists.

   On Monday, the state Legislature moved forward with plans to invest up to
$250 million in public funding to establish the Stem Cell Institute of New
Jersey in New Brunswick and other possible facilities. Gov. Jon Corzine
campaigned on and has continued to be a vocal supporter of the idea.

   "We have an advantage in our region because of the leadership position the
state of New Jersey has chosen to take," says Thek, whose firm helped prepare a
pending patent application for NJIT professor Treena Arinzeh, who is working on
the use of stem cells to encourage the cell to turn into a more specialized cell
such as bone or cartilage.

   "That is the stake New Jersey has put in the ground for this region," Thek
says.

   Lawyers at Gibbons, Del Deo, Dolan, Griffinger & Vecchione's government
affairs outpost in Trenton are involved in a different way: The firm is focused
not on the science, but on the activists in Trenton who want to see the proposed
legislation adopted.

   "We're really looking at this from the perspective of getting the funding
done first," says David Pascrell, chair of Gibbons' government affairs group.
Once the funding is in place, then the firm will consider what should be done to
attract other stem-cell work.

   His days are spent in the corri dors of the Statehouse pushing legislators
for a vote and getting people such as George Greatrex of the South Jersey
chapter of the Juve nile Diabetes Research Foundation in front of budget
committees and other decision makers.

   "Legal expertise is just as im portant in interpreting the laws as it is in
creating and crafting laws," says Greatrex, who is also a co-founder of the New
Jersey Citizens' Coalition for Cures, a group of scientists, patient advocacy
groups and citizens pushing to see the stem-cell institute established, which
hired the Gibbons firm.

   But not everyone in the legal community is sold on the idea of creating a
special team to handle work in a field that may be revolutionary but hasn't yet
proven to be profitable.

   New Jersey's largest firm, McCarter & English, takes the view that it isn't
necessary to create a special group of lawyers to handle stem-cell issues.

   Jeffrey Baumel, a partner, said the firm already has a staff to deal with the
full range of developments in the stem-cell world. For a time, the legal world
got heated up over nanotechnology, then it was gene therapy work, and now this.
Crafting a deal between two companies to finance research or develop a new
product works pretty much the same no matter what the technology, Baumel said.

   "You hate to say it's the same issues, but generally it's the same stuff," he
said. "It's another deal. I don't see us gearing up in any unusual fashion."

   Kate Coscarelli may be reached at kcoscarelli@starledger.com or (973)
392-4147.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2007


                              736 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                                  ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 029

LENGTH: 268 words

HEADLINE: THE TICKER

BODY:

   Internet search giant Google Inc. may have to turn over some customer data to
help a U.S. government effort to prevent Internet pornography from reaching
minors. U.S. District Judge James Ware in San Jose, Calif., said that Google and
the government had agreed in private negotiations to limit the scope of the
Justice Department's request. He said he would review the agreement to make sure
it wasn't too burdensome on Google.

   A Porsche Design store that sells luxury men's accessories including watches,
luggage, leather goods and sunglasses will open at Boston's Copley Place this
summer. Tumi, a retailer that sells luggage, business cases, handbags, writing
instruments and watches, also will open there.

   Retail sales in the United States fell last month after the biggest gain in
more than four years as auto purchases declined and the return of cold weather
discouraged shoppers.

   Johnson & Johnson's drug-coated stent prevents new blockages in heart
arteries better than Boston Scientific Corp.'s competing product, according to a
study presented at a cardiology meeting in Atlanta.

   Corautus Genetics Inc. and Natick-based Boston Scientific Corp. suspended
patient treatments in a study using a Boston Scientific catheter to deliver
Corautus' experimental gene therapy for severe heart pain.

   Federated Department Stores Inc. agreed to pay $725,000 to settle a
government investigation into misleading advertising and phony sales promotions
at Kaufmann's department stores in New York.

   Albertson's Inc. may have to pay a $276 million fee to Supervalu Inc. if the
sale of the supermarket chain isn't completed.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006


                              737 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 410 words

HEADLINE: SHIRE EXPANDING, HIRING 100 AT CAMBRIDGE UNIT

BYLINE:  BY JEFFREY KRASNER, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Shire PLC said it is hiring 100 people to work at its Human Genetic Therapies
division in Cambridge, expanding the number of employees at the former
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. by 25 percent.

   The company is adding salespeople, scientists, manufacturing staff, and
general corporate staff, said David Pendergast, general manager of the genetic
therapies unit.

   "We're expanding on two fronts," said Pendergast. "We're launching a product
and building a pipeline. We're alive and healthy as a business unit within
Shire."

   Shire purchased TKT for $1.6 billion last year after a bitter boardroom
battle between chief executive Michael Astrue and a faction of directors. Astrue
and two directors wanted TKT to remain independent, while an opposing group of
four directors wanted to sell the company. The latter group won out, and Astrue
resigned when the deal was disclosed in April 2005.

   Shire said it was buying the Cambridge firm for its expertise in developing
and manufacturing protein-based therapeutics. A year later, the former TKT
appears to have maintained a degree of autonomy. Shire, based in England, has US
headquarters near Philadelphia and reports its financial results in dollars. In
2005, Shire had revenues of nearly $1.6 billion and a net loss of $410 million.

   Shire is gearing up in anticipation of FDA approval of Elaprase, a treatment
for Hunter syndrome, a rare genetic disease. The US Food and Drug Administration
is expected to rule by May 25 on Shire's application to market the drug.

   In addition, Shire is adding scientists to boost development of early-stage
treatments for central nervous system diseases, genetic diseases, and other
health conditions.

   The proteins that go into Elaprase are manufactured at Shire's facility in
North Cambridge tucked behind an office building at 185 Alewife Brook Parkway.
While that facility already operates around the clock a crucial element when
working with cell cultures for bioengineered proteins the facility will add 25
employees and increase the number of batches it produces. The facility also
makes proteins for Replagal, its treatment for Fabry disease. That drug is
marketed outside the United States, where competitor Genzyme Corp.'s Fabry
treatment has orphan-drug status giving it exclusive rights to the US market.

   Pendergast said Replagal sales continue to increase. Shire is working to win
public reimbursement for the treatment in Canada.

   Jeffrey Krasner can be reached at krasner@globe.com.

GRAPHIC: MAP

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                              738 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             March 13, 2006 Monday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04B

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: Primate research slow but not stopped;
Specially bred mice, tissue cultures cut use of apes, monkeys

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

BODY:

   The OSU Primate Research Center hasn't housed an ape or monkey in two years.

   When the $2.53 million laboratory opened its doors in 1996, more than 380
monkeys and chimpanzees were being used in experiments on campus. The new center
was to have held an additional 180.

   Times have changed.

   With the recent departure of nine chimpanzees for a primate refuge in Texas,
no chimpanzees are left on campus. In all, 28 monkeys are left on the main
campus.

   The research center was supposed to be something special when it opened. The
brainchild of William Yonushonis, who oversees laboratory animal use at OSU, the
center is one of six buildings on about 100 acres off Godown Road, just east of
Don Scott Field on the Northwest Side.

   It was touted as a place where researchers from across the state could use
primates in cancer and AIDS research.

   "The advances we make with animal research helps protect human lives,"
Yonushonis said in 1996.

   The opening, however, coincided with a decline in primate use, especially
chimpanzees. Chimps were once thought to be the ideal test animals for AIDS
studies. But scientists found out that, while chimpanzees can contract the human
form of HIV, they don't develop AIDS.

   Chimp use is down nationally, says the federal government, which has been
scrambling to find retirement homes for its surplus primates.

   Primate use fell as researchers switched to cell-tissue cultures, computer
modeling and specially bred mice.

   These days, the OSU primate lab is filled with rodents quarantined before
they are sent to Main Campus labs.

   They include standard lab mice, deer mice and hamsters, as well as high-toned
transgenic mice that cost as much as $10,000 a pair.

   "Everyone went into transgenic mice," Yonushonis said during a recent tour of
the lab.

   Of the more than 100,000 animals used in OSU lab research today, 90 percent
are mice and rats. Rodent use has increased so fast that the university doesn't
count each individual anymore. Instead, cages are counted, and that number is
multiplied by 2.4 animals per cage.

   Transgenic mice are useful because they can be bred for particular diseases,
such as breast cancer. Other mice missing a portion of their immune system can
be injected with human cancer cells that continue to live. Then the mice can be
treated with experimental chemotherapies or gene therapies.

   "We're actually looking at the effect of the therapies on human cancer. The
mice are serving as the living test tubes for that," said Dr. Valerie Bergdall,
Yonushonis' assistant and a veterinarian. "That application has been the one
with the biggest impact on using mice instead of primates."

   The few primates used in experiments at OSU are used in diabetes and brain
research. The nine chimps that were recently sent to Texas were used in
cognitive studies.

   Neuroscientist John Buford studies and records the brain activity of monkeys
when they reach for objects.

   "That helps us understand the mechanism for recovery after a stroke," he
said. "We try to understand the shared responsibility between these brain areas
for normal reaching."

   The monkeys, a species related to rhesus monkeys known as fascicularis, are
killed and their brains dissected after the research so Buford knows he has
recorded activity in the correct part of the brain.

   "The difference of a millimeter can be the difference between studying the
eye and the arm," he said.

   The decline in primate numbers at Ohio State reflects a national trend among
universities, said John Harding, director of primate resources for the National
Institutes of Health.

   At government research centers, the use of primates has increased. And
chimpanzees are still important in medical research at the Yerkes National
Primate Research Center in Atlanta and the Southwest Foundation for Biomedical
Research in San Antonio.

   Chimps are valuable in studying diseases for which there is no other
available animal model, said Southwest Foundation scientist Robert Lanford.

   And, he said, there is still a role for chimpanzees in AIDS research.

   "If we really understood how chimps suppress HIV so well, it might help
people," he said.

   Nationally, 50,000 primates may be in use in government and university
laboratories, not counting those operated by pharmaceutical companies.

   Harding said 21st-century diseases such as SARS and West Nile virus, are
driving the demand. The primate of choice these days for AIDS research is the
rhesus monkey, which can be infected with a simian version of HIV.

   So more primates are likely to cross the threshold of Ohio State's Primate
Research Center.

   "Everyone wants investigators to do studies on tissue culture and computer
studies. There's no question that will increase, but it's unlikely the use of
nonhuman primates will decrease," Harding said.

   "At the end of the day, you need a living, nonhuman primate, especially for
vaccines, before it can go into humans."

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

GRAPHIC: Graphic, Graphic

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006


                              739 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 476 words

HEADLINE: InnerCool sold to Cardium for just $6 million

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Some venture capital investors in InnerCool Therapies may be feeling a chill.

   The San Diego medical device firm, which had raised about $50 million from
investors since it was formed in 1998 to develop a system to induce hypothermia,
was acquired this week for a sparse $6 million.

   Under terms of the deal, San Diego heart therapy developer Cardium
Therapeutics, whose stock trades on the over-the-counter bulletin board, issued
2.5 million shares and assumed about $560,000 in InnerCool liabilities.

   In addition, InnerCool investors -- which include Credit Suisse First Boston,
Invesco Private Capital Group, and Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield and Byers -- are
entitled to a one-time "product success payment" of $5 million if InnerCool's
product revenues exceed $20 million. Cardium can decide whether to make the
contingent payment with cash or shares of its stock.

   Credit Suisse, Invesco and Kleiner Perkins did not return telephone calls or
e-mail messages. InnerCool management did not return telephone calls.

   InnerCool won regulator approval in 2003 for a catheter-based device that
allows doctors to induce mild hypothermia in neurosurgical patients who could
suffer brain damage from an aneurysm or cardiac arrest. The system, dubbed
Celsius Control, cools blood going to the brain, reducing the rate at which
cells die and damage occurs. While the technology is intriguing, the device
generated scant revenue. Cardium, which employs 15, hopes to remedy that by
building up a sales force and marketing the device more vigorously to hospitals,
according to Cardium Chief Executive Officer Christopher Reinhard.

   InnerCool will operate as a wholly owned subsidiary of Cardium, which plans
to add to InnerCool's staff of 15.

   "InnerCool is still a pretty embryonic company, and our intention is to grow
and develop that business," Reinhard said. "We believe it has great potential."

   Cardium raised $30 million in a private financing last October and merged
into a publicly traded shell company to gain a stock market listing. The money
was used in part to acquire a portfolio of experimental drugs to treat heart
disease, including a gene therapy called Generx, from Germany's Schering AG.

   Generx was developed by former San Diego gene therapy company Collateral
Therapeutics, which was acquired by Schering in a $140 million stock deal in
2002. Cardium CEO Reinhard was a founder of Collateral Therapeutics.

   Schering halted late-stage clinical studies of Generx in 2004 after an
interim analysis found "insufficient evidence" that it benefited patients. But a
later subgroup analysis of the data yielded "positive efficacy insights,"
according to Cardium.

   "We go out and buy `fallen angels,' opportunities that have challenges, and
re-energize those opportunities in the marketplace," Reinhard said.

   Cardium plans to start new clinical trials for Generx later this year.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006


                              740 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                             The Houston Chronicle

                              March 5, 2006 Sunday
                                 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 875 words

HEADLINE: Lab-mouse business grows challenging, lucrative;
The rodents have become a critical tool in quest for drugs, treatment

BYLINE: MATT CRENSON, Associated Press

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, MAINE

BODY:

   BAR HARBOR, MAINE - When it comes to the price of mice, you pay extra for
defects.

   A mouse with arthritis runs close to $200; two pairs of epileptic mice can
cost 10 times that. You want three blind mice? That'll run you about $250. And
for your own custom mouse, with the genetic modification of your choosing,
expect to pay as much as $100,000.

   Always a mainstay of scientific research, mice have become a critical tool in
the quest for new drugs and treatments because their genes are remarkably
similar to a person's.

   With proper manipulation - either by man or nature - a set of mouse genes can
produce an animal with just about any human ailment, or a reasonable facsimile
of it. Strains of mice that succumb to Alzheimer's disease, obesity, diabetes,
cancer and countless other conditions are being used to study both the illnesses
themselves and potential treatments.

   As many as 25 million mice are used in experiments each year. Where do they
come from?

   Where else? Mouse farms.

   Multiple suppliers There are many vendors: The Jackson Laboratory, a
nonprofit supplier in Bar Harbor, Maine, ships more than 2 million a year.
Commercial breeder Charles River Laboratories of Wilmington, Mass., makes about
$500 million annually selling and caring for lab animals, most of them mice.

   Yet the mouse business is a challenging one. What was once a relatively
simple business of breeding and shipping animals has become an extremely
challenging enterprise that requires cutting-edge technology and a mastery of
difficult logistics.

   "It's not just putting two animals together anymore," said Terry Fisher,
general manager for business development and surgical services at Charles River
Laboratories, which offers laboratory animals to pharmaceutical companies and
researchers.

   Nearly identical genes Mice gained their new significance not long after the
completion of the human genome project in 2001. Scientists rushed to finish
sequencing the mouse's DNA the following year, and when they put the two genetic
codes side by side they found something they'd always suspected - the genes of
mice and humans are virtually identical. The obvious differences between us and
them lie not in the genes themselves but in where, when and how those genes are
activated.

   "It means that the anatomy and physiology of a mouse is pretty darn similar
to what you see in a human," said Roy Woychik, director of the Jackson
Laboratory.

   For much of the 20th century, new strains of lab mice were created either by
selective breeding or by chance. If a lab technician spotted an unusual animal
that turned out to have a novel mutation, a new line would be produced to study
that particular gene.

   Now companies such as Deltagen of San Carlos, Calif., will create a
"knockout" mouse that lacks a particular gene.

   Woodlands company Depending on the specific genetic manipulation, the cost to
create a custom mouse is usually in the tens of thousands of dollars. Once the
line has been established, individual animals can run into the hundreds.

   "Not that much to pay if you want to see how a disease affects a mammal or
how a drug is going to work," said Lee Silver, a Princeton University biologist.

   This year the NIH spent $10 million to purchase 250 strains of knockout mice
from two biotechnology companies, California's Deltagen and Lexicon Genetics of
The Woodlands. The acquisition is just an "hors d'oeuvre" for a much larger
effort to create a knockout strain for every one of the mouse's 20,000 to 25,000
genes, said Chris Austin, director of the National Institute of Health's
Chemical Genomics Center.

   Leading to new drugs? Some researchers think studying knockout mice will even
lead to the development of new drugs, perhaps dozens of them. One of the first
steps in drug development is the identification of what biologists call a target
- a biological molecule that is involved in the disease process and can be
blocked or otherwise affected by a small, relatively harmless compound.

   Good targets are hard to come by. But knockout mice are virtual target
factories because they are missing a single gene, and thus a single biological
molecule. For example, if researchers found a knockout mouse that stayed skinny
no matter how much it ate, they would immediately have a promising target for an
obesity drug.

   "You can manipulate the genes ... and use the mouse as a translator of
mammalian physiology," said Brian Zambrowicz, executive vice president of
research at Lexicon Genetics.

   Lexicon has knocked out 3,000 mouse genes already and has designs on 2,000
more. If the company can find just a few dozen good targets among the 5,000
genes it is knocking out, it could easily revolutionize the pharmaceutical
industry. Zambrowicz claims that the company has already identified 70 new
targets, which is pretty impressive when you consider that the 100 top-selling
prescription drugs on the market exploit no more than a few dozen.

   Still, it remains to be seen whether a leap can be made from mice with
knocked-out genes to therapies for humans. In the past, discoveries that looked
promising in rodents have often failed in humans.

   "These mice are not going to tell us everything, and sometimes they tell us
nothing. But as a starting point," Austin said, "mice play a central role."

GRAPHIC: Photo: BIG JOB: A technician holds a mouse at the Jackson Laboratory in
Bar Harbor, Maine. The lab ships more than 2 million mice a year.
ROBERT F. BUKATY : ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2006


                              741 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14WC; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1289 words

HEADLINE: Grief and Rage, Distilled Into Generosity

BYLINE: By CARIN RUBENSTEIN

DATELINE: PURDYS

BODY:

   WHEN Gina Arena of Purdys eulogized her 6-year-old son, Jimmy, last
September, she told his nearly 1,000 assembled mourners that ''the ripple effect
of his life will be felt forever.''

     That was true in part because nearly everybody in town knew about Jimmy and
his battle against a malignant brain tumor.

   But it has also turned out to be true for another reason: The flood of
financial donations that poured in for Jimmy moved the Arenas to start a
charitable organization meant for others who end up in their predicament.

     They aren't the only ones to have taken this approach. Mothers and fathers
with very sick children usually rally family and friends for support, and then
begin to seek a channel for their anger and grief, said Dr. Michael H. Gewitz,
executive director of the Maria Fareri Children's Hospital at the Westchester
Medical Center in Valhalla.

     Dr. Gewitz has had almost too much experience with such families. Each
year, he said, the hospital treats about 1,500 children with potentially
life-threatening illnesses and the corresponding number of traumatized and
grieving parents.

     And each year, he added, ''just a handful of them will start the process
toward developing a foundation.''

     In that group in Westchester, along with the Arenas and a number of others,
are the families of Jacob Sontag, 10, of Harrison, who has an incurable
congenital neurological illness called Canavan disease, and Danny Potocki, 17,
of Pelham, who at 4 contracted leukemia.

     The Arenas' organization, Just Imagine Making Miracles Yours (the acronym
is self-explanatory), already has collected about $13,000.

     Members are planning a dodge ball tournament between local fire departments
as a first fund-raiser, according to Elisa Boston, who is treasurer (for
information, see jimmboy.com).

     Plans are to provide for families ''who need help if their child is
diagnosed with a life-threatening illness,'' Mrs. Arena said.

     ''When Jimmy was sick, the fire department did a fund-raiser for us and
raised $75,000,'' she said, ''and we want to give back what we can.''

     That money, she said, ''enabled us to take Jimmy for proton radiation
treatment in California, and it really saved us financially.''

     Although the treatment did not save the boy's life, she said, ''it gave him
an extra six months.''

     On the face of it, the family members are not likely philanthropists.
Jimmy's father, also named Jimmy, is a highway worker for the Town of Bedford.

     He and Mrs. Arena have six daughters ranging in age from 17 to 3, including
Jessica, 15, who has autism and lives in a facility in Cape Cod. They are
expecting another child, a boy, in July.

     They live in a two-bedroom, 1,400-square-foot home that they are fervently
hoping to have rebuilt and enlarged by the crew of the reality television show
''Extreme Makeover: Home Edition,'' on ABC.

     On a recent Sunday night, as Mrs. Arena sat surrounded by a crowd of
friends and relatives for a viewing of ''Extreme Makeover,'' family members
revealed that according to the network, they are finalists and are likely to be
chosen sometime in the spring for a domestic makeover.

     This would be ''pretty amazing,'' said Victoria Arena, 14, especially
because she would love to have her own room.

     Mr. Arena patted his wife's head on his way out to pick up five pizzas for
the crowd. The couple, lifelong Westchester residents, met at John Jay High
School in Katonah.

     Reminiscing about Jimmy, family members studied recent photographs, as Emma
Arena, 3, pointed to a picture of the painfully frail boy seated in a stroller,
taken just a month before his death.

     ''He's my brother, Jimmy,'' she said.

     WHEN doctors diagnosed Canavan disease in Jacob Sontag in 1996, they told
his mother, Jordana Holovach, that he ''would become increasingly lost to the
world and die within 10 years,'' she recalled.

     ''The doctors told me to go home and accept his diagnosis and make him
comfortable for whatever is left of his life,'' she said, ''but it's not in my
genes to do that.''

     Ms. Holovach, a petite person who nevertheless looks as if she could
command a Broadway stage, puts it this way: ''I'm not going to bury my child.''

     Instead she insisted that Jacob take part in gene therapy trials. He has
done so, along with 23 other Canavan children, 22 of whom are still alive. In
order to make that happen, she started Jacob's Cure, which has so far raised $3
million for gene therapy research to stop or slow the progression of Canavan
(the Web site is jacobscure.org).

     In addition, she clearly knew how to generate publicity. Jacob's name gets
almost 300 hits on Google; his story has been told on national television and in
print media since he was an infant, and his is the face of hope for gene therapy
research. In December 1998, The New York Times Magazine became one of the news
media outlets to recount the family's struggle.

     Jacob, now a second grader at Purchase Elementary, is 100 percent
dependent. He is secured to a wheelchair, fed and medicated by tube, and unable
to move, eat or speak. But experts say it is evident he can see and learn, and
his classmates clamor to be allowed to prop up his oversize books, to hold his
hand and to be in his reading group.

     Ms. Holovach and Jacob's father, Richard Sontag, are now divorced; in 2002,
she married Gareth Holovach. Both men are involved in Jacob's daily care, and
Mr. Holovach is active in fund-raising efforts, she said.

     Most of the funds raised by Jacob's Cure go to the Cell and Gene Therapy
Center directed by the neuroscientist Paola Leone, at the Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School in Camden, N.J. Because Jacob's Cure was so successful last year,
Ms. Holovach said, her organization now supports two other laboratories as well.
''Jordana was a major savior,'' said Dr. Leone, who had almost given up her
research 10 years ago for lack of financing. Although Canavan is a very rare
disease, Dr. Leone is confident that her work will influence the treatment of
more-common neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis, stroke and Lou
Gehrig's disease.

     DANNY POTOCKI contracted leukemia at age 4, devastating his parents, Peter
and Kathy. Mr. Potocki, the owner of a commercial chemical company, and his
wife, an art teacher, didn't know many of their neighbors at the time.

     ''I was busy being Danny's mother, but the community kind of rallied around
us,'' said Mrs. Potocki, who still seems puzzled by exactly how it happened.
After the couple first took Danny to Memorial Sloan-Kettering for treatment, her
husband said, more than 100 Pelham residents donated blood in response to a
request for help.

     ''The town of Pelham really came to his call,'' said Mr. Potocki. ''I can't
put my finger on what made Pelham rally behind my son, but look at all the good
things that have come out of it.''

     Money started trickling in unsolicited, and friends persuaded Mr. Potocki
to use the cash to pay for hospital parking in Manhattan every day. Several of
them got together and created The Danny Fund, to help the Potockis, said the
group's former president, Barbara McCann.

     The fund (see thedannyfund.org) is now used to help other area families in
need, and has raised at least $500,000, most of it distributed to about 50
families in and around Pelham, all coping with the serious illness of a child,
she said. Mr. Potocki is a board member.

     As for Danny, he is a senior at Pelham Memorial High School, a boy of few
words, who plans to attend the School of Visual Arts in Manhattan in the fall.
Being the inspiration for the fund, he said, is weird, especially when friends
find out that he's the Danny of the Danny Fund.

     ''I don't see it as about me,'' he said. ''It just helps other people
now.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jacob Sontag, with his classmates helping him, at Purchase
Elementary School. (Photo by Suzy Allman for The New York Times)(pg. 1)
 Jacob Sontag, in wheelchair, is 100 percent dependent on others. A
self-portrait of Danny Potocki, who contracted leukemia at age 4 but recovered.
Arena family members in their home, where a sticker hangs on a wall in memory of
Jimmy. (Photographs by Suzy Allman for The New York Times)(pg. 6)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2006


                              742 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                              March 3, 2006 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 316 words

HEADLINE: Trudy Swan: Science teacher who enjoys the 'ah-ha' factor

BYLINE: BY MICHELLE B. MUELLER

BODY:

   Although she's been teaching science to middle- and high-schoolers for 32
years, Trudy Swan says her passion for teaching never wanes. Worldwide advances
in the fields of molecular biology and genetics provide fresh material to share
with students.

   After teaching in her home state of Oregon for 30 years, Swan moved to St.
Louis to be closer to her daughter and granddaughter. She has taught upper level
genetics, ecology and advanced placement biology at Incarnate Word for the past
two years. The students' schedules allow for open lab time to work on projects
such as DNA fingerprinting to help them understand forensics or transferring
genes from glowing jellyfish into bacteria to understand the concept of gene
therapy.

   In addition to lab projects, Swan has breathed new life into the Science
Club. Between 20 and 30 students meet during lunch and after school to study
specific areas of science, such as forest ecology, to prepare them for
competitions.

   "Hopefully this gets them interested in areas of science that they might not
think about," says Swan.

   Swan says it is especially exciting to help girls get excited about science
and to understand concepts that are initially difficult. "It makes teaching
worthwhile when you see that they finally get it."

   Swan is a member of the Science Teachers of Missouri and is the chairwoman of
a committee with the National Association of Biology Teachers that selects the
Outstanding Biology Teacher Award recipients in each state.

   Where did you go to high school? Willamette High School in Oregon.

   Education: Bachelor's degree in science from Oregon State University;
master's degree in interdisciplinary science from Western Oregon University.

   Hobby: Square dancing.

   Who inspired you to pursue a career in education? "My high school biology
teacher, Harold Plateau."

   What's the best part of your job? "When you see the 'ah-ha' moment in
students' eyes."

NOTES:  SPOTLIGHT ON EDUCATION | INCARNATE WORD ACADEMY

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - Swan

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2006


                              743 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 Times Publishing Company
                              All Rights Reserved
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                              March 3, 2006 Friday

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Probation violations cost man 27 years

BYLINE: ABBIE VANSICKLE

DATELINE: INVERNESS

BODY:

   Patsy Domonick Critelli, a convicted sex offender, didn't think his required
polygraph examination was up to his standards.

   So Critelli, 50, wrote up a list of demands - requirements he thought would
ensure an accurate test. But when the polygrapher declined to follow the
demands, Critelli threatened to tell law enforcement the polygrapher refused to
give him the test.

   Unfortunately for Critelli, the whole thing was on tape.

   At a hearing Wednesday afternoon, Circuit Judge Ric Howard gave the man 27
years in state prison, the maximum allowed, for violating the terms of his
probation. Among the violations: refusing to take that polygraph and refusing to
take a genetic test.

   Critelli was sentenced in 1989 to 15 years in prison and 10 years' probation
for four counts of sexual activity with a child, according to court records. He
served six years in prison and was released in 1995.

   After his release, he moved to Colorado, where he was required to continue
abiding by the terms of his probation, including regular polygraph tests. He was
arrested July 26 and accused of violating those terms.

   During the hearing to determine his punishment, Critelli told the judge he'd
been going to therapy and thought he was doing well.

   "I believe it's important for those who are entering the program . . . to see
that there is light at the end of the tunnel," he said.

   He told the judge he'd be going to therapy for the rest of his life.

   When asked if he wants to commit any more sex crimes against children, he
replied, "Absolutely not."

   After he got out of prison, he said, he'd wanted to go into prisons to
minister to other offenders. But because he was on probation, it wasn't allowed.

   He also had dreams of starting a faith-based school program to help others
deal with their crimes.

   But it appears all of that will have to wait.

   When the judge questioned Critelli about his refusal to take a genetic test,
Critelli said he wasn't aware that it was legally required. He said he feared
discrimination against his children because he's a registered sex offender.

   As for the polygraph, Critelli said he had problems with a polygrapher and
with a polygraphy firm. He said he didn't trust the reliability of their
results.

   Then came the video of his refusal.

   In the tape, which lasted less than five minutes, Critelli, his arms crossed,
sat across a table from a polygrapher with a laptop. He handed the man a piece
of paper with his list of demands.

   When the man refused to change his method for administering the test,
Critelli said, "I'll just tell them you're refusing to give me a (polygraph)."

   He then grabbed his jacket and walked out.

   His refusal was a "willful and substantial" violation of the terms of his
probation, said Assistant State Attorney Rich Buxman.

   The judge agreed, saying Critelli showed a "willingness to lie."

   "Your credibility is abysmal," he said. "In fact, it is nonexistent."

   With that, the judge sentenced him to 27 years in prison.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
Patsy Domonick Critelli

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2006


                              744 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. D9

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: ENHANCING THE QUEST FOR GOLD

BYLINE:  BY SONIA ARRISON

BODY:

   THE 2006 Winter Olympics is winding down, offering an opportunity for the
world community to look back on the event and reflect. Drug testing, for
instance, was an ongoing element of the games, bringing about intrigue that
included Italian drug testers who surprised athletes by posing as fans. This
demonstrates why it's time for the Olympics, whose motto is "Faster, Higher,
Stronger," to lift the ban on human enhancement in sports.

   The long list of banned substances includes insulin and beta-blockers, and
this year the International Olympic Committee aimed to increase testing by 72
percent. It would make more sense to give athletes permission to use whatever
methods they choose to make themselves the best they can be.

   Ordinary citizens can avail themselves of such enhancements as
pharmaceuticals, implants, and gene therapy, so it seems Luddite to maintain
restrictions on athletes. While some might think that allowing enhancements
violates the spirit of the games and offends the principle of fairness, neither
objection is convincing.

   If the spirit of the games is about hard work, world community, and a
celebration of the human spirit, enhancement will amplify such values. That is,
in an enhancement-friendly Olympics, athletes would be responsible for making
the right choice to improve their ability, just as they currently do with the
equipment they use. Hard work, world gatherings, and the triumph of humans
against the odds would not go away. Arguably, the greatness of humanity would be
elevated as Olympians become stronger, run faster, and jump higher. Indeed, it
has already begun to happen without anyone noticing.

   Athletes are better competitors today than they were in ancient Greece
because they have the benefits of better nutrition, laser eye surgery, and
technological tools to measure and improve their metrics. For instance, cyclist
Lance Armstrong and other Olympians have been known to sleep in hypobaric
chambers that simulate altitudes of up to 9,000 feet in order to raise red blood
cell levels. While seemingly natural sounding, the knowledge and technology to
enhance the body in this way is far from natural and probably would have been
considered an unfair advantage by the original Olympians.

   Second, if anyone thinks that the Olympics is "fair" in the sense that
athletes start from an equal point, it might be worth considering that the
wealthy and individual-focused United States holds the record of Olympic gold
medals: 907 since 1896. The second best country in those standings was the USSR
(from 1952-88) with 395, and we know that a good deal of that success was based
on intense training backed up with resources from an authoritarian government.

   Do people from the United States and the former Soviet Union have some sort
of natural athletic talent that the rest of the world lacks? That's an unlikely
scenario, and the rational way to explain the huge divergence in results is
differences in culture, wealth, and focus. Since it's clear that all athletes do
not start from an equal basis, they should be allowed to make up for their
deficiencies. That's what humans have been doing for centuries, and it's the
quest for never-ending self-improvement that is the true spirit of human
character.

   Some may object to the idea that a number of athletes might use such drugs as
steroids that have long-term damaging effects on the body and are currently
illegal to abuse. One response to this, other than the obvious that many
athletes are already taking steroids, is that there's a real possibility that if
enhancement opportunities were transparent and accepted, better, safer,
alternatives to steroids would be offered. Already, scientists have figured out
how to increase red blood cell levels through gene therapy a much safer way to
regulate levels than, say, through using the drug EPO.

   From the moment humans discovered fire, they have been using technology to
advance themselves. With technology accelerating at a break-neck speed and
enhancement tools widely available, it's time for the Olympic Games to let go of
its quasi-paternalistic mindset and let athletes choose what is best for them.
That way, Olympic officials wouldn't have to masquerade as Hollywood stars in
order to surprise highly-driven competitors.

NOTES: Sonia Arrison is director of technology studies at the California-based
Pacific Research Institute.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                              745 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 San Francisco Chronicle
                              All Rights Reserved

                    THE SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE (California)

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 840 words

HEADLINE: INNOVATIONS;
Gene therapy: Solving delivery problems

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

   INNOVATIONS / First in a series exploring new developments in technology,
business and science. .

   Survival of the fittest drove evolution. Now a UC Berkeley researcher is
subjecting viruses to brutal competition as a tool of biomedical innovation.

   Chemical engineer David Schaffer is using a laboratory version of natural
selection to find a better way to deliver microscopic healing agents directly to
the diseased cells of patients.

   In the process, he is trying to solve one of the problems that has held back
the field of gene therapy, one of the darlings of biotechnology before stem
cells stole the limelight.

   In theory, gene therapy involves putting a short length of therapeutic DNA
into a harmless virus. The virus is designed to penetrate the cell membrane and
deliver its medicinal payload.

   In practice, however, gene therapy has been bedeviled by problems, including
the fact that patients' immune systems often see these viral delivery agents as
invaders rather than ambulances.

   In an experiment that's getting attention in the biotech world, Schaffer used
natural selection to improve a common gene therapy delivery vehicle called
adeno-associated virus.

   Adeno-associated virus is a parasite that lives off adenovirus, the bug that
causes colds and sore throats. "There have been a number of epidemiology studies
that have found no correlation between AAV and any disease,'' Schaffer said.

   But because everybody has had a cold, chances are they've been exposed to
both the adeno virus and its harmless freeloader, the adeno-associated virus.
"It's just sitting there not doing much of anything,'' Schaffer said.

   Nevertheless, once the immune system has been exposed to the harmless virus,
it creates antibodies to intercept it -- and that frustrates gene therapy
scientists who want to load the benign virus with therapeutic DNA for delivery
to diseased areas.

   To get around immune system interference, Schaffer and his colleagues used
some laboratory tricks to create versions of adeno-associated virus with
different exterior shells. Imagine that a virus was like an egg in which the
shell, called a capsid, protects the DNA inside. The capsid also happens to be
the part of the virus that gets noticed by the immune system.

   Likening the harmless virus to a delivery truck, Schaffer said, "If we try to
take the truck and load it with a therapeutic gene it is likely to be blocked by
the immune system."

   So the researchers created a batch of adeno-associated virus with altered
exteriors -- repainting the truck, so to speak. The scientists ran these
bioengineered viruses through a screen of antibodies. The viral particles that
proved best at evading detection were subjected to more lab work that further
altered their capsids. The researchers repeated this winnowing process until
they found six variants -- out of millions screened -- whose altered shells made
them anywhere from 100 to 1,000 times better at evading immune detection.

   "We set up a little Darwinian process,'' said Schaffer, who collaborated with
scientists at Ohio State University and published the study results in the
journal Nature Biotechnology. "It's really a survival of the fittest type
approach."

   Using natural selection in laboratory settings is called directed evolution,
and it's just one of the innovative ways researchers hope to cut the long lead
times involved in developing new medicines.

   Researchers have already spent more than 20 years trying to move the
beguilingly simple concept of gene therapy from the laboratory to the medicine
chest, said Barrie Carter, a pioneer in these studies and chief scientist with
the Seattle biotech company Targeted Genetics.

   "If you're talking about innovation taking time, this is a classic case,''
Carter said. But progress is being made. Carter recently surveyed more than 20
clinical trials -- experimental treatments administered to human patients --

   that were testing adeno-associated virus to deliver cell-based agents to
treat prostate cancer, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia and other conditions.

   Carter lauded Schaffer's directed evolution experiments as a clever attempt
to solve one of the field's problems.

   "Some people have strong immune responses,'' he said.

   Schaffer's experiments make a potentially important contribution to
circumventing this immune system interference, but his approach does not address
other problems gene therapists have yet to overcome.

   For instance, Schaffer noted that some cell types are very efficient at
chopping up DNA, destroying the therapeutic agent. This means that even if a
medical payload makes it to the affected area, it may be dismantled -- thwarting
gene therapists who want the corrective DNA to linger and perform its healing
task.

   In this light, the Berkeley experiment should be seen as one development in a
larger and longer process in which success will ultimately depend on many small
innovations coming together, rather than a single insight leading to a solution.

   As Schaffer says with typical scientific understatement: "There's still
plenty of work to be done."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2)
(1) Magnified neurons in a rat brain treated by adeno-associated virus. / UC
Berkeley, (2) David Schaffer (right) and graduate student J.T. Koerber are
working on delivery systems for microscopic healing agents at UC Berkeley. /
Christina Koci Hernandez / The Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2006


                              746 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                           February 25, 2006 Saturday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: CALIFORNIA; Metro; Metro Desk; Part B; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: Twin With New Heart Is Improving;
After an initial scare, the 7-month-old is doing so well that his chest incision
can be closed.

BYLINE: Kurt Streeter, Times Staff Writer

BODY:

   Nick Draper, the 7-month-old identical twin who struggled to live after
receiving a transplanted heart last week, has improved so much that doctors at
UCLA Medical Center closed his chest in a short operation Friday morning.

   Doctors considered the procedure a major milestone, one made possible because
Nick's new heart is now working normally and his prognosis for recovery is good.
His twin, however, still needs a new heart.

   After an arduous, early morning transplant operation Feb. 16, Nick's new
heart failed to beat strongly or rhythmically. Fearing that the organ was being
rejected and that the baby would die on the operating table, doctors connected
Nick to a bypass machine that helped circulate his blood and keep him alive.

   While Nick's new heart steadily grew stronger this week, enough so that
doctors took him off the machine, his chest remained open in a 4-inch-long,
almond shaped incision. It made the baby susceptible to deadly infection.

   By midweek, however, Nick's doctors at UCLA's Mattel Children's Hospital felt
increasingly confident. Tests showed the heart was beating well and needed
little help. Doctors decided to close his chest, which would have been the last
step in the transplant operation itself had it gone as planned.

   During Friday's hourlong procedure, Dr. Mark Plunkett, Nick's surgeon,
attached strands of thin wire to both sides of the baby's chest and pulled his
ribs together. He then stitched up the surrounding skin.

   Tests of Nick's new heart showed it was beating more efficiently than most
hearts. Nick's former heart pumped less than a quarter of the blood it should
have with each pulse.

   Doctors believe the transplanted heart struggled at first because it took an
unusually long time -- about eight hours -- to bring it to Los Angeles. The
donor's name, residence and cause of death are confidential under the law.

   Over the coming days, Nick probably will be taken off the sedatives that have
kept him asleep almost continuously since the operation. Doctors also plan to
remove a breathing tube from his throat and to wean him off powerful drugs that
have fueled his heart since shortly after birth.

   Friday's operation brought joy to Nick's parents. "He's on his way," said
Nicole Draper, Nick's mother. "We're just so encouraged. Wow. We feel like he
has jumped over a major hurdle."

   But Nicole said the happiness was tempered by the condition of Nick's twin,
Nate, who was recently transferred to an intensive care ward at UCLA because he
is faring poorly. Doctors have said he needs a new heart as soon as possible.

   Mike and Nicole Draper, Phoenix residents, moved here after Nick and Nate
were born in order to be close to UCLA -- known for its heart care and
transplant program.

   The twins suffer from dilated cardiomyopathy, a rare disease that malforms
the heart. Nick received the first transplant because he was put on the waiting
list first. At the time, Nate was too sick to go on the list.

   Even with transplants, the twins' futures are uncertain. Heart transplants
have become common only over the last two decades, and the science is evolving.
Rejection occurs with all transplants eventually. Sometimes it causes fatal
heart attacks.

   Doctors at UCLA note that advances in medication have helped the hearts they
transplant last about 10 to 12 years before being rejected.

   Plunkett, who has performed almost 300 heart transplants, said the fact that
Nick's new heart is beating so strongly won't affect how long it lasts. But he
added that he expects advances in medication, and cutting-edge science such as
gene therapy, to increase the time that transplanted hearts such as Nick's
remain healthy.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: RECOVERING: Dr. Mark Plunkett, left, stitches closed the chest
of Nick Draper after surgery Friday at UCLA Medical Center. The 7-month-old
identical twin's chest had been left open as a precaution since he underwent a
heart transplant on Feb. 16.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Photographs by Anne Cusack Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: WAITING: Volunteer Laura Zimmermann holds Nate Draper, who
is still waiting to receive a new heart.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2006


                              747 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                           February 25, 2006 Saturday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Genesis of homosexuality is called unclear

BYLINE: By Eric Hand ST. LOUIS POST-DISPATCH Kim Bell of the Post-Dispatch
contributed to this report.

BODY:

   Homosexuality, so far, has resisted any definitive genetic or environmental
explanation, scientists say.

   Both biology and early childhood -- perhaps even the hormonal environment of
the womb -- seem to matter in forming the complex trait that many gays say they
know was fixed at a young age.

   "Genetics is just part of the puzzle," said Alan Sanders, director of
behavior genetics at Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Research Institute in
Illinois.

   Two Christian organizations, Exodus International and Focus on the Family,
have come to St. Louis to ask gays to stop behaving as they do. At a conference
today at First Evangelical Free Church in Manchester called "Love Won Out," the
groups will seek homosexuals who want to change. About 1,300 people from 28
states are expected to attend.

   At a news conference Friday, four area pastors who support the conference
said that homosexuality was a sin.

   Willie Kent, pastor of Community Fellowship in the Central West End, said: "I
love people. I love homosexuals. I love sinners. But this is God's word. They
damn themselves to Hell."

   Gay activists plan to protest from across the street from the conference,
saying the offered "conversion" or "reparative" therapies are harmful.

   On the nature-nurture divide, conservative groups emphasize the possible
effects of sexual abuse and family configurations -- especially parental roles,
even though many psychologists say old Freudian theories of distant fathers and
overprotective mothers haven't panned out.

   Gay activists emphasize the different physical characteristics that
scientists have found: Gay men have different brains and respond to different
pheromones than straight men. They're more likely to be left-handed. Lesbians
blink more like men. The length ratio of a lesbian's ring finger to index finger
is more like a man's.

   Still, those are physical effects, not genetic causal factors.

   In 1993, researcher Dean Hamen grabbed headlines when he said a particular
marker on the X chromosome was shared more often by a small sample of gay men.
The X chromosome was a potentially good spot for a "gay gene" since there's some
evidence that homosexuality runs through maternal lines.

   Other researchers weren't able to replicate the work. Sanders doesn't find
much significance with this particular gene.

   Instead, he thinks a suite of genes, maybe hundreds, could trigger
homosexuality -- and even then, environmental cues would be important.

   Some of the most compelling genetic evidence for homosexuality has come from
twin studies by Northwestern University psychologist J. Michael Bailey. Several
of his studies show that identical twins are both gay much more often than
fraternal twins.

   Yet the studies also show that environmental factors are important, since
there are many cases where only one identical twin is gay. Based on the studies,
Sanders estimates that genes account for about 40 percent of homosexuality.

   In 1973, the counseling community removed "homosexuality" from its manual of
mental disorders.

   Now, statements from the American Medical Association and the American
Counseling Association oppose the use of "reparative" therapy. The American
Psychiatric Association says the risks of reparative therapy are "great" and
include depression and self-destructive behavior.

   But Focus on the Family psychologist Bill Maier says patients should have the
right to get counseling if they don't want to be homosexual.

   "If a gay man or woman is happy with their sexual orientation, we have no
desire to come in and bonk them over the head with a Bible. For those that want
to change, we want to offer an alternative viewpoint," he said.

   He says Focus on the Family acknowledges that gays have a predisposition
toward homosexual attraction -- but that acting on that attraction is a matter
of choice. "We still have free will," he said.

   That's what Rev. Jim Venice tells homosexuals who come to his Pure Heart
Ministries, the group to which Exodus International refers gays who seek
conversion therapy in the St. Louis area.

   From his St. Charles County ministry, Venice tells gays about his own
experience as an ex-gay who gave up homosexuality about a decade ago. He says
he's had success with 1,000 clients over four years by helping them understand
their childhood.

   While he says that gays do not choose homosexuality, he rejects the idea of
biological factors: "I was not born gay," he said.

   The American Psychiatric Association Web site says so far, no one knows what
causes homosexuality -- or, for that matter, heterosexuality. It goes on to say
biological and family dynamical explanations have so far proved insufficient.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2006


                              748 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 24, 2006 Friday

SECTION: BRIEFS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1263 words

HEADLINE: Business news in brief

BODY:


IN THE REGION

Acquisition and research costs lead to loss for Shire

   Shire P.L.C., maker of the world's No. 1 attention-deficit-disorder drug,
said yesterday that it posted a net loss of $411 million last year because of a
spike in acquisition and research costs. But the British company, whose U.S.
headquarters and executive offices are in Wayne, said revenue from product sales
rose 19 percent from 2004. Sales of its ADHD drugs Adderall and Adderall XR rose
21 percent, from $641 million to $774 million. Total 2005 revenue rose to $1.59
billion from $1.36 billion a year earlier, Shire reported. But Shire turned from
2004 net income of $269 million to a 2005 loss of $411 million because of costs
associated with its acquisition of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and its
partnership with New River Pharmaceuticals Inc. Shire said its full-year loss
was 82 cents a share, compared with income of 53 cents a share in 2004.
Fourth-quarter net income was down 8 percent, to $76.7 million, or 15.1 cents a
share, from $83.4 million, or 16.7 cents a share, a year earlier. Shire's stock
closed up $1.49, or 3 percent, on the Nasdaq yesterday, at $47.75.- Thomas
Ginsberg

GlaxoSmithKline sues FDA to block generic Flonase

   GlaxoSmithKline P.L.C., which has a U.S. headquarters in Philadelphia, sued
the Food and Drug Administration to block the sale of a generic form of the
allergy drug Flonase. The lawsuit, filed yesterday in U.S. District Court in
Baltimore, said the agency failed to establish that the generic copy of Flonase
worked the same way as the original. On Wednesday, the FDA approved Boehringer
Ingelheim GmbH's application to sell a version of Flonase, which is Glaxo's
ninth-biggest drug. Flonase had sales of $297 million in the fourth quarter of
last year, up 12 percent from a year earlier. Glaxo tried to block Boehringer
Ingelheim's application for the generic version of Flonase twice during the FDA
approval process by filing petitions.- Bloomberg News

Checkpoint Systems delays report on 4th quarter

   Checkpoint Systems Inc., which makes antitheft equipment for retailers,
delayed reporting fourth-quarter earnings so it could determine how to account
for nonrecurring tax items. The company said it expected revenue from continuing
operations of $193.4 million for the quarter, and said annual profit would be 4
cents higher than its previous estimate of $1.20 to $1.25 a share. Checkpoint
had net sales of $185.6 million in the year-earlier quarter. The company said in
a statement that it needed more time to determine the appropriate way to account
for some nonrecurring tax items and to complete an audit of its financial
results. The Thorofare, N.J., company said it expected to release fourth-quarter
and 2005 earnings Thursday.- Bloomberg News

New Vanguard quant fund aims at institutions

   Vanguard Group Inc. is launching a third fund to be managed by its in-house
quantitative equity group, using computer models. Structured Large-Cap Equity
fund is meant to improve modestly on the Standard & Poor's 500 index by
winnowing its holdings roughly by half, according to documents filed Wednesday
with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Meant for institutions, the fund
will require a minimum initial investment of $5 million. Vanguard offers a
similar quant fund based on the S&P 500 to ordinary investors. The $7.4 billion
Growth and Income fund, managed by an outside firm, has a $3,000 minimum.- Todd
Mason

1818 Market St. sold to California company

   Triple Net Properties L.L.C., of Santa Ana, Calif., announced the acquisition
yesterday of 1818 Market St. on behalf of tenant-in-common investors, for $152.8
million. The property, acquired from 1818 Market-VEF II L.L.C., had 983,000
square feet of office space. The building is 95 percent leased to 60 tenants.-
Emmet Linn

Online job-recruitment efforts grew in region in Jan.

   If online job-recruitment efforts are any guide, employment prospects are on
the rise in the Philadelphia metropolitan area, according to a survey of January
postings conducted by Monster.com. Particularly strong sectors were
architectural and engineering, computer and mathematical, protective services,
personal care and service, and community and social services. Demand for workers
in food preparation, health-care support, and office and administrative support
cooled from December.- Jane M. Von Bergen

Cendant unit to become Title Resource Group

   Cendant Settlement Services Group, a Mount Laurel subsidiary of Cendant's
Real Estate Services Division, said it would begin operating under the name
Title Resource Group. The name change results from Cendant Corp.'s previously
announced decision to spin off its four business lines as standalone, publicly
traded companies and retire the Cendant name. The change will take effect on the
completion of Real Estate Services' spin-off from Cendant Corp., which is
expected to take place in the second quarter. At that time, the Real Estate
Services Division will become known as Realogy Corp.- Thomas J. Brady

Joint venture to sell investments to institutions

   Emerald Asset Management, Lancaster, and PMG Advisors L.L.C., West
Conshohocken, have formed a joint venture to offer fixed-income investments to
institutional customers under Emerald's name. Emerald manages $2.6 billion in
assets, including those in three mutual funds sold under the Forward Emerald
name. PMG manages $1.2 billion in assets.- Todd Mason

ELSEWHERE

Home Depot to buy back $1 billion more in shares

   Home Depot Inc., the nation's biggest home-improvement retailer, said its
board authorized the repurchase of an additional $1 billion worth of outstanding
shares, bringing the total buyback authorization to $12 billion. The stock
closed down 30 cents at $41.58 on the New York Stock Exchange.- AP

Eight unions' nurses to form an AFL-CIO alliance

   Nurses from eight unions will form an organizing and bargaining alliance
called RNs Working Together under the auspices of the AFL-CIO. The nurses' group
is the AFL-CIO's industry coordinating committee, and it was developed in
response to a debate on industry organizing that partly led to a split in the
AFL-CIO last summer. The AFL-CIO vowed to organize more of these committees. The
200,000 nurses are represented by the American Federation of Teachers; American
Federation of Government Employees; Communications Workers of America; United
American Nurses; United Nurses of America/American Federation of State, County
and Municipal Employees; United Steelworkers; United Auto Workers; and Office
and Professional Employees International Union. The group said it would work to
improve working conditions for nurses and health care for patients.- Jane M. Von
Bergen

NEA says local chapters will be able to join AFL-CIO

   The nation's largest teachers' union, the National Education Association,
will allow its local chapters to join the AFL-CIO. The agreement will be
formally announced next week, said Mark Pudlow, spokesman for the Florida
Education Association, the NEA's affiliate in the state. It ends a rivalry
between the NEA and the second-largest U.S. teachers' union, the American
Federation of Teachers. The AFT already belongs to the AFL-CIO and had
previously blocked the NEA's attempts to join.- Bloomberg News

30-year mortgage rates fall for first time in 5 weeks

   Rates on 30-year, fixed-rate mortgages averaged 6.26 percent, their first
drop in five weeks, Freddie Mac reported in its nationwide survey. Last week's
rate of 6.28 percent had marked a two-month high. One-year adjustable-rate
mortgages dipped to 5.32 percent from 5.36 percent last week.- AP

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                              749 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                           February 23, 2006 Thursday

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: Shire posted net loss of $410 million in fourth quarter

BYLINE: Thomas Ginsberg, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Shire P.L.C., maker of the world's No. 1 attention-deficit disorder drug,
said today it posted a net loss of $410 million last year due to a spike in
acquisition and research costs.

   But the Britain-based company, whose U.S. headquarters and executive office
is located in Wayne, said revenues from product sales rose 19 percent from 2004
to 2005.

   Sales of its ADHD drugs Adderall and Adderall XR rose 21 percent, from $641
million to $774 million. The drugs now claim 26 percent of the global ADHD
prescription drug market, Shire said.

   Total 2004 revenues rose to $1.59 billion, from $1.36 billion a year earlier,
Shire reported.

   But Shire's 2004 net income of $269 million turned into a loss of $411
million last year, due to costs associated with Shire's acquisition of
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and its partnership with New River Pharmaceuticals
Inc.

   Shire's full-year loss was 82 cents per share, compared with income of 53
cents per share in 2004, the company said.

   For the fourth quarter, net income was down 8 percent, to $76.7 million, or
15.1 cents a share, from $83.4 million, or 16.7 cents, a year earlier.

   Cchief executive Matthew Emmons nonetheless called it a "successful" year and
forecast revenue growth to be in the low double-digits this year.

   The company did not provide an earnings estimate for 2006, but said it
expected spending on marketing and research to rise as it tries to launch new
products and extend its ADHD lead.

   Shire's stock price was up nearly 3 percent in morning trading on the Nasdaq
stock exchange, to $47.61.

   Contact staff writer Thomas Ginsberg at 215-854-4177 or
tginsberg@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2006


                              750 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                    Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock)

                            February 19, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: TRAVEL

LENGTH: 1268 words

HEADLINE: REVIEW Recognizing our ignorance is a first step to wisdom

BYLINE: BY RAGAN SUTTERFIELD SPECIAL TO THE DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE

BODY:

   The Way of Ignorance and Other Essays, by Wendell Berry, Shoemaker & Hoard,
180 pages, $24.

   The story goes that Hawaii had a rat problem that turned into a mongoose
problem. Rats are not native to Hawaii, but when the ships first arrived from
Europe they carried rats to the islands. The rats ate the native birds and their
eggs, and with plentiful food and no predators they multiplied. Several bird
species became extinct and rats ran the streets. Some scientists were brought
in, experts, and they decided that what Hawaii needed was an effective rat
predator, so mongooses were introduced to kill off the rats. There was only one
problem, unforeseen in the original plan - rats feed mostly at night while
mongooses feed mostly during the day. The result was that the rats and the
mongooses ate the birds and nearly completely missed each other.

   This story could be a parable for far too many instances when the "experts"
came up with a solution that was beyond the bounds of their understanding. They
thought that they could solve a problem or that a problem wouldn't be as large
as it ended up being and the world is left with the consequences of their
ignorance. But we don't often recognize this ignorance for what it is. Rather,
we believe the scientists and economists and sociologists know best without a
proper skepticism and recognition of the inevitable limits of the mind and
ability of any person. It is this problem and its solution that is the focus of
the essays in Wendell Berry's new collection The Way of Ignorance.

   ARROGANT IGNORANCE

   Ignorance is not a virtue that Berry recommends - he is no apologist for
backwardness. Rather, ignorance is an inescapable aspect of human existence, "a
part of our creaturely definition." Ultimately, Berry writes, "some problems are
unsolvable and some questions unanswerable Ö we are never going to be free of
mortality, partiality, fallibility and error." These claims are common to the
best traditions of the world's literature and religions, and so it should be
strange that this recognition of ignorance would be bold. But we live in the
information age, the age of the computer and gene therapy and Google. Ignorance
is not something we readily admit. But it is Berry's purpose to show us, and the
experts we put our trust in, that for all of the good of the modern world, if we
do not practice humility and recognize the limits of our understanding then we
are surely doomed.

   The modern denial of ignorance is typified by Richard Dawkins' assertion that
"`our brains Ö are big enough to see into the future and plot long-term
consequences.'" This, Berry scoffs is "a superstition of the most primitive
sort." Such a claim is hubris - that age-old arrogance that supposes the
abilities of the human mind to be far greater than history can prove. "Ignorance
plus arrogance plus greed Ö produces the ozone hole and the dead zone in the
Gulf of Mexico." It proclaims progress because it has yet to account for the
debits on its balance sheet. A civilization that trusts itself to apply
knowledge and information that it cannot hope to understand resembles, Berry
writes, "an automobile being driven by a 6-year-old or a loaded pistol in the
hands of a monkey."

   A LITTLE HUMILITY, PLEASE

   Think of Einstein witnessing the test of the atom bomb or a power industry
executive with a daughter plagued with asthma and you will see the absurd
results of "ungodly ignorance disguised as godly arrogance." What is troubling
to Berry is that with such a multitude of examples of the underestimation of
human understanding we still think that we are moving forward on the march of
"progress." When will we call global warming, polluted rivers, and depleted
fisheries debits against "better living through chemistry" and the "miracle" of
the automobile?

   We cannot hope to call things as they are, Berry argues, until we begin to
free ourselves from the narrow vision of expertise. One can cure a disease
without curing the body, and that is exactly the relationship that too many
experts have with the problems they set out to solve. They see only what is
before them without looking around at the complex world that lives beyond the
understanding of even our most brilliant minds. "Creatures who have armed
themselves with the power of limitless destruction," Berry reminds us, "should
not be following any way laid out by their limited knowledge and their unseemly
pride in it." What we need instead is "an appropriate way: a way of ignorance,
which is the way of neighborly love, kindness, caution, care, appropriate scale,
thrift, good work, right livelihood." It is a way ultimately of that forgotten
virtue in this age of pride and power: humility.

   Berry is not afraid of committing modern heresy in his attempt toward humble
sanity. "If we cannot control scale so as to limit the effects," he writes,
"then we should not take the risk. From this, it is clear that some risks simply
should not be taken. Some experiments should not be made." This is a sentiment
that few scientists or the corporations that fund so much of their research want
to hear. But it is not something that Berry says lightly. For him it is a
practical statement of what must be the result of a proper understanding of
human limits.

   LIVING WITHIN LIMITS

   Berry, for all of his sharp critique, has not left The Way of Ignorance
without a vision for a solution. Berry gives us examples of farmers and loggers
and scientists who have recognized their limits and have tried to develop
properly scaled practices. In his essay "Charlie Fisher," Berry introduces us to
an Ohio logger who uses a team of draft horses to selectively log hardwood
forests. Using draft horses is not a showpiece stunt to get tourist dollars or
the antiquated practice of a hobbyist. Fisher uses draft horses because they are
properly scaled to his work. Draft horses allow him to cut timber selectively
and to leave young trees intact to be logged later. People with timber stands
are glad to have Fisher log their land because he does so in a way that does not
leave the ugly marks of skidders or destroy an asset that could continue to
generate income for centuries. "`I hope maybe there'll be trees here for my son
to cut in 10 or 20 years,'" Fisher says at one stand. Here, Berry writes, "the
ecological standard becomes, again, an economic standard as it proves to be good
for business." Another example Berry offers of work within a proper scale and
limit is that of the scientists of the Land Institute at Salina, Kan. Wes
Jackson and his team of botanists and ecologists are working to create a
perennial agriculture that imitates the working of the Kansas prairie. "The
innovation they have in mind is something old under the sun," Berry writes, "a
better adaptation of the human organism to its natural habitat." Berry ends his
book with an essay by Courtney White. In Berry's short introduction to the essay
he says that he included it in his collection for three reasons: it is a good
essay; it tells of a joint effort by ranchers and conservationists to develop a
locally-adapted land economy; and it is an essay about "cooperation between
people and nature, between people and their places, and between ranchers and
conservationists." Recognizing that people would disagree with this essay and
with his own work, Berry writes that "the purpose of an essay is not to deliver
the final word. An essay's purpose is merely to take part in a conversation. So
let the disagreements come. Long live the conversation!" Amen.

   Ragan Sutterfield is a farmer and teacher from Morrilton.

   This article was published 02/19/2006

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2006


                              751 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 The Columbus Dispatch
                              All Rights Reserved

                          The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           February 18, 2006 Saturday
                               Home Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Researcher foresees 1,000-year-old people

BYLINE: Mike Lafferty, THE COLUMBUS DISPATCH

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS

BODY:

   ST. LOUIS -- Humans might someday outrun the Grim Reaper and live to 1,000
years old, a British scientist said yesterday.

   Living indefinitely, or at least hundreds of years, is not an outrageous
scientific proposition, said Cambridge University scientist Aubrey de Grey.

   Achieving what he called "life-span escape velocity" by always staying a
couple of decades ahead of death is theoretically possible, although probably
not for another half century.

   "If you could give people alive now another 30 years," de Grey said, "that
gives (scientists) another 30 years to get more advances."

   The researcher was on a panel addressing aging issues at the American
Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in St. Louis.

   University of Texas cell biologist Steven Austad called de Grey's 1,000-year
vision science fiction. However, Austad said through genetic advances and by
learning how to treat health problems at the molecular and cellular levels,
people today could live to 150.

   He said if researchers use gene therapy to identify disease in animals and
then design drugs to treat the same illnesses in humans, life spans can be
significantly extended.

   Killer diseases don't have to be eliminated, Austad said, only reduced to
treatable conditions. Certain fatal cancers, for example, might be delayed 50
years.

   "I have no problem thinking the 60-year-old today should be like the
50-year-old and even a 40-year-old," said Stanford University demographer
Shripad Tuljapurkar.

   But the panelists warned that extending our age won't be worth it if we don't
improve the quality of life at the same time.

   If half of those older than 80 suffer with Alzheimer's, "it's going to be a
train wreck," Austad said.

   There are social and political issues that will change as well.

   As we live longer, retirement ages will be pushed back, Social Security will
have to stretch even more and marriages will have to adjust.

   "Maybe the person we picked at 20 doesn't fit at 80," Tuljapurkar said.

   He said he fears that life-extending health procedures will be too costly to
include the poor in this country and others.

   "There will be continental-sized groups that won't benefit," Tuljapurkar
said.

   mlafferty@dispatch.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2006


                              752 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            February 17, 2006 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B5

LENGTH: 1054 words

HEADLINE: Head of Sigma-Aldrich has grown with the company Jai Nagarkatti, who
started as a scientist for the chemical giant and has never worked elsewhere,
has been the force behind plenty of changes.

BYLINE: MARTIN VAN DER WERF

BODY:

   Sigma-Aldrich Corp. is the world's largest supplier of research biochemicals
and organic chemicals and test kits. Its headquarters are in midtown, near
Harris-Stowe State University. Yet, the company is unknown to many St. Louisans.

   The new president and chief executive, Jai Nagarkatti, seemingly fits the
mold. Soft-spoken and unassuming, he has never worked anywhere but
Sigma-Aldrich.

   Born in India but now a U.S. citizen, he began as a scientist, went on to
lead the fine chemicals division and joined senior management.

   But, slowly, quietly, he has been remaking the company. He led a team that
recommended it be split into four divisions. He emphasized Internet sales and
poured resources into emerging markets. The company also has begun investing in
small startups, licensing technology and acquiring companies involved in gene
therapy and stem cell research.

   It's unusual for a person to start as a lab scientist and eventually become
head of the company.

   First of all, I believe it's a strength of Sigma-Aldrich that that can
happen.

   When you come to this place, you just immediately get overwhelmed with the
sheer number of products that the company makes. We make almost 50,000 of the
90,000 products that we sell. . . . I don't think there's any other company in
the world that makes that many.

   As you start getting engaged in this process, you come in contact with a lot
of other people within the organization who are employed in other functions,
like quality control or (research and development). You learn how to deal with
people of different levels of understanding. I think that is the foundation on
which people build their management skills. . . . After all, what is management?
Management is common sense.

   What is the thinking behind increased spending on startup companies and
licensing?

   You don't want to go and place a huge bet on something that is not proven.
But if you license technology, you're placing a small bet. And you're able to
spend your resources placing many such small bets and hoping that some of them
grow.

   This company has been pretty conservative. Your new strategy sounds riskier.

   We are beginning to take some risk. I would still call it prudent risk. We
are not going to go pay an unusually high multiple when we are doing an
acquisition, because we think an acquisition should be accretive, or quickly
start contributing to the bottom line.

   Has the company always been in St. Louis?

   No. Sigma originated in St. Louis, and Aldrich started in Milwaukee. Sigma
did mostly what we would call biochemicals, which were extractions, isolation
and purification, and from living organisms like plants and animals. And the
Aldrich part of the operation built the molecules from other materials.

   When did they come together?

   1975.

   How does St. Louis stack up as a place to run an international corporation?

   We are very fortunate that we work in communities where the work ethic of the
people is really strong; the commitment to the company is, I think, fantastic.
That is, in itself, the biggest hurdle that many of the companies that operate
in other parts of the country have to face.

   I think we can get products from here to any part of the world within a week
to 10 days.

   How about airline service?

   The only hardship is for the people who travel internationally. It used to be
it was one quick jump traveling from St. Louis, connecting to Europe.

   Does Sigma-Aldrich not call attention to itself because of the nature of its
products?

   We are supporting local community activities, whether it's the Science Center
or the Symphony or the Art Museum. Certainly we are not flamboyant.

   But one real good test of how well your company is known is when we have some
good positions that open up, we don't have to advertise them. We get a lot of
people who know about us, and we get these people applying to us.

   Are you concerned about the level of science education in this country?

   I don't think we do enough. If you take a look and see all the advances in
science, in the quality of life today, whether it is improving the weaves of
cloth or making a fabric stain-resistant or finding some cholesterol-lowering
drug, these are all the result of research. We need to emphasize the importance
of that work.

   If it is the system of education that turns younger kids off of science;
that's a concern. And I think, long-term, we have to change that.

   Are there cultural differences that compel students in a place such as India
to study science in greater numbers than in the United States?

   I think it has everything to do with competition. In places like India and
China, there are so many people that it's really a competition to survive. When
(students) go to colleges, they tend to gravitate toward programs based on the
best opportunities for them to get employment after they graduate.

   On the other hand, if you take a look at countries that are much more
advanced, then you can say that the education is much more broad-based. I think
there may be tremendous scientists coming out of India or China . . . but if you
look at the broad-based knowledge of art, literature, history, etc., (they)
would not be at the same level as a kid graduating from a high school here in
the U.S.

   So there are trade-offs. If you'd like to have a better-rounded, overall
knowledge, I think I would say that systems generally here prepare people for
that. And I think that then we go to the next level with the (U.S.) kids who
choose to go to college and then pursue a science degree, I think I'd say that
they're as good or better than any of the counterparts anywhere in the world.
Look at the Nobel Prize winners that come out of the U.S. education system every
year. They far outnumber any (other) part of the world.

   ---

   Jai Nagarkatti

   President and chief executive, Sigma-Aldrich Corp.

   Age: 58

   Education: Master's degree in chemistry, Osmania University (India);
doctorate degree in organic chemistry, East Texas State University (now Texas
A&M University-Commerce).

   Personal: Lives in Chesterfield with wife, Susan. One grown daughter.

   Career: Began work with Sigma-Aldrich as a chemist, 1977. President of fine
chemicals division in Milwaukee, 1988-99. Moved to St. Louis, 2000. President of
scientific research, 2000-04. President and chief operating officer, August
2004-December 2005. Became president and chief executive, January 2006.

NOTES:  5 MINUTES WITH ... The water cooler

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - (Jai Nagarkatti) Keving Manning | Post-Dispatch

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006


                              753 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                           February 14, 2006 Tuesday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firm to test CF therapy $1.5 million given to fight cystic
fibrosis

BYLINE: Emily Hamlin, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   A deal between Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Therapeutics Inc. and a Cleveland
biotech company may lead to a cure for the genetic disease.

   The CFFT will give Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. $1.5 million this year to
research its gene therapy method and $4.6 million next year if the method shows
signs of working.

   CFFT donated money to the company for a similar study in 2004.

   "Cleveland is a great place for [the foundation], for everything from basic
research to clinical trials to new technologies, so we're optimistic about this
research," said Bruce Marshall, vice president of clinical affairs for CFFT.

   People with cystic fibrosis have a faulty gene that causes a thick, sticky
mucus to coat their lungs, making it hard to breathe. About 30,000 people in the
country have the disease, Marshall said.

   Copernicus has developed a replacement gene that enters the lungs through an
aerosol mist that patients inhale.

   Most clinical trials use a virus to deliver the new gene, making Copernicus'
method unique, said President and CEO Bob Moen.

   But it will be years before researchers know if the method works, Moen said.

   "We're eager to find a cure, but this isn't like producing a brake pad," he
said. "This takes time."

   The company will begin testing the mist's safety on animals this year before
trying it on a small group of human patients.

   It will then broaden the test group to include 100 to 1,000 patients and
eventually try giving patients multiple doses, a test that could be three to
five years down the road, said Jim Scozzie, senior vice president of
BioEnterprise Corp., a Cleveland developer of bioscience businesses.

   Scozzie said that could add up to more than a $20 million investment from the
foundation, which has promised to support Copernicus through a multi-dose trial.

   "We're talking about a substantial commitment here," he said. But CFFT is
giving more than just money, Moen said.

   "This agreement lets us tap into their whole network of experts," he said,
"and that puts us even closer to finding a cure."

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: ehamlin@plaind.com, 216-999-4152

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2006


                              754 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Gannett Company, Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                                   USA TODAY

                            February 13, 2006 Monday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: Maze of cystic fibrosis is getting a little clearer;
'Exciting time' as disease is fought from all directions

BYLINE: Liz Szabo

BODY:

   When Chip Hawkins was born, the prognosis for patients with cystic fibrosis
was bleak. Most died as children.

   Hawkins, now 38, shows how far patients with the rare genetic disease have
come, experts say, and how their quality of life may improve even more.

   Hawkins is a scientist at Baltimore's Johns Hopkins University, where he
creates "transgenic" mice, some of which have been modified to carry the cystic
fibrosis gene. That allows doctors to study the disease and test new
medications.

   "This is an exciting time," says Pamela Davis, a professor at Case Western
Reserve University who specializes in cystic fibrosis. "We're almost at the
point of changing this from a fatal disease to a nuisance."

   Doctors today are attacking the disease at every level, thanks partly to the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's efforts to jump-start research, says Robert Beall,
president and chief executive officer of the foundation.

   Drug companies usually are reluctant to invest in a relatively rare disease,
Beall says. They are more attracted to larger markets -- such as the 100 million
Americans with high cholesterol -- than "orphan" diseases such as cystic
fibrosis. About  30,000 Americans have the disease.

   That's why the foundation pays for its own studies, Beall says. Its network
of researchers now leads many of the early studies to test unproven therapies.
Once those drugs appear effective -- and have a greater chance of getting to
market -- biotech companies are more likely to take over.

   If the therapies work out, the foundation uses its share of proceeds to
finance other research. In all, the foundation has paid for more than 30
clinical trials since 1998.

   "We have worked to reduce their risk of getting involved in cystic fibrosis,"
Beall says.

   Advocates for other orphan diseases have been inspired by the foundation's
success. In a recent report about ways to develop more drugs for pediatric
cancer, the Institute of Medicine, which advises Congress on health, suggested
that children's advocates study the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's example.

   Beall says the foundation is pursuing a number of strategies.

   *Gene therapy. The disease is caused by mutations in a single gene. These
mutations disrupt the flow of salt through the cells lining the lungs and
pancreas. That leads people with cystic fibrosis to produce sticky mucus that
clogs the airways of the lungs. Patients develop chronic lung infections which,
for many patients, eventually prove fatal.

   Scientists identified the gene in 1989. At the time, many experts predicted
that a cure was around the corner, says Preston Campbell, executive vice
president of medical affairs at the foundation.

   Getting the gene where it needs to go, deep inside the lungs, has proved
challenging. Initially, doctors tried delivering genes through a sort of Trojan
horse, Campbell says. They hid them inside the shell of a empty cold virus,
hoping the virus would "infect" lungs cells with the healthy gene. But the
viruses irritated the body, which attacked the cold bug and caused inflammation.

   Researchers have not given up, however.

   Scientists are experimenting with delivering genes inside nanoparticles, ones
small enough to slip through the cracks of a cell wall, "like wind going through
a log cabin," Campbell says.

   The youngest patients might benefit most from gene therapy, Davis says.

   Doctors might have an easier time getting drugs or genes into babies whose
lungs have not yet become clogged, Davis says. If doctors could correct their
genetic defect, these children might never get sick. Eighteen states and
Washington, D.C., test newborns for the disease, which allows doctors to treat
them earlier; 13 states plan to begin screening babies in the next year or so.

   *Drugs to combat the protein involved in cystic fibrosis. Finding the gene
has helped scientists better understand the underlying cause of the disease,
Beall says. In people who have the disease, an abnormal gene leads to the
creation of a defective protein, which keeps salt from moving around properly.
Doctors would like to find a drug compound that could fix the protein or at
least help it do a better job, he says.

   In the past, scientists could screen two or three compounds at a time. New
technology allows doctors to test thousands of compounds a day, Beall says.
Doctors hope to test a number of promising compounds in patients by the end of
the year.

   *Drugs with new uses. The foundation is also supporting the study of drugs
originally created for dry eye and rheumatoid arthritis, Beall says.

   Hawkins says he is willing to join future clinical trials if he can help
combat his disease. He says he is relieved that his health has remained stable
for eight years.

   "I don't ever feel impatient," Hawkins says. "These are small steps, but
every year or so there are some new drugs.

   "Until a cure is found, and as long as there are steady improvements, that's
the way to go."

   Years of progress
Progress in fighting cystic fibrosis has accelerated in recent years:

   1953: Researchers develop  "sweat test" to diagnose cystic fibrosis.

   1950s: Pancreatic enzymes help patients improve their nutrition and maintain
weight.

   1989: Scientists discover the gene that causes the disease.

   1993: The Food and Drug Administration approves Pulmozyme, the first biotech
drug designed for cystic fibrosis. This enzyme breaks down the thick mucus that
clogs patients' lungs.

   1997: The FDA approves TOBI, or inhaled tobramycin, an antibiotic that helps
fight dangerous infections.

   2002: Research shows that Zithromax, or azithromycin, can

   improve lung function and reduce hospitalizations by half.

   2006: Doctors show that inhaling very salty water can help clear mucus and
prevent complications.

   Source: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation

GRAPHIC: PHOTOs, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY (2)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2006


                              755 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 10, 2006 Friday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D06

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: Chief of anti-doping agency says 'we will use any means we have to'

BYLINE: Tim Panaccio, Inquirer Staff Writer

BODY:

   Drug testing at the Winter Olympics will be more sophisticated, more refined
and more prevalent than it was four years ago in Salt Lake City.

   The system also will include the use of informants, according to Dick Pound,
chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency.

   "We will use any means we have to," Pound said yesterday at a news
conference.

   Doping "is very clandestine," Pound said. "It is rarely accidental. You use
whatever means you can. I have no compunction about using informants."

   WADA estimates that there will be 17 percent more drug testing at these Games
than in the past.

   "It's always a balance," Pound said. "The athletes who are showing up here,
looking their fellow athletes in the eye and representing their country, they
are affirming that they are competing and thereby abiding by the anti-doping
laws.

   "The public is aware that testing is being done to make sure the competition
at the Olympic Games is fair, not out of suspicion."

   Among WADA's biggest challenges is testing for genetic doping. Blood samples
taken at these Games will be stored for as long as four years, officials said,
in hopes that the science of genetic testing will improve.

   "The experts we have tell us they don't think [genetic doping] is going to
apply here," Pound said. "Even the information coming out of the trials tells us
it's more inquiries than [identifying] a genetic doping agent.

   "In future Games, we have to operate on the assumption there will be people
out there willing to do it."

   According to the New York Academy of Sciences and the University of San
Diego, which conduct programs in gene therapy, the idea behind genetic doping is
to build skeletal muscle and increase production of red blood cells.

   Such doping is seen as a performance enhancer under the WADA's guidelines.

   "We hope to arrive at a test for it by the time people are doing it," Pound
said.

   Andrew Pipe, who heads the independent observer team at the Turin Games, said
that the next phase of grand-scale testing will be "retro testing" of old
samples versus new ones on a genetic basis.

   Contact staff writer Tim Panaccio at 215-854-2847 or
tpanaccio@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006


                              756 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 10, 2006 Friday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BRIEFS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1242 words

HEADLINE: Business news in brief

BODY:


IN THE REGION

Comcast sells two-thirds of its Cablevision stock

   Comcast Corp., Philadelphia, sold 9.4 million shares of Cablevision Systems
Corp. Comcast's stake in Class A shares of Cablevision, the biggest cable-TV
company in the New York area, fell to 5.1 million Class A shares, or 2.3 percent
of the outstanding stock, from 6.5 percent, Comcast said in a filing with the
Securities and Exchange Commission. Shares of Cablevision, which have fallen 4.7
percent in the last 12 months, rose 26 cents to close at $25.27 in New York
Stock Exchange trading. Comcast stock fell 41 cents to close at $26.61 in Nasdaq
Stock Market trading.- Bloomberg News

Newspaper Guild explores buying Inquirer, Daily News

   The Newspaper Guild, a union representing newsroom, advertising, circulation
and other workers at newspapers and online news sites, is in discussions with
financial partners

   bidding for nine Knight Ridder Inc. newspapers, including

   The Inquirer and the Philadelphia Daily News, according

   to Henry Holcomb, president of the Philadelphia Guild local and head of the
Knight Ridder Council of local unions. Officials of Knight Ridder and
Philadelphia Newspapers Inc., the Knight Ridder unit that publishes The Inquirer
and Daily News,

   were not immediately available to comment. Knight Ridder has not agreed to
negotiate directly with the union-led group and would prefer to sell its 32
newspapers together, if it can find a single buyer.- Joseph N. DiStefano

AmerisourceBergen buys cancer-research firm

   Pharmaceutical distributor AmerisourceBergen Corp. said it completed the
acquisition of Network for Medical Communications & Research L.L.C. for $90
million. The Valley Forge company said the purchase would add 1 cent per share
to its 2006 earnings. AmerisourceBergen's board also announced a cash dividend
of

   2.5 cents a share on stock payable March 6 to shareholders of record Feb. 20.
AmerisourceBergen said the private cancer-research and
physician-medical-education company

   would operate as part of AmerisourceBergen Specialty Group's
manufacturer-services business, which includes physician education, analytics,
reimbursement consulting, third-party logistics, and other support services.-
Linda Loyd

NewSpring Capital raises $90 million for new fund

   NewSpring Capital, King of Prussia, has finished raising $90 million from
private investors for its new investment fund, NewSpring Mezzanine Capital L.P.,
according to general partner Steven D. Hobman. The fund will be invested in
increments of

   $2 million to $5 million for "late-stage and buy-out opportunities in
information technology, health care, business services and specialty
manufacturing" in the Mid-Atlantic region. Investors have placed a total of $250
million with NewSpring Capital, including its NewSpring Ventures and Commerce
Health

   Ventures funds. - Joseph N. DiStefano

RheoGene to license technology for multiple sclerosis

   RheoGene Inc., Norristown, said it would license its gene-regulation
technology to Ichor Medical Systems, San Diego, to develop a gene-therapy
product for multiple sclerosis. The companies did not disclose financial terms.
RheoGene, created in 1999 by Philadelphia chemical company Rohm & Haas Co., and
now owned by the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, has a technology that
turns genes on and off.- Linda Loyd

Kingsbury expanding its bearings-repair factory

   Kingsbury Inc. said it was expanding its Hatfield repair and service division
by 12,000 square feet to 37,000 square feet to improve its ability to provide
emergency repairs for large bearings used in power-generating equipment.
Kingsbury, which is based in Northeast Philadelphia and has its main factory
there, estimated that the expansion - scheduled for completion in

   June - would enable it to bill an additional $1 million in

   business this year.- Harold Brubaker

Charming Shoppes to speed up store-openings plan

   Charming Shoppes Inc., a Bensalem retailer specializing in women's plus-size
apparel, said that for fiscal 2007, it planned an acceleration of its new
store-opening plan, primarily in its Lane Bryant brand. The majority of
full-line store openings for Lane Bryant are expected to be in a new, larger
format store. The company also said it planned to enter the outlet business
through Lane Bryant Outlet, during July and August 2006, with the opening of
about 75 to 80 outlet stores.- Thomas J. Brady

Wind turbines to be made at old U.S. Steel property

   A maker of wind turbines that generate electricity plans to open a plant that
will employ about 250 people on U.S. Steel's former Fairless Hills property,
economic-development officials said. Gamesa, a publicly traded company with
headquarters in Spain, will open a 250,000-square-foot factory by June at the
site of U.S. Steel's former central maintenance building. The plant will occupy
about 22 acres of U.S. Steel's 1,289 acres, said Rick Leighton, of NAI Global,
which is helping market the property. The acreage has been designated as a
Keystone Opportunity Zone, where businesses can operate tax-free through 2019.-
AP

ELSEWHERE

Gateway CEO abruptly resigns; chairman to fill in

   Wayne Inouye, the chief executive who refocused Gateway Inc. on
personal-computer sales, is resigning and will be temporarily replaced by
chairman Rick Snyder, the company said. Inouye, who became CEO after Gateway's
acquisition of eMachines Inc. in 2004, left "to pursue other interests," the
company said. Gateway declined to elaborate, and Inouye did not return a call to
his office. Snyder, 47, was Gateway's president and chief operating officer in
1996 and 1997, before the company became an also-ran against Dell Inc. and
Hewlett-Packard Co.- AP

Initial OK for Bristol-Myers' settlement of lawsuit

   Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. said a judge gave preliminary approval for a
proposed $185 million settlement to end a class-action lawsuit that alleges the
drugmaker artificially inflated its stock price by making false and misleading
claims about an experimental heart drug. U.S. District Judge Stanley Chesler
entered preliminary approval of a settlement for the case

   pending in the U.S. District Court in New Jersey. The case involved the drug
known as Vanlev, the company said.

   Vanlev was never approved. - AP

Jobless rolls edge up slightly, but below projection

   The number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits edged up slightly
last week, but remained at a level indicating a strong labor market. The Labor
Department reported that 277,000 people applied for jobless benefits, an
increase of 4,000 from the previous week. That was below the gain of 12,000 that
economists had been expecting.- AP

Boeing to shutter Ark. facility with 103 workers

   Boeing Co. said it would close an aircraft maintenance facility in Melbourne,
Ark., that employs 103 workers. The facility is being closed as a result of an
expired contract to service Navy planes, Chicago-based Boeing said in a
statement. The operation will close next quarter. Boeing has a plant in Ridley
Township, Delaware County, where the fuselages for the Osprey V-22 aircraft are
manufactured.- Bloomberg News

30-year mortgage rates increase a third week

   Rates on 30-year mortgages edged up for a third straight week, Freddie Mac
reported. The giant mortgage company said its nationwide survey showed that
rates on 30-year mortgages rose to 6.24 percent, up from 6.23 percent last week.
One-year adjustable rate mortgages increased to 5.34 percent this week, compared
with 5.33 percent last week.- AP

CORRECTION-DATE: February 11, 2006

CORRECTION:

   A brief in yesterday's Business section erred in the location of Kingsbury's
Inc.'s repair and service division. It is in Hatboro.

   The Inquirer wants its news report to be fair and correct in every respect,
and regrets when it is not. If you have a question or comment about news
coverage, contact editor Amanda Bennett (phone 215-854-2529) or managing editor
Anne Gordon (215-854-4682) at The Inquirer, Box 8263, Philadelphia 19101, or
e-mail abennett@phillynews.com or agordon@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006


                              757 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 2006 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            February 6, 2006 Monday
                                Sunrise Edition

SECTION: Local News; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 857 words

HEADLINE: Fanconi anemia killed her son, Jake. Now she's driven to save others

BYLINE: ANDY DWORKIN, The Oregonian

BODY:

   When Jake Shearer was diagnosed with Fanconi anemia three years ago, his
family had never heard of the rare disease.

   They learned there is no cure for the genetic illness, which affects perhaps
500 U.S. families, at least seven in Oregon.

   And the family could not find a perfectly matched marrow donor to offer a
stem-cell transplant, the best treatment for the illness. After months of
looking, Jake got an imperfectly matched transplant. But he died several months
later, in October 2003.

   Now Jake's mother, Portland resident Peggy Padden, wants to help erase the
obstacles her family faced after his diagnosis. For the second consecutive year,
she has organized a walk and run around Valentine's Day to raise money for the
Eugene-based Fanconi Anemia Research Fund. She hopes the event Sunday will
educate people about the disease and support research into better treatments,
including gene therapy.

   The fundraiser includes a drive to register new marrow donors, increasing the
odds for patients to find a perfect match. That could help people facing a wide
variety of diseases treatable with marrow donations.

   The drive could also help her youngest son, Spencer. The 18-year-old Grant
High School senior also has Fanconi anemia. He's very healthy now. But Fanconi
anemia is a relentless disease, and he probably will need a transplant one day.

   "We want to keep looking to find a match for him and other people," Padden
said. "Most of us have decided to donate our organs when we die to save
someone's life. And with the bone marrow registry, hopefully you can save
someone's life while you're alive."

   Most patients die young

   Fanconi anemia is a failure of one of the body's basic systems for repairing
strands of DNA, which commonly break as cells divide. That causes the bone
marrow to stop making new blood cells, greatly increases a person's risk for
cancer and sometimes causes birth defects. Most patients die by their 20s.

   The disease strikes people who inherit flawed copies of a Fanconi gene from
each parent. In the past 14 years, scientists have found 11 different genes
whose mutations can cause the disease --one of which is identical to BRCA2, a
gene linked to breast cancer.

   Much of that research was at least partly funded by the Eugene-based research
fund, started in 1989 by University of Oregon President David Frohnmayer and his
wife, Lynn. Two of the couple's daughters died of the disease, Katie in 1991 and
Kirsten in 1997. Their third daughter, Amy, 18, has the disease.

   "I remember reading about them" years ago, Padden said. "I just couldn't
imagine anything worse, especially two children."

   The Eugene foundation is funded largely by donations raised by the
Frohnmayers and other families with Fanconi anemia, Executive Director Mary
Ellen Eiler said.

   Last year, more than 140 families nationwide held golf tournaments, casino
nights, auctions and other fundraisers, she said. Most of those events raise
$500 to $5,000. So Padden's first 5K last year, which raised $12,000, represents
a large amount of money for the fund, Eiler said.

   Padden said she planned last year's run in just six weeks. Still, the event
drew 235 people --a number she hopes to top this year. An elementary school
teacher, Padden has started working half time, freeing up hours to raise
awareness and funds for Fanconi anemia research. She gets help from her husband,
Glen Shearer, and from Spencer and her middle son, Conor, who does not have
Fanconi anemia.

   Padden hopes to expand the race to other cities in coming years, like the
Race for the Cure, which benefits breast cancer research. With Fanconi science
advancing rapidly, she said, "Research is where our hope is. . . . Gene therapy
is our absolute dream."

   Treatment ideas offer hope

   Gene therapy probably can't fix every problem with Fanconi anemia, including
cancer risk. But scientists think they might be able to use genetic treatments
to prevent or fix bone marrow failure, the disease's main cause of death. Now, a
transplant is the main treatment for marrow failure. And the transplants are
risky, especially without a perfect marrow match.

   For a brief, exciting time, Shearer's family had a perfect match for Jake:
his brother Spencer. Only when doctors started testing Spencer further did they
find low blood counts, leading to his diagnosis.

   "It was really pretty hard to believe," Spencer said. "It was more hard with
my brother than me."

   Spencer said he feels good now, and rarely thinks about his illness --mostly
when he goes for blood tests every few months. He is finishing high school and
looking forward to college, hopefully at the University of Oregon or the
University of Hawaii.

   Jake was studying computer science and fine arts at Carroll College, in
Helena, Mont., when he grew ill, Padden said. He was engaged to be married and
had recently started running.

   "He was just an absolutely wonderful person. He loved life. He was interested
in just about everything. He was happy, kind, curious," Padden said.

   She thinks the fundraiser would make him proud.

   "I know he sees what's going on," she said. "He would say, 'Oh, cool.' "

   Andy Dworkin: 503-221-8239; andydworkin@news.oregonian.com

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2006


                              758 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                            February 3, 2006 Friday
                  5 NORTHWEST CONNECTICUT/SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. C2

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: STARTING LINES

BYLINE: Compiled by Mike Bartolotta from wire reports

BODY:

   Gene Doping Alleged

   The trial of a German track coach accused of supplying performance-enhancing
drugs to athletes has included evidence indicating gene doping already might be
taking place in sports.

   E-mails seized in the investigation of Thomas Springstein contain references
to Repoxygen, a substance used in gene therapy.

   Gene doping, which is banned in sports, involves transferring genes into
human cells to blend into an athlete's own DNA to enhance muscle growth and
increase strength or endurance.

   Most experts didn't believe gene doping was in practice, but suggested it
could be a threat by the time of the 2008 Beijing Olympics.

   Springstein, who has worked with some of Germany's top runners, is on trial
in Germany on charges including the alleged doping of young athletes in 2003.

   Repoxygen can boost an athlete's performance by inducing the release of
erythropoietin, or EPO, a substance that stimulates the production of red blood
cells to carry more oxygen to the muscles.

   There is no known test for Repoxygen, which gives the body the gene to
stimulate EPO production on its own.

   Funny Cide Encouraging

   Former Kentucky Derby winner Funny Cide failed to find the winner's circle
again, finishing second to Sir Greeley at Gulfstream Park Thursday in Hallandale
Beach, Fla.

   Funny Cide, the 2003 Derby and Preakness winner, was 1 1/2 lengths behind the
winner but 1 1/4 lengths ahead of 3-5 favorite Sun King.

   Even in defeat, the race was encouraging since the 6-year-old gelding had
finished out of the money in his previous five starts.

   Funny Cide was hampered by various ailments last year. His last victory came
Oct. 2, 2004, at Belmont Park.

   Bulgarian Appeals Ban

   Bulgarian tennis player Sesil Karatantcheva appealed her two-year doping ban
to the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Lausanne, Switzerland.

   The International Tennis Federation suspended Karatantcheva, 16, Jan. 11
after she twice tested positive for the steroid nandrolone. Karatantcheva
contends she tested positive because she was pregnant and had been taking food
supplements, CAS said.

   Sharapova Advances

   Top-seeded Maria Sharapova cruised past American Lisa Raymond 6-4, 6-4 to
join to Martina Hingis in the Pan Pacific Open quarterfinals in Tokyo.

   Sharapova will next face Samantha Stosur of Australia, who defeated
sixth-seeded Daniela Hantuchova, 7-6 (5), 6-2. Hingis recovered from a slow
start for a 4-6, 7-5, 6-2 win over third-seeded Nathalie Dechy of France. ...
Fourth-seeded Tommy Haas of Germany beat Romania's Andrei Pavel 6-7 (1-7), 6-1,
7-5 to move into the quarterfinals of the International Tennis Championships in
Delrey Beach, Fla. Top-seeded Andre Agassi, third-seeded Xavier Malisse,
sixth-seeded Florian Mayer and eighth-seeded Vincent Spadea of the U.S. also
advanced.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                              759 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            February 3, 2006 Friday

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D08

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: Sports in Brief | Pierre's 1-year Cubs deal: $5.75 million

BYLINE: Compiled By The Inquirer Staff

BODY:

   New centerfielder Juan Pierre agreed yesterday to a $5.75 million, one-year
contract with the Chicago Cubs, who also settled on a $610,000 deal with
left-handed reliever Will Ohman.

   Pierre, obtained in a trade with the Florida Marlins in December, made $3.7
million last year. He asked for $6.5 million, and the Cubs offered $5 million.

   Baseball Hall of Famer Phil Rizzuto, 88, will auction memorabilia that he
collected over 53 years as a player and broadcaster for the New York Yankees,
including uniforms, autographs and letters from two U.S. presidents.

   The auction will take place about midyear via Internet, phone and fax.

   Elsewhere: The Cincinnati Reds gave all-star shortstop Felipe Lopez a $2.7
million deal for the coming season... . The Washington Nationals signed
lefthander Felix Rodriguez to a one-year contract and gave veteran shortstop
Royce Clayton and outfielder George Lombard minor-league contracts with
invitations to spring training. The Nationals sent righthander Francis Beltran
outright to triple-A New Orleans... . Right-hander Sunny Kim lost to the
Colorado Rockies in the first salary arbitration case of the year and will earn
$600,000 rather than the $800,000 he had sought. Catcher Yorvit Torrealbaand the
Rockies agreed on an $850,000 deal... . Outfielder Craig Monroe, the last
Detroit Tigers player in salary arbitration, agreed to a $2.8 million, one-year
contract.

Pro football

   The Denver Broncos have had at least two internal discussions about acquiring
Miami Dolphins running back Ricky Williams, but the teams have not talked about
a deal.

   The Denver Post, citing two NFL sources, reported this week that coach Mike
Shanahan might consider trading for Williams, but that's likely only if the team
does not trade for Eagles receiver Terrell Owens.

   Former St. Louis Rams coach Mike Martz backed out of the Detroit Lions'
offensive coordinator position, saying, "It just didn't work out with the
money."

   Elsewhere: Center Dennis Norman agreed to a contract extension with the
Jacksonville Jaguars for undisclosed terms. Norman, a 6-foot-5, 312-pound
Princeton alum, is a graduate of Cherokee High in Burlington County... . Jaguars
receiver Reggie Williams will perform community service to settle charges filed
after police found a small amount of marijuana in his car last month in
Jacksonville, Fla... . The Denver Broncos and 12-year veteran center Tom Nalen
agreed to a three-year contract extension.

Colleges

   Wisconsin running back Booker Stanley was kicked off the team less than two
months after being suspended following his arrest on charges of sexual assault,
battery and bail jumping.

   Stanley, suspended since Dec. 21 - when Madison police were called to the
apartment he shared with his girlfriend - is expected to face a preliminary
hearing this month. The 22-year-old is free on bond.

   Temple's Candice Dupree was named to the 20-player Wooden Award midseason
all-American women's basketball team with Maryland's Crystal Langhorne, who is a
graduate of Willingboro High, and Rutgers' Cappie Pondexter.

   Lafayette men's soccer coach Dennis Bohn signed a four-year contract
extension until 2010.

   Temple women's lacrosse coach Jenny Ulehla was named an assistant coach of
the U.S. national women's team.

   St. Joseph's Prep tight end Matt Leddy of Havertown, a first-team
all-Catholic League selection as a junior and senior, signed a letter of intent
Wednesday with Division I-AA Elon University in North Carolina.

   The recruiting class at Division I-AA Lafayette includes Abington tight
end/defensive end Michael Bolton; former Holy Cross quarterback Robert Curley of
Cinnaminson, who spent a prep year at the Kent School in Connecticut; Tatnall
School defensive back Samuel Leland of New Castle, Del.; Cheltenham defensive
back Nick Oliver; and Bishop McDevitt offensive lineman Michael Wojcik of
Philadelphia.

Olympics

   The Alpine broadcasting media center for the Turin Olympics was back in
action in Sestriere, Italy, a day after part of the floor collapsed.

   Repairs were made and the section was tested.

Noteworthy

   The trial in Berlin of a German track coach accused of supplying
performance-enhancing drugs to athletes has included evidence indicating that
gene doping might be taking place in sports.

   E-mails seized in the investigation of Thomas Springstein contain references
to Repoxygen, a substance normally used in gene therapy.

   Gene doping, which is banned in sports, involves transferring genes directly
into human cells to blend into an athlete's own DNA to enhance muscle growth.

   American goalie Kasey Keller, 36, and the German Bundesliga team Borussia
Moenchengladbach agreed to a one-year contract extension through June 2007.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                              760 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            February 3, 2006 Friday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Sports; E02

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: Gene Doping Comes Into Play in Drug Trial

BODY:

    The trial of a German track coach accused of supplying performance-enhancing
drugs to athletes has included evidence indicating gene doping already might be
taking place in sports.

     E-mails seized in the investigation of Thomas Springstein contain
references to Repoxygen, a substance used in gene therapy. Gene doping, banned
in sports, involves the transfer of genes directly into human cells to blend
into an athlete's own DNA to enhance muscle growth and boost strength or
endurance. Most experts have said they didn't believe gene doping was yet in
practice.

     Springstein, who has worked with some of Germany's top runners, is on trial
on charges including the alleged doping of young athletes in 2003. This week the
court was read e-mails found when police raided his home in search of evidence.
In one, Springstein complained that "Repoxygen is hard to get. . . . give me new
instructions soon so that I can order the product."

     --  From News Services

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                              761 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
                           Christian Science Monitor

                          February 1, 2006, Wednesday

SECTION: FEATURES, CURRENTS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: State laws bypass research ban

BYLINE: Gregory M. Lamb Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

BODY:

   Washington has effectively put a lid on federal efforts to advance embryonic
stem-cell research. But pressure from scientists eager to expand their
knowledge, special interest groups searching for new cures for diseases, and
those who see a lucrative new biomedical industry has found a relief valve: the
nation's 50 statehouses.

   Stem-cell initiatives flowing from legislatures and governors' offices
continue to gather steam, including some that permit controversial human cloning
to generate embryonic stem cells. In response, opponents of such research, who
find it ethically unacceptable, have also stepped up their activity in states -
with some success.

   There has been an "explosion" of state activity since 2000-01, says Alissa
Johnson, who tracks genetics issues for the National Conference of State
Legislatures (NCSL). An August 2001 Bush administration mandate to restrict
embryonic stem-cell research to a few existing stem-cell lines has "created a
state-by-state [stem-cell] movement unprecedented in medical research," wrote
Paul Sanberg, director of the Center for Aging and Brain Repair at the
University of South Florida, Tampa, in October's issue of The Scientist.

   In 2005, states considered at least 180 bills or resolutions on stem-cell
research, according to the NCSL. A dozen states carried over legislation into
this year, and other states will have new bills introduced.

   Missouri is being watched closely. Advocates there are gathering signatures
to put a measure on the November ballot that would legalize stem-cell research,
including therapeutic cloning, which destroys very early human embryos, called
blastocysts, in the process. The medical and business communities generally back
the initiative, while groups such as the Missouri Catholic Conference and
Missouri Right to Life oppose it.

   In Illinois, a bill would put a proposal to spend $1 billion on stem-cell
research on the November ballot. In Maryland, a measure passed the Senate that
would provide $125 million for stem-cell research. Gov. Robert Ehrlich has
offered an alternative in which $20 million would be allotted for research on
either embryonic or less controversial adult stem-cell research.

   Some states have restricted research. Last year Indiana banned human cloning
for any purpose, including to generate stem cells, but created a center to
research adult stem cells, which are not derived from human embryos. A similar
effort now is under way in Mississippi.

   Governors have been active, too. In a speech last month, Iowa Gov. Tom
Vilsack, possibly with a presidential bid in mind, called for a repeal of a 2002
Iowa law that bans therapeutic cloning. And in Wisconsin, Gov. Jim Doyle - who
earlier vetoed a bill that would have banned embryonic stem-cell research -
called on the state to spend $5 million to recruit companies doing stem-cell
research. These companies could add 100,000 new jobs in the state by 2015, he
argued in his January state-of-the-state address.

   Embryonic stem-cell advocates have pointed to California's $3 billion
investment in stem-cell research, passed by voters in 2004, and urged their own
states to keep up. But the Golden State's massive program - slowed by lawsuits
and charged with a lack of transparency and accountability - has had trouble
moving forward.

   "That one has kind of come to a standstill," says David Prentice, a senior
fellow for life sciences at the Family Research Council in Washington, D.C.,
which opposes embryonic stem-cell research.

   Such a crazy quilt of state policies toward stem-cell research can create
problems for scientists. "Biomedical research in general is an interstate
activity involving collaboration among institutions," says Kathy Hudson,
director of the Genetics & Public Policy Center at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, "so this [state-by-state approach] is really making complicated the
conduct of research."

   But states are "jumping into the void," Ms. Hudson says. "The federal
government is basically paralyzed. We're exactly where we were on stem-cell
policy in 2001, when Bush made his pronouncement."

   January's news that a supposed breakthrough in human cloning by South Korean
scientist Hwang Woo-Suk had been faked may have also left state legislators more
wary about how quickly embryonic stem-cell therapies can advance. "Hwang created
some negative press," says John Hlinko, one of the founders of StemPAC, a
national political action committee committed to advancing all forms of
stem-cell research. But in the long view, Hudson says, the Hwang debacle hasn't
altered the opinion that embryonic stem-cell therapies will be an option someday
and that the country will need policies to guide what practices will or won't be
allowed.

   Right now, states are also performing their traditional role as testing
grounds, she says. States can look at what others are doing and ask, "Did that
work? ... [or] did that policy have glitches in it that we can learn from?"
Where it is stimulating public discussion, Hudson says, "that has got to be a
good thing."

   "It's very much an educational and, in some sense, a PR debate going on right
now," says Mr. Prentice, who travels widely to speak against embryonic stem-cell
research. "It's going to be a tough fight."

   A bill loosening restrictions on embryonic stem-cell research gained some
momentum in Congress in 2005, including backing from Senate majority leader Bill
Frist, but failed to pass.

   "The federal government is the 800-pound gorilla," Mr. Hlinko says. "It's
wonderful that states are trying to do this, but it's not a substitute for
federal action."

   (c) Copyright 2006. The Christian Science Monitor

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2006


                              762 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                            January 29, 2006 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PROSPECTUS; Pg. P53

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: Biotech gains traction with town-gown cooperation

BYLINE: BY FRED O. WILLIAMS - NEWS BUSINESS REPORTER

BODY:

   As a maker of food for cells, Invitrogen Corp.'s Gibco Division plant on
Grand Island is part of a booming biotechnology industry.

   "Every year is a record year for the Gibco business," said Monette Greenway,
general manager of the division. As genetic engineering turns cells into tiny
drug factories, pharmaceutical companies increasingly use Gibco's cell growth
culture in the production of drugs.

   Consequently the California-based company announced plans in 2005 to invest
$5 million in the site and add 36 jobs over two years, bringing the employment
total close to 500.

   Investment in life sciences has been heavy in the region in the past few
years, both from private and public sources, in hopes of capturing economic
benefits from health-related industries.

   Now industry experts hope private investment by entrepreneurs - and by
existing companies like Invitrogen - will step up to a quicker pace in 2006 as
federal research funding levels off.

   "The private-sector funding of research is going to be more important going
forward," said Alan Olhoeft, executive director of Bufflink, Buffalo's biotech
industry advocate.

   Funding to area institutions from the National Institutes of Health, which
supports much university life science research, reached $100.5 million in the
federal fiscal year that ended in September. The amount is up by 64 percent
since 2000 as the agency's funding from Congress jumped.

   Now, however, further gains will be harder to achieve as the NIH budget
plateaus.

   The lab work fueled by the federal dollars can be spun off into commercial
ventures to bring medical advances from the lab bench to the bedside, Olhoeft
said.

   Five new biotech companies opened their doors in the region, according to
Bufflink, most through spinoffs from area researchers. Their ideas range from
better treatments for prostate cancer to hospital respirators that recapture
costly inhaled medication. Osteoinvent Biologics, formed by a University at
Buffalo dental researcher and a graduate of its business school, has launched a
business plan to commercialize a bone regeneration therapy for dental surgery.

   Other recent start-ups are passing milestones on the long journey to
developing new medical products. Kinex Pharmaceuticals in Buffalo hopes to begin
clinical trials of its potential cancer drug this year, following the
identification of a lead compound as drug candidate.

   "We have encountered no safety problems thus far, and [the compound's] unique
properties provide opportunities for both anti-cancer treatment and maintenance
maintenance therapy," said Kinex Chief Executive Dr. Allen Barnett. The
compound, which seems to halt tumor growth and kill tumor cells in lab tests,
could be a potent weapon against deadly colo-rectal cancer, he said.

   Start-up companies are one way of turning lab research into jobs. Since 2001,
area companies in life science have announced plans to create 1,067 jobs,
according according to Bufflink's count of publicly announced expansions and
start-ups.

   "It's not going at warp speed - we never said it would," Bufflink Chairman
Angelo M. Fatta said. However, the region is succeeding in building an
infrastructure of patenting ability at colleges and start-up capital sources in
the private sector to help springboard lab ideas into commercial use.

   "If you've got a good business plan, the money will find you," Fatta said.
"So our job is to have good deals here."

   Another important growth source is the investment of existing biotech firms
and medical products manufacturers, whose investment can be spurred by
inventions from area life science labs.

   For example, Ethox International in Buffalo, a maker of hospital products,
announced a plan to develop a UB researcher's idea for a catheter to diagnose
heart ailments. The patented catheter - which enters via the esophagus instead
of more invasive arterial catheters used currently - was awaiting a commercial
partner to license it for development, president Thomas Bienias said.

   Fostering more such town-gown collaborations is one goal of an alliance
between Bufflink and the Health Care Industries Association. The two groups will
share staff and budgets, closely aligning their operations while remaining
separate entities. The alliance should help foster more ties between university
licensing authorities and local companies, HCIA president Dr. Thomas Stewart
said.

   This year will see the long-awaited opening of the state's Center of
Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, whose new building in the
medical campus north of downtown Buffalo will house 200 employees, including 60
scientists.

   Roswell Park's adjoining building, its Center for Genetics and Pharmacology,
is also slated for a spring opening. The structures will complete the trio of
buildings in the Life Sciences Complex, joining the Hauptman Woodward Medical
Research Institute's new Structural Biology Research Center which opened last
May.

   Although the scientific work of the institutions has been in progress for
some time, the opening of the permanent buildings will mark another milestone in
the development of life sciences capability in the region.

   And while the UB bioinformatics center will be without its founding scientist
Jeffrey Skolnick, who left for a job at Georgia Tech, the departure isn't
expected to throw a kink into the work being done here on discovering gene-based
causes of disease.

   "Jeff was a good scientist," Olhoeft said, "but the Center of Excellence is
much more than Jeffrey Skolnick."

   e-mail: fin@buffnews.com

GRAPHIC: Harry Scull Jr./Buffalo News Dina M. Bycina prepares samples for
analysis at Invitrogen Corp.'s Gibco Division on Grand Island, which is
undergoing a $5 million expansion that will add 36 jobs over two years.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2006


                              763 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           January 28, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-3

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: Family;
Rated `G

BYLINE: Caroline Dipping

BODY:

   Onstage

   21st annual California Young Playwrights Contest

   Audiences who attended last week's scripted readings and staged performances
of the Playwrights Project experienced a wide range of what live theater can
offer and what the playwrights of the future are capable of doing. Characters
ranging from an immature tomato to an obsessed lover sprang from the pages of
these winning scripts from the California Young Playwrights Contest, produced by
the Playwrights Project in association with The Old Globe Theatre.

   Chosen from more than 180 submissions by teenagers throughout the state, five
works received full professional productions and four were read during the
festival. Each festival performance began with readings of scripts by writers
under age 14.

   The scripts of local students that were fully staged were: "Tripping" by
Julianne Vanessa Athon, 16, of San Diego; "Spanish Rhapsody" by Emily Bookstein,
16, of La Jolla; and "A Man of His Word" by Mariah MacCarthy, 18, of San Diego.

   Readings of works by local students included: "Idaho Lament" by Ben Kelly,
13, of Carlsbad; "Sara's Volleyball Dreams" by Zoe Carr Sanchez, 12, of
Encinitas; and "Joe the Tomato" by Stephen Whiting, 11, of San Diego.

   Rated "G" reviewer Nikita Koraddi attended the festival and shares this
report. To learn more about the Playwrights Project, call (619) 239-8222 or
visit www.playwrightsproject.com.

   By NIKITA KORADDI

   Review: With more than 180 submissions from all over California, the
Playwrights Project, in association with the Old Globe, presented the cream of
that crop last week at the Cassius Carter Centre Stage. The playwrights, all
under age 19, poured out their talent and dedication to their passion of writing
and acting.

   The festival started out with a rather lighthearted and amusing piece called
"Joe the Tomato," written by Stephen Whiting. A young tomato, eager to attend
the tomato festival, lets go of the vine, but then realizes that he might not
turn red.

   In desperate hopes of fulfilling his desire, Joe dives into a tin of red
paint, only to realize that he is actually turning red. A confession has to
follow.

   After "Joe" came the very enjoyable "This Girl Is a Bird," written by William
Alden, 16, of Santa Monica. A boy who is fighting with his girlfriend's
priorities complains of her insensitivity toward their love.

   Bluntly denying the accusation, the girl bursts into spirited descriptions of
the beauty of the sky and the vastness of the ocean and her fantasies of a life
as a fish and a bird, only to surprise us at the end. Talent, energy and passion
were present with every line, and the language used was beautiful.

   The fully staged script I thought to be the most intriguing and powerful was
"Step Into the Night," written by Kit Steinkellner, 18, of Santa Barbara. A
senior from Chicago (played by Mathew Bohrer) who tends to degrade himself to
the title of a "spineless, cowardly loser" is embarking on a terrifying journey
-- prom! His monologue explains his inability to ask the girl next door to the
dance.

   Her beauty, he claims, paralyzes him. But his troubles go far beyond teenage
infatuation.

   Throughout the piece, he battles with the frustration of cowardice and
resistance to risks that brew inside him. He yearns to rise beyond his fears and
be a hero.

   A ponderous message, with a bit of humor incorporated into it, made for a
beautiful play.

   I was a little disappointed that the majority of the audience was older folks
because the talent that was shown on the stage would be an inspiration for any
youngster. Every piece has its share of innovation and creativity, offering
something for us to think about or just plain chuckle over.

   This and that

   `GENOME: The Secret of How Life Works'

   The San Diego Natural History Museum opens an exhibit today that presents the
human genome in a way that we nonscientists can easily grasp. The exhibition
explores the genome and explains the secret codes that make us who we are and
who we might become.

   Artifacts, environments and family-friendly activities are used to reveal the
mystery of our genes, the last two centuries of discovery and the implications
of gene therapy for the future of medical science.

   Family Days on March 4 and April 29 are planned in conjunction with the
Genome exhibition. They will include activities such as making a cell model,
isolating DNA from fruits and vegetables, and visits with forensic scientists.

   "GENOME: The Secret of How Life Works" runs through May 1 at the San Diego
Natural History Museum in Balboa Park. For more information, call (619)
232-3821.

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Robert Milz and Jennifer Snowden play a young
couple trying to figure out what each other needs in William Alden's play "This
Girl Is a Bird." The staged production was one of several teen works showcased
in the Playwrights Project at the Old Globe Theatre. 2. The exhibit uses
interactive displays to help the public understand the genome's function and its
role in daily life.; PHOTOBY: 1. Randy Rovang 2. San Diego Natural History
Museum

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2006


                              764 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 987 words

HEADLINE: BIOLOGISTS CITE WAY TO MULTIPLY BLOOD STEM CELLS;
CAMBRIDGE RESEARCH MAY AID BONE MARROW TRANSPLANTS

BYLINE:  BY GARETH COOK, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Biologists announced yesterday a way to dramatically expand populations of
blood stem cells, a discovery that could improve bone marrow transplants and
make them available to more patients.

   Bone marrow transplants save the lives of thousands of Americans every year,
mainly cancer patients, but many others are denied treatment because the cells
that give the transplants their regenerative power blood stem cells are quite
rare, and doctors have no way of substantially increasing their number before
giving a transplant to a patient.

   The new technique, discovered in mouse experiments by biologists at the
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, uses a cocktail of
growth factors to multiply the stem cells up to thirtyfold. If the discovery can
be adapted to humans, scientists said, it would transform the field saving
patients who can't be helped today, in part because of a shortage of bone marrow
donors.

   "This is a very significant step forward," said Dr. Guy Sauvageau, who was
not involved in the Whitehead work and is scientific director of the Institute
for Research in Immunology and Cancer in Montreal.

   The discovery is also a boon for the field of adult stem-cell research, which
has labored in the shadow of its controversial cousin, embryonic stem-cell
research. Adult stem cells, such as those that form the blood, do not have the
ability to become any cell in the body the hallmark of embryonic stem cells. Yet
adult stem cells, unlike embryonic ones, are already used to treat patients.

   The new research, published yesterday in the journal Nature Medicine, could
expand the relatively limited medical uses for adult stem cells.

   Stem cells have become the focus of intense research because of their
regenerative power. Stem cells can make copies of themselves, and also become
more specialized cells, meaning that they can replace damaged tissues. Bone
marrow transplants give a patient new blood stem cells, which can then replace
red, white, and other blood cells destroyed by chemotherapy or radiation
therapy. The transplants are used to treat leukemia, or blood cancer, as well as
other diseases such as lymphoma and blood disorders.

   One of the most immediate applications of multiplying blood stem cells would
be to make the blood taken from umbilical cords at birth more widely usable as
an alternative source of stem cells for patients awaiting bone marrow
transplants, said Dr. Eva Guinan, associate director for clinical and
translational research at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. Cord blood has blood
stem cells, but not enough to help many adults. Thousands of Americans die every
year waiting for a bone marrow transplant.

   The technology could also have a wide range of other applications, improving
the safety of current procedures and making new ones possible, said Guinan, who
is also a bone marrow transplant doctor at Children's Hospital Boston.

   For example, it could make it easier to do gene therapy, in which doctors
correct genetic problems in blood-forming cells and put the repaired cells in a
patient. This could be done, for example, in patients who have severe, inherited
diseases of the immune system.

   The discovery is also important, scientists said, because it provides new
clues into the basic biology of the stem cells. Although these transplants have
been used for decades, and blood stem cells are the most intensively studied
stem cell, biologists have not been able to accomplish one of the most basic
tasks: keeping them alive and healthy outside the body for long periods. This
has made them more difficult to study, preventing the expansion of their medical
applications, scientists said. The new finding, which coaxed the cells to
multiply in laboratory dishes over the course of a week or more, suggests that
the field may be coming close to solving this problem.

   To find a way to multiply the blood stem cells, the researchers began with
nature, according to Cheng Cheng Zhang, a postdoctoral fellow at the Whitehead.
When a mouse is developing in the womb, there is a dramatic expansion in the
number of blood stem cells near the liver. The same thing happens in humans.

   Zhang's team, working under the direction of Whitehead scientist Harvey F.
Lodish, suspected that there are cells in the liver that help the blood stem
cells multiply. Zhang tried growing blood stem cells next to different types of
liver cells, until he found cells that prompted the blood stem cells to
multiply, according to the paper, which was published online.

   To find out what made these cells special, he compared them with other cells
in the liver. He found that these cells were churning out proteins that the
other cells were not. He then did another round of experiments, which showed
that these proteins, called growth factors, made the blood stem cells multiply.

   The most successful cocktail of proteins caused a thirtyfold increase in the
number of stem cells, substantially more than similar attempts by other
researchers in the past. Some scientists have achieved higher levels by
genetically engineering the blood stem cells, but this technique poses a threat
of cancer, so would not likely be used by doctors.

   Similar growth factors are found in human livers, and the Whitehead team is
organizing a study to see whether they can be used to make human blood stem
cells multiply in the lab. The work is far from any commercial application
because these experiments are difficult and time-consuming. (The team declared
no financial interests in the research, according to the paper.) But if the
experiments are successful, the next step would be to make sure that all of the
growth factors could be used in human cells, without posing any kind of threat.
Zhang said he has started new experiments to find more growth factors, with the
hope that he can boost the numbers of stem cells even more.

   "The more the better," he said.

   Gareth Cook can be reached at cook@globe.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                              765 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                            January 22, 2006 Sunday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: LOS ANGELES TIMES MAGAZINE; Lat Magazine Desk; Part I; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 5271 words

HEADLINE: Death. And How to Avoid It.;
The brains behind La Jolla's biotech boom try to answer the big questions.

BYLINE: Steve Chapple, Steve Chapple last wrote for the magazine about Randy
Hayes and the Rainforest Action Network.

BODY:

   Dr. Richard Houghten did not choose his parents wisely. His father died at
58, his mother at 51. One grandfather died at 57, another at 47. An uncle, three
brothers and his sister all have Type 2 diabetes. He is 59.

   The awareness of his own mortality drives Houghten, president and director of
the Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies. It drives the rest of us too,
of course, but Houghten and the other biotech cowboys on La Jolla's "Science
Mesa" are actually doing something about it.

   "It's all going to happen, Steve!" says Houghten, welcoming me into his
office at the institute, a soaring concrete-and-glass structure that reminds me
of the corporation in the film "Gattaca." "But will I be around long enough to
see it? No. Your kids? My kids? Guaranteed! You can already grow a human ear in
the intestinal tissue of a mouse. Your heart in a beaker--that's going to
happen. The question is whether it's your heart tissue or whether it can be stem
cells. Stem cells are very important. There's been some cool work with baby
teeth recently, so the whole question of abortion may be left by the wayside.
There's pulp in there, in baby teeth, and you can get the cells and multiply 'em
up. It's a future way beyond what we're already talking about, and probably way
sooner. If someone tomorrow said they had cloned a human, would you be
surprised? I'd be surprised if it hasn't already happened. If you're rich, think
about it, you've got a spare $100 million, plenty of technology, a network, and
you can fund it. Technically, cloning a human is not nearly so hard as Los
Alamos"--says a man whose father helped refine and measure the effects of the
first hydrogen bomb.

   "You may not like the idea of organ culture--hydroponic cloning--but in a
way, what's wrong with it? You take a few of your cells, your kids' when they
are born, those baby teeth, that umbilical cord blood, and you can eventually
replace a rotten kidney, a bad liver, harvest a heart, certain parts of your
brain--the whole brain's a lot harder--if you have Alzheimer's or whatnot. In
the end what's going to happen is, we are going to live as long as we want to,
until we get bored. 'I'm bored,' " Houghten shrugs, pretending to be about 200
years older than he is, " 'I'm bored with it all. I want out.' " He laughs.

   People on the Mesa laugh a lot. Maybe it's the sequestered beauty of the
place, a swimmable surfer's sea lapping limestone cliffs, palm trees mixed with
pines, cool mornings, sunny afternoons, perfect air, a collegial setting, very
high and quite justified salaries, and no traffic. Or maybe it's the astounding
beauty on the micro level--imagine using safe viruses as guided-missile vectors
to bring new drugs to hidden tumors, or arresting diabetes with protein
synthesized from the saliva of the Gila monster, or switching off the "bad
genes" for Tay-Sachs, Huntington's chorea and cystic fibrosis.

   Once a sleepy paradise, "Beverly Hills by the Bay," La Jolla and Torrey Pines
Mesa are now at the center of the most concentrated cluster of biomed in the
world: more than a dozen major research institutes, among them Salk, Burnham,
Scripps and UC San Diego, and 300 companies such as Pfizer, Novartis, Amylin and
the aptly named Isis Pharmaceuticals (Isis put the pieces of Osiris back
together, long ago, in Egyptian times, when the brain was treated as the most
discardable of organs), many within a few square miles of each other, some
stretching in a weaving, blinking line, like the twisted strands of the double
helix itself, up to Oceanside and down to Mission Bay. In all, 39,000
life-science professionals work in San Diego County, generating near-daily
breakthroughs and headlines and bringing in as much money to the new San Diego
as either of the old mainstays, defense and tourism.

   I'm hoping these people know something--something big--that the rest of us
don't. So I've come as a concerned layman to query Houghten on a subject of wide
interest: death. Also, how to avoid it.

   I hadn't seen him since our days in the Bay Area, where he got a PhD in
organic chemistry at Berkeley and used to roar to work on a motorcycle, smoking
the Bay Bridge at dawn, and where he skydived, free-dived and scuba-dived with
great whites off the Sonoma Coast. "A phase," he says, "that lasted about four
years. It was along the lines of 'Life is short, and I want to do everything.' I
was 25, and it seems like only yesterday." Now he drives a minivan and holds a
joint professorship at Zhejiang University, south of Shanghai, lecturing and
sussing out China for manufacturing possibilities. But he says he hasn't
changed. "You're the same at 15. When you're very young, you want respect, but
now it's the thrill of doing something that nobody else has done that you know
will be successful. It's better than sex."

   What I like about Houghten as a guide to practical immortality, La
Jolla-style, is that I can get him to talk about stuff other scientists will
only whisper. Our planned philosophical get-togethers promise to be like
Tuesdays with Morrie, if Morrie had chatted a mile a minute, conceptualized at
warp speed, banked a few million from his 60 patents and six companies, and
thought, just maybe, that he or his kids had a snowball's chance and so had to
excuse himself, right now, to go down the hall and synthesize some peptides,
essentially small proteins that can be used both as drug-delivery systems or
novel drugs themselves.

   "In the lab, we routinely make 6 trillion peptides," he says, popping his
eyebrows. "I can make them all. I have made them all. That's what I do. We can
even test them in the living animal, let its system decide, for pain relief or
hyperactivity, say. It's a phenomenal step beyond the test tube."

   Is Houghten depressed, knowing what he knows, knowing he was born 40 years,
shall we say, prematurely?

   "No, actually, in a way that's been a driving force--mortality, time, the
ticking clock--for my whole career. We're going to die, Steve! And what's going
to keep us from maybe not dying? 'Cause you and me, we're not going to heaven,
way up there in the clouds." He's laughing again. "What is the one thing that
might not make that happen? Science. I mean, there may be a God, but we are to
him as a bacteria is to us."

   Houghten walks me out into the filtered Mesa sunlight, General Dynamics to
the left, Novartis to the right. He's still trying to help me to first base.
"Aging isn't one thing," he says. "Cancer is hundreds of things; aging probably
is too. Why does everything die? That's the first question to ask. Nothing is
immortal. Some cells can be made immortal, but any complex organism has a life
span. Why?"

   "Can I pose kind of a stupid question?" I ask Sean Oldham, a world expert in
signal transduction--intra-cellular communication--in his fly lab on the ground
floor of the Del E. Webb Center for Neuroscience and Aging Research at the
Burnham Institute, around the corner from Houghten's complex. Oldham is 37, the
father of four daughters, ages 8, 6, 3 and 1. I had already asked him how he
slept at night. He said he didn't.

   Now I ask: "Why are fly genes so close to human genes? We don't look much
like flies. I mean, do we?"

   The short answer, obvious to scientists who understand evolutionary genetics
but strange to anyone else, is that, yes, we do look a lot like flies, at least
on the grand micro-scale of things.

   "We have arms. They have wings. We are big. They are little. We both have to
grow. We both start out as eggs. We both have to differentiate into other
functional tissues," Oldham says. "Drosophila shares some 60% of human genes. A
fly functions as an adult with physiological systems that are the same as a
human's. You can take human insulin and it works in the fruit fly. You can take
a human gene and a fly that lacks the same gene, put the human gene in--the
human gene works just fine, and it can rescue what's missing in the fly."

   But it doesn't work the other way around.

   "You can't do that. It's hard enough to do gene therapy with human genes, let
alone putting a fly gene into a human"--and here we get what I first recognize
as "the La Jolla laugh," a sort of \o7Aha, so this is the way the universe
really works\f7 chuckle. "Theoretically, sure, you could, but you would get in a
lot of trouble."

   Technically?

   "No, legally."

   Oldham's research is showing that aging fruit flies can be made to live
longer if certain genes that manipulate and control their insulin-producing
pathway are "turned off." This and similar research conducted in mice and in
\o7C. elegans\f7, a translucent little roundworm, are behind the
restricted-caloric-intake movement, the idea that eating 30% less will make you
live longer.

   "It's a social experiment in humans," says Oldham, as futile as it is
fashionable, "since eating too little has no benefit. There are also side
effects. In flies, the mutants are dwarfs. They are sterile. You don't want to
live longer if you are sterile and a dwarf, as a fruit fly or a person." He
laughs. "It's a complex system, and we are tweaking it by taking one gene off
here, another there. The Holy Grail is to do it in such a way that you get
longevity without the associated side effects, which can include a loss of
muscle mass. You don't want life extension with 200 years of hip replacements.
Some researchers don't necessarily care whether you extend life span. They want
to restore the decline in organ function, in the heart, the immune system, so
that you will live happier and more productively. That's the balance we're
tackling now."

   On the way out of Burnham, I stop for ice cream. In a lower courtyard at 3 in
the afternoon, Bill Stallcup, a professor of developmental neurobiology, is
churning vanilla with mixed berries for his post-docs and fellows. He tells me a
story about a group of La Jolla scientists who attended a meeting in Boston. The
plane was late. They didn't have time to change and arrived at dinner the way
they went to work on the Mesa--polo shirts, chinos, cargo shorts. "Here come the
Californians," gibed one Harvard professor.

   "So was he jealous or annoyed?" I ask.

   "Oh, he came out to La Jolla two years later," Stallcup says, "so I guess
jealous."

   "My view is that life extension is not necessarily the object," says Fred
Gage, trim, 55, an expert on neurogenesis and stem cells and chair of the
faculty at the Salk Institute, a 15-minute walk from Burnham. "The object is to
have quality of life for as long as you live. What you would like is that the
period of time from deterioration to extinction be made as short as possible,
out to the biological maximum. Whether you want to extend life is a separate
discussion. If you don't improve quality of life and you get life extension,
well--" He laughs, softly.

   The groundbreaking experiments that Gage and his lab have conducted have
improved the quality of life for a great many people, changing the way we live
in the process. Headlines on his lab's research projects tell the story:
"Exercise Makes Mice Smarter," "Human Brains Do Sprout New Cells," "An Enriched
Environment Stimulates An Increase in the Number of Nerve Cells in Brains of
Older Mice."

   "Cognitive decline can be reversed," Gage explains, because there is a small
population of immature nerve cells in the mature brain, and these can be
switched on by focused learning in a challenging environment or simply by
regular exercise. "From the time a cell is born in your brain till it matures
into a functioning neuron with electrical-physical activity takes about a month.
It doesn't just turn on like that--" Gage snaps his fingers. Your brain also
turns cells on according to what you do, whether you're a veteran London cabby,
musician or scientist. On the other hand, acute stress causes the baby brain
cells in the mature brain to lie fallow and undifferentiated.

   "You can boost neurogenesis, nearly double the number of neurons being
formed, even in an aging adult. The first results [in 1997] were so striking,"
Gage says, "that the few couch potatoes in my lab decided to start running at
lunch. We're still struggling with the conceptual framework: Why is it that the
adult brain has retained this capacity for generating new neurons, so reliably,
across so many species?" He cites the theory of an evolutionary value in
grandparents' helping to care for those still of reproductive age.

   I find the concrete buildings at Salk boxy and stark, but Paul Heyer, in
"American Architecture: Ideas and Ideologies in the Late Twentieth Century,"
writes: "Louis Kahn's Salk Institute for Biological Studies ... aspires within
its own spirit to an order achieved through clarity, definition, and consistency
of application. It stands as a testament to Kahn's word, 'Order is.' "

   "Order is," indeed. Salk and Kahn's working temple is as cluttered and
creative as a kindergarten on the inside, with beakers and bulletin boards and
pictures of babies and James Watson, anoles and Rio de Janeiro. Only on the
outside does it flip to mid-'60s functionalism.

   "Here the emphasis is on ideas," Gage says. "People come from the East Coast
and they can be frustrated. They ask who's in charge. But nobody's in charge.
Everybody just wants to get their work done. If getting together helps me get my
work done, then OK. It's a Darwinian selfishness--if this community is strong,
then I will be strong. Originally, senior scientists like Salk set a standard
that was very, very high. Young scientists coming in knew what it meant to be
the best from these people, who weren't hung up on accolades but were more
excited by ideas, by productivity, than by being Herr Professor--a community of
scholars, a generosity of spirit. Biotech is a real boon to this community. Used
to be, you're into the money, you must be a bad guy. There was a 10-year period
of changing what it meant to be a scientist."

   Leaving the institute, I stop in a parking lot fronting the Torrey Pines
Gliderport to watch what I imagine are intrepid post-docs as they defy
death--thrillingly, slowly, hang gliding on puffs of air above Black's Beach, a
mecca for surfers and the unclothed far below. I've heard there's a fatality
nearly every year. Gage says he prefers playing squash for longevity.

   "If you could live forever," Houghten had asked, "would you spend the rest of
eternity doing everything? Hang gliding? Mountain climbing without a rope? Or
cloistered in a room with books, afraid to take any risks?" Mortality in the
future could be like hemophilia today. Which makes you feel more alive?

   "As a commercial endeavor," writes Cynthia Robbins-Roth in "From Alchemy to
IPO: The Business of Biotechnology," "combinatorial chemistry didn't exist until
1990, when Dr. Richard Houghten at the Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular
Studies in La Jolla, California, founded a company around a revolutionary new
technology. Although chemists traditionally took many steps to synthesize a
single compound, Houghten developed a way to synthesize many compounds in
relatively few steps. Building on earlier work that used a solid substrate to
synthesize peptides, Houghten accelerated the process through the use of 'tea
bags'--porous membranes containing solid beads that could be exposed to a
variety of chemical groups, thus adding them onto a core structure, or
'scaffold.' "

   Combinatorial chemistry--"combichem" in biowonkese--allows huge libraries of
drugs to be created and quickly tested for medical use, a valuable development
in curing disease and, on the Mesa, in creating wealth. Houghten's share of
Multiple Peptide Systems, a privately held garage start-up he funded with his
own "pocket money" in 1986, came to be worth about $12 million by the 1990s. In
1996, he took his Trega Biosciences public, riding it up and down the Nasdaq,
selling it at one point and then buying it back.

   The first big San Diego biotech company was Hybritech, which used monoclonal
(from one cultured cell) antibodies to diagnose disease. It was started in 1979
by UCSD medical professor Ivor Royston, biochemist Howard Birndorf and executive
Howard Greene with $300,000 in venture capital. (Genentech was the big dog of
the time, formed in the Bay Area in 1976.) La Jolla, long home to the Salk
Institute, ramped up in 1986, when Eli Lilly bought Hybritech, which had grown
to 800 employees, for about $500 million. The legendary Royston went on to
co-found Forward Ventures, San Diego's major biotech funding group.

   Houghten, himself once a researcher at Scripps, recalls that in the '80s,
forming your own company was seen as "economic prostitution" by many scientists
in academia. Now it's almost the expectation of ambitious professors. "You can't
just have a therapeutically cool idea," he says. "You have to have an idea with
commercial potential, paired with people with the right financial and business
acumen to match the discovery. It's an exciting time on the Mesa, but the last
two to four years have seen a shaking of the tree. Now the fruit is ripe. In the
next five to 10 years, people will be knocked back on their heels by what we
come up with. The public wants stuff to fall out of the sky, but often it's the
quiet advancements that sneak up on you, the progress in antivirals and stem
cells.

   "In the beginning, I saw that I could lose every penny. If you're a scientist
or an entrepreneur, know that it can all disappear, and embrace that loss. And
if you can't, don't do it. You might not want to if you're 80, but when you're
40--" He laughs.

   Eventually I ramble off the mesa.

   At the Living Room, a coffeehouse as bohemian as La Jolla gets, Isabelle
Rooney, an MD/PhD associate director at SGX Pharmaceuticals, a drug-discovery
company specializing in cancer therapies, points to her 4-year-old daughter
Genevieve's perfect skin. "Skin is hard. I have little doubt we will come close
to curing cancer in 20 years, at least controlling it, as we do AIDS, but skin
is tricky." I gather she means regenerating it, keeping it smooth as a baby's
bottom, as we non-scientists like to say, but--cancer cured, and in 20 years? "I
should hope so," says Rooney. Genevieve hands her 2-year-old brother Lincoln a
messy hunk of blackout cake. "I had Lincoln's cord blood frozen. It costs $100 a
year to keep it, a place in Texas. For the stem cells. May come in quite handy
for Lincoln in 50 years. I froze Genevieve's too. Lincoln, please use this
napkin."

   At Scripps Institution of Oceanography, I gaze under a microscope at a
bryozoan, a moss-like intertidal creature--this species more like a dirty Brillo
pad--as it filters seawater. Dr. Margo Haygood and her PhD students are cloning
some genes of a bacterium that lives symbiotically with the bryozoans. The
bacterium produces a chemical called bryostatin that the Brillo pad uses to make
its larvae taste bad to hungry fish. The chemical, coincidentally and
wonderfully so, also renders human cancer cells less dangerous. It will be a
neat trick to clone the genes, pop them into another bacterium and tease this
milk-cow into manufacturing the rare compound, but the real problem, explains
Haygood, is one of intellectual property rights, patent laws and the usual
non-science headaches on the way to FDA acceptance.

   Sunset, La Jolla Shores Playground. I lift my 5-year-old daughter onto the
parallels. She rattles down them like a howler monkey with a leopard behind,
then runs to join her kindergarten pal Camilla Zanetti, whose dad, Maurizio, a
professor of medicine at UCSD, is developing a universal vaccine against cancer.
Cool. The process, which targets an enzyme called telomerase--important in aging
but out of control in the ageless cancer cell--was FDA-approved for Phase I
clinical trials last year and is headed for Phase II, perhaps in volunteers with
prostate cancer, a leading killer of "dinosaur dads" like Maurizio and me.
Zanetti, who worked with Jonas Salk, has set up a company around the technology,
known as transgenic lymphocyte immunization.

   "It would be nice see your daughter become a grandmother," he says in his
soft Venetian accent.

   A few weeks later, Rooney calls. She is very excited. She's solved something
big. Two years of work, a large team of scientists under her direction. "It's
just so wonderful to figure out what nobody else has!" What is it? I ask. What's
the implication? Pause. "Well, I guess that's proprietary." For cures? For
drugs? SGX Pharmaceuticals targets a range of cancers, and maybe much more I
don't know about. "Yes! All that!" she says.

   "Do we have to talk about immortality? Why can't we talk about immorality?"
Houghten jokes on my next visit. "What would you do to live longer? Would you
give up fatty foods, lose 30% of your body weight, give up sex?"

   Pretty much all the way to the sex part. I believe orgasm clears the
arteries, at least in the middle-aged male.

   Houghten laughs. "But you're probably going to run out of orgasms around age
99, 100."

   I was hoping he had made some progress.

   "Mortality is the basic fear, immortality the need and the desire and the
wish," Houghten begins, rapid-fire, "because death's nasty, and you're rotten
and moldy and bugs are eating you and everybody that's ever been alive is dead,
except the ones alive now. There's this huge fraud on the part of the biomedical
community, Steve. Every single person dies. Nobody comes out of here alive. We
pass a baton of new information from generation to scientific generation in a
grand relay, but--

   "Lots of theories come and go. Free radicals, vitamin E--whoops, too much
screws up your liver. It's like the Woody Allen movie 'Sleeper.' He wakes up 200
years later to find that tobacco makes you live longer and carrots make you die
young. A lot of science du jour. If an expert makes the news, people think
they'd better start eating blueberries or taking that supplement, antioxidants,
drinking red wine--oops, my liver is gone. I'm more amazed as I get older that
we exist at all, physiologically and spiritually, not religiously. It puts me in
a state of awe, the biochemical mechanisms, the subatomic particles, it's so
beyond any nice little fairy tale they told you as a kid. It's so much more
symmetrical, more beautiful, more organized. It just works."

   But expanding life span?

   "Well, it's a pretty simple thing to expand the average person's life span 20
to 30 years. You just say, if you have this gene, this gene, this gene, don't
drink. Or, you have a predisposition to diabetes or pancreatic cancer. Very
soon, we'll be able to test your DNA and cull out the life-threatening genes.
They can do it in animals. Then, instead of getting cancer in your 50s, you
might make it to your 90s." He laughs. "The diagnostic component of longevity is
coming to the forefront. If you could be painted in a body wash that would make
every speck of skin cancer glow, you could zap it all. Diagnostics is flowing
into therapeutics, and therapeutics will be individualized. Vioxx is a great
drug, but if you are that tiny outrider who can't handle it, you're dead--yet
your brother can take it. When stem cells and organ culture really come online,
we will be able to grow the part of your body that we know from DNA testing,
perhaps at birth, is going to blow up in 50 years. It's your liver, your cells,
no rejection, boom, and you're OK. Or, who knows, maybe you'll be dysfunctional,
like an old car with a new water pump. We'll see."

   Houghten mentions a friend who has developed an inexpensive mobile test for
free-fatty acids: a prick of your thumb and the tech will know whether you've
had a heart attack or bad Chinese food, no need to be brought to the ER in an
ambulance or even to see a full MD. As the arteries constrict, unbound
free-fatty acids are released, almost before you clutch your chest. After
genomics and proteomics--the analysis of protein diversity, structure and
function--will come metabolomics, the ability to measure all the metabolites the
body uses and generates, in real time. During a down-tick in biotech in 2002,
few believed in Houghten's inventor friend, but the test was eventually licensed
to big pharma.

   "You seem bothered today, Steve. This death thing getting to you?"

   I hate it when these hard-science guys stray into social science territory.
"I've taken a childish way out," I admit, "and immersed myself in the concept of
immortality, intellectualization as a defense against death. So what?"

   Foggy dawn. I pedal my bike up the Mesa, past the Scripps Birch Aquarium,
where male sea horses incubate their young in body pouches, to the UCSD
Biological Sciences 2005 Dean's Symposium, "RNA: Beyond the Central Dogma."

   This year's symposium honors Sydney Brenner, who, his bio states,
"established the existence of messenger RNA and demonstrated how the order of
amino acids in proteins is determined. He also conducted pioneering work with
the roundworm, a model organism now widely used to study genetics. His research
with \o7Caenorhabditis elegans\f7 garnered insights into aging, nerve cell
function and controlled cell death, or apoptosis. He was awarded the Nobel Prize
in 2002." The South African \o7enfant terrible\f7, born to\o7 \f7impoverished
parents, had learned to read at age 4 from the newspapers used to cover the
breakfast table. Not too long after, he fell in with the American James Watson
and the Brit Francis Crick, who even more famously plotted out the shape of the
double helix in the early 1950s.

   Sometimes it's best not to know whom you're dealing with. The talks at the
symposium are, at times, as far above my head as Houghten's heaven, yet I find
myself seated at lunch beside Brenner and Sidney Altman, a Nobel winner from
Yale, who all too easily surmises that I had been an English major.

   "The way to live longer is not to eat so much," says the nearly octogenarian
Brenner, starting on a turkey sandwich, "because all the proteins and genes
involved in aging are the same ones involved in the regulation of sugar
metabolism. I know someone who has actually done this on himself, a professor at
Caltech," he says to Altman. "He's lost about 60 pounds by restricting his
sugar." Brenner chews, shrugs. "Unfortunately, I think the machinery just goes
to pot. It's like a television or a motorcar, lots of parts to age, and there
are no keys."

   Brenner is a crusty delight, that rare gene sequencer with a flair for
amusing insights: "DNA makes RNA and RNA makes protein and protein
makes--money." In the 1970s, he was the scientific advisor to Victor Rothschild
and David Leathers, among the original bankrollers of biotech, helping to form
companies such as Genzyme, which bridged the gap between plasma and medical
devices and gene therapy, and also Amgen, both multibillion-dollar corporations
today in terms of market capitalization.

   Will the next 40 years of science bring extreme life extension?

   "Probably not," replies Brenner. "We've extended it pretty well, but then
people will find other things to die of. I think you could extend it today
simply by getting people to look after their bodies.... They think the drug
industry will come along and save them with a pill at the end. There seems to be
a complete fascination in this country with immortality, and I think the
epicenter is California. But it's going to be hard to fix the problem. It may
just be really impossible. One thing you learn from science is that some things
just can't be done"--he pronounces it \o7cawn't\f7, in his lilting South African
accent--"and you just have to accept that. Part of the culture of America in
general is the frontier, and we will cross the frontier, but we may have come to
an end to it."

   I can't tell if Altman is rolling his eyes or wants to talk.

   "What do you think?" I ask him. "Are Americans inclined to think anything can
be beaten, even death?"

   "No," he says.

   There's some dead air here. Brenner and I wait for him to elaborate. But
Altman is as terse as his lecture, the title of which was "RNase P." Period.

   "There is an old joke," Altman says. "You can live a longer life, but it sure
as hell is going to be boring."

   "I mean," says Brenner, "stay with the life span you've got. That's what I
think!" And he launches into a discussion of "social therapeutics," how to
extend human life by conquering influenza, tuberculosis, "the man-created
disease, addiction," AIDS, cholera, dysentery. "The biggest change in life span
was one great act of public health," he says, "when we learned to separate the
water we drank from the water we excreted in."

   "I don't want to achieve immortality through my work. I want to achieve it
through not dying," Woody Allen once said. It's a lot for this senescent English
major to wrap his fears around. I walk to Jose's Courtroom, probably the last
establishment in La Jolla that doesn't offer chocolate martinis, and enlist the
help of two Dutch beers. The waitress (age 31) is trying to induce Chano, the
swamper (age 56), to dance to "One Fine Day," blasting over the speakers.

   "What's the matter, Chano, doesn't your wife like to dance?"

   "You don't know the half of it," Chano sighs. "She used to love to dance, and
now she says \o7e\f7\o7l tiempo pasa y se lleva todo con el y nunca regresa.\f7"

   I ask what that means.

   "Time goes by and it takes everything with it, and it never returns," he
translates.

   "I tell my kids," says Houghten, who has two grown children and three younger
ones, " 'Put me in the ground and plant a seed on top of my grave.' " Once his
body is reduced to a pencil point of neutrons, protons and electrons--"all there
is," he says--then, well, matter is neither created nor destroyed, we are but
the dust of stars, and all that jazz. Why do we die? We don't. We age unto
death.

   Houghten invites me to a ballgame, Padres vs. Marlins, with his wife, Pam,
who works with kindergarten children. Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular
Studies has a block of seats in the Toyota Terrace overlooking first base. On
the drive down La Jolla Scenic, Houghten wants to know who's the most impressive
person I've talked to. I hedge, assuming this is a mirror-mirror-on-the-wall
question. But what Houghten wants to know, I realize, is something deeper,
sadder, more than career. Is somebody working on something he doesn't know
about, has someone found some answers through good science or blind luck, a clue
that will take us beyond the personal "extermination" point, as Fred Gage so
nicely put it? If we could hold out for 30 more years, who knows what others
might discover to take us beyond--to escape velocity, they call it in rocket
science. Houghten, just a fan on his way to a ballgame, wants to know because,
well, death may or may not be a joke, but his clock is ticking.

   It's "Trevor Time." We arrive late to the game. Soon it's the 7th inning, and
43,000 fans jump to their feet, filling Qualcomm Stadium with a mass of waving
white flags--or, rather, twirling Trevor Time T-shirts. The first Padres pitcher
is tiring. Trevor Hoffman, appropriately known as "The Closer," takes the mound.

   I ask Houghten what an amyloid is. "They did an autopsy on a 113-year-old
woman in Los Angeles, oldest autopsy ever done, nothing wrong with her, 'Cause
of death: Old age.' Her brain was full of amyloids."

   "It's a protein--" Houghten is twirling his Trevor Time T-shirt as goofily as
everybody else. "Get too much of it--"

   "But it's not a problem when we're young?"

   "No. It just mucks things up over time, one sequence of molecules bonds to
another, and another, until it clogs the cell, can't get rid of it, makes old
people tired."

   Hoffman fires one-two-three pitches. Three strikes, the batter is out. Next
batter gets four, he's out. Third batter, two strikes, then a pop-up. Trevor
Time! A surgical strike. It's all over for the Marlins.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dr. Richard Houghten of the Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular
Studies says his driving forces are "mortality, time, the ticking clock."
PHOTOGRAPHER: Photograph by ALLEN J. SCHABEN \o7Los Angeles Times \f7

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2006


                              766 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                            Plain Dealer (Cleveland)

                            January 20, 2006 Friday
                          Final Edition; All Editions

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 465 words

HEADLINE: Research paying off for Ohio universities

BYLINE: Jennifer González, Plain Dealer Reporter

BODY:

   The amount of research and development money at Ohio colleges continues to
grow, according to a report by the Ohio Board of Regents.

   Total research spending by Ohio universities increased from $903 million in
1998 to $1.25 billion in 2003.

   That translates into an increased knowledge base and direct stimulus to
Ohio's economy.

   That's because the bulk of the money comes from outside the state, says
Darrell Glenn, director of performance reporting and analysis at the Board of
Regents.

   But even more important is the long-term effect that research dollars can
have in Ohio when innovative ideas turn into commercial products.

   "We are in a knowledge economy," Glenn said.

   "We need more knowledge to better compete in the new economy."

   In 2003, Ohio State University, the University of Cincinnati and Case Western
Reserve University were the top three universities in the state for bringing in
research dollars. OSU is ranked among the top 10 U.S. public universities in
total research expenditures and 15th among all institutions, public or private.

   OSU received $553 million in research awards in 2005, with most of the money
coming from the National Institutes of Health.

   Research projects there include new therapies for the most common form of
leukemia and the creation of more environmentally friendly manufactured goods
from Ohio farm products.

   Case is using its research dollars to find ways of preventing the
transmission of HIV and using gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis.

   Ohio is also making progress in converting research into economic development
through patents, inventions, licenses and the formation of companies. In 2004,
Ohio universities filed 399 U.S. patent applications, and 121 were issued. From
2001 to 2004, patent applications increased by 48 percent and patents issued
increased by 13 percent.

   Also encouraging is the fact that 69 start-up companies were formed between
2001 and 2004 as a result of university research activity.

   Other highlights in the regents' annual college performance report:

   Thirty-eight percent of all first-year students in 2004 took at least one
math or English remedial course.

   Undergraduate tuition this school year averages $7,941 at public, four-year
universities, 45 percent higher than the national average.

   The average tuition at two-year public colleges is $3,328, which is 52
percent higher than the national average.

   Undergraduate enrollment represents the same general racial and ethnic
composition as the state's college-age population.

   Thirty-one percent of undergraduates at public and private institutions are
25 and older, 57 percent are women, and 33 percent attend part time.

   The full performance report is available at
www.regents.state.oh.us/perfrpt/2005index.html.

   To reach this Plain Dealer reporter: jgonzalez@plaind.com, 216-999-4327

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2006


                              767 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                         Copyright 2006 The Denver Post
                              All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                           January 18, 2006 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-04

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: Cutting-edge alternatives to steroids helping cutting horses CSU's
therapies using stem cells are getting injured equine athletes back on their
hooves.

BYLINE: Katy Human Denver Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   In another era, Classical CD would be out in pasture by now, big with foal.

   Instead, the cutting horse from Longmont, who has earned her owners nearly
$250,000, competed again this week at the National Western Stock Show & Rodeo,
expertly cutting a cow away from its herd - dancing confidently from side to
side to keep the animal separate.

   While Classical CD looks spry, she suffers from "kissing spine" - a condition
characterized by "bone-on-bone pain" and inflammation, said owner Gail Holmes.

   Without newfangled treatments from Colorado State University, Holmes said,
"she would just hurt too bad."

   Increasingly, the owners of equine athletes are seeking high-tech
alternatives to the steroid injections, which help many horses and often become
ineffective over time.

   "Ultimately, most of these horses will be treated with gene therapy,
stem-cell therapy in my opinion," said CSU veterinarian Wayne McIlwraith,
director of CSU's Gail Holmes Equine Orthopedic Research Center.

   Holmes and her husband have contributed more than $1 million to the research
center.

   Like human athletes, competitive horses are vulnerable to joint injuries,
especially tendon and cartilage damage, McIlwraith said.

   CSU researchers are using new techniques to reduce the inflammation
associated with injury, he said, and even repair torn cartilage and tendons,
which is notoriously difficult in horses.

   Stem cells show promise.

   CSU researchers, in collaboration with a team from California, are extracting
stem cells from a horse's own fat, building them up in petri dishes and
injecting them in injured joints.

   The stem cells migrate to injury sites, where they set about healing tendon
tears or chipped cartilage, McIlwraith said.

   CSU researchers have used the technique on several dozen horses so far, he
said.

   On occasion, the stem-cell treatment appears to trigger the horse's own
immune system, making the animal sick, and researchers are studying how to
prevent that.

   McIlwraith and his colleagues are also tapping into the cellular series of
events that cause harm- ful inflammation after an injury.

   Interleukin-1 plays a primary role in immune responses. "We consider it to be
the worst mediator in inflammation disease because it's the head of cascade in
osteoarthritis, which results in destruction of cartilage," McIlwraith said.

   So the scientists figured out how to increase a horse's own production of
chemicals that block interleukin-1.

   Today's version of the treatment involves incubating some of the horse's
cells in an environment that encourages them to produce the helpful chemicals.

   Soon, the treatment may involve putting altered genetic material back into
the joint to fight damage more effectively.

   Why bother using such sophisticated treatments on horses?

   The cost of training a cutting horse is so high that an expert competitor can
be valued at $250,000, said Meredith Lyons of the Western States Cutting Horse
Association.

   "The money in cutting horses ... is second only to the money spent in
racing," she said.

   Staff writer Katy Human can be reached at 303-820-1910 or
khuman@denverpost.com.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2006


                              768 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2006 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               The Baltimore Sun

                            January 17, 2006 Tuesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 809 words

HEADLINE: Hold scientists accountable

BYLINE: RICHARD HAYES

BODY:

   So now it's confirmed that South Korean stem cell king Hwang Woo Suk had been
lying all along - not just about the illicit manner in which the women's eggs
used in his experiments were obtained, but about his major claim to have
successfully created clonal human embryos in the first place. He lied to the
news media, the public, his government and patients hoping for cures.

   I heard Mr. Hwang speak just over a year ago at a forum at the United
Nations. He was lauded by the scientists present as the Galileo of stem cell
research. When a reporter asked about rumors that the eggs used in his
experiments had been obtained under questionable circumstances, he denied it.
None of the other scientists present voiced the least concern.

   If we are to learn the most important lessons from this sorry episode, we
need to be aware of the broader context.

   Mr. Hwang is not the first scientist to have lied or engaged in ethically
questionable behavior concerning their experiments with human genes, stem cells
or embryos. The new genetic technologies are among the most powerful and
consequential ever developed. Scientists holding patent rights to successful
genetic techniques stand to become millionaires many times over. If ever there
was an occasion to remind ourselves of Lord Acton's dictum that power corrupts,
this is it.

   In 1998, New York University researcher Jamie Grifo created embryos
containing genes from three parents and implanted them in infertile women in a
controversial procedure to help them have children. The women involved in the
experiment had not been fully informed of the risks to the fetuses they were
carrying. The Food and Drug Administration, to its credit, promptly shut down
the operation.

   In 1999, University of Pennsylvania gene therapy scientist James Wilson
misled Jesse Gelsinger, 18, and his parents about the risks inherent in an
experiment that Mr. Gelsinger had volunteered for and about the financial stake
that Mr. Wilson had in its success. The experiment failed, and Mr. Gelsinger
died.

   In 2001, Advanced Cell Technologies (ACT), a Massachusetts stem cell firm,
announced that it had cloned an endangered species of Asian ox. The procedure
was opposed by conservation groups working to save endangered species and was
widely regarded as a publicity stunt, perhaps intended to bolster the confidence
of ACT's investors. ACT had not told its own ethics committee about the
experiment, and a leading member resigned in protest. The ox died two days after
birth.

   In 2004, California voters approved a $3 billion stem cell research program.
The ballot measure was written and financed by a small group of wealthy
Californians, including stem cell scientists, venture capitalists and biotech
entrepreneurs.

   It entrusted control of the money to a new state agency dominated by the very
institutions that stand to receive the research grants. It exempted the agency's
most important policy committees from California's open meetings and
conflict-of-interest laws.

   It failed to guarantee the safety and health of women who provide eggs for
cloning research. It contained no provisions to ensure that intellectual
property arrangements would benefit the people of California. And late last
year, it was revealed that real estate millionaire Robert Klein, the prime
author and funder of the initiative and the current chairman of the program,
knowingly misrepresented its likely full cost to California voters by perhaps $1
billion.

   What's going on here is both a very old story and a very new one. The old
story is the drive for fame, fortune and power and the willingness of some
people - in this case, scientists and biotech entrepreneurs - to put their
personal drives and ambitions above the common good.

   The new story is the immensity of what is at stake. The new human genetic
technologies are giving scientists the power to change the nature of human life
forever. They are being developed at breakneck speed. Neither public
understanding nor governmental oversight has been able to keep up. Scientists
and biotech corporations are playing to our deepest desires and fears in their
effort to secure the commanding heights of the technology, the law and the
market.

   Stem cell research should go forward, but we can't entrust its leadership to
the scientists and business interests now running the show. We need laws and
treaties allowing stem cell research to proceed at a reasonable pace, subject to
clearly demarcated ethical limits. We need oversight bodies representing all
stakeholders.

   Most of all, we need social and political leaders who can move beyond the
polarized politics of the moment and forge the broad coalitions necessary if
such policies are to be developed and adopted.

   Richard Hayes is executive director of the Center for Genetics and Society in
Oakland, Calif. His e-mail is rhayes@genetics-and-society.org.

GRAPHIC: Photo(s)
 South Korean researcher Hwang Woo Suk bows in apology Thursday in Seoul after
his claims of human stem cell breakthroughs were confirmed to be fraudulent. Mr.
Hwang blamed the scandal on three junior researchers.
 BLOOMBERG NEWS

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                              769 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: Gene Increases Diabetes Risk, Scientists Find

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Scientists have discovered a variant gene that leads to a sizable extra risk
of Type 2 diabetes and is carried by more than a third of the American
population.

     The finding is being reported today in the journal Nature Genetics by
researchers at Decode Genetics, a company in Reykjavik, Iceland, that
specializes in finding the genetic roots of human diseases. Decode Genetics
first found the variant gene -- one of many different versions that exist in the
human population -- in Icelanders and has now confirmed the finding in a Danish
and an American population.

   An immediate practical consequence of the discovery, said Decode's chief
executive, Kari Stefansson, would be to develop a diagnostic test to identify
people who carry the variant gene. If people knew of their extra risk, they
would have an incentive to stay thin and exercise, he said.

     Diabetes, a disease in which damaging amounts of sugar build up in the
blood, with risk of blindness and loss of limbs, affects 20.8 million Americans,
according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. An estimated
800,000 adult New Yorkers -- more than one in every eight -- now have diabetes,
and city health officials have expressed concern about its growing incidence.

     Type 2 diabetes, the predominant form, is typically diagnosed in adults and
adolescents, though it is creeping into younger age groups. The Type 2 kind
accounts for up to 95 percent of all diagnosed cases, according to the centers.

     Because people carry two copies of every gene, one inherited from each
parent, the risk conferred by the new gene depends on whether one or two copies
of it have been inherited. The estimated 38 percent of Americans who have
inherited a single copy have a 45 percent greater risk of Type 2 than do
unaffected members of the population. The estimated 7 percent who carry two
copies are 141 percent more likely to develop the disease, according to the
Decode researchers, who were led by Struan F. A. Grant.

     What scientists call the ''population-attributable risk'' of the new
variant is 21 percent, which means that if all the variant genes in the
population were erased, so would be 21 percent of diabetes cases.

     The finding is ''a beautiful piece of work and as convincing as any initial
publication could be,'' said David Altshuler, a medical geneticist at
Massachusetts General Hospital, who has in the past taken issue with certain
aspects of Decode's claims.

     ''In terms of the epidemiological risk of diabetes, this is by far the
biggest finding to date,'' he said, just after hearing a lecture on the finding
by Augustine Kong, Decode's chief statistician. Diabetes is thought to be caused
by a variety of different genes, each conferring a risk for the disease. Because
most of the variants exert a minor effect, they are hard to detect, and many
claims to have found diabetes-causing genes have turned out to be unfounded.

     ''This has turned out to be the disease that has been the most difficult
for geneticists to crack, probably because of the large environmental
contribution,'' Dr. Stefansson said.

     The new variant identified by Decode was of a somewhat obscure gene that
had not been suspected of having any involvement in diabetes. The gene,
designated TCF7L2, is one that controls the activity of other genes. Its role
may include setting the level of a hormone that acts along with insulin to
control blood sugar levels.

     Discovery of the TCF7L2 gene could be therapeutically helpful, Dr.
Stefansson said, because it identified a major biochemical chain reaction or
pathway through which the disease developed. Several different genes, and their
protein products, are involved in the pathway that sets the level of the
companion hormone. Any of these genes and proteins are potential targets for new
drugs.

     Dr. Altshuler, of Massachusetts General, agreed. ''Being directed down that
pathway is very helpful,'' he said, though he added that the process of
developing better treatments might take a decade or two.

     While Type 2 diabetes is more common in African-Americans, Latinos,
American Indians, and Asian-Americans, Dr. Stefansson said more studies were
needed to see whether there were significant differences in the variant gene's
distribution among races.

     He said he could not yet say if the genetic variant was more common in
African-Americans and so might explain their greater burden of Type 2 diabetes.
But he noted that the variant was ancient, having arisen before the dispersal of
modern humans from Africa some 50,000 years ago, and would probably be found to
exist to varying degrees in all populations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                              770 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 The Washington Post

                              The Washington Post

                            January 16, 2006 Monday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: Financial; D10

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: RECENT DEALS

BODY:

   EMC Corp., a Massachusetts-based information management and storage company,
acquired Internosis Inc., a Greenbelt-based IT services firm. Terms were not
disclosed.

    E.magination Network LLC of Baltimore acquired Hawk Technical Solutions LLC,
an Ellicott City-based provider of technical integration services to the defense
industry. Terms were not disclosed.

    Storecast Holdings Inc., a provider of merchandising services to major food
and drug retailers and manufacturers, acquired the Archway Merchandising
Services business from Arlington-based AHL Services Inc. Terms were not
disclosed.

   ABS Capital Partners of Baltimore teamed with Norwest Equity Partners to
finance a management-led buyout of Fairfield Language Technologies, the
Harrisonburg, Va., company that sells language learning software under the name
Rosetta Stone. Terms were not disclosed.

    Virxsys Corp., a Gaithersburg gene therapy developer, sold $24.1 million in
Series F preferred stock and Series G warrants to 177 investors, part of a $30
million commitment received from a group of wealthy and institutional investors
to fund HIV-AIDS drug trials.

    Carlyle Europe Technology Partners LP,  a European growth equity and venture
capital fund sponsored by Washington's Carlyle Group, has raised $83.7 million
of its $242 million goal, according to SEC filings. Investors in the fund
include the Agricultural Bank of Greece and the Canadian pension fund Caisse de
Depot et Placement du Quebec.

    LaborLogix Inc., a McLean business software company, sold $1.9 million of
Series A preferred stock to three investors, according to an SEC filing.

   VCampus Corp. of Reston, an online education company, completed the private
sale of $2.3 million of Series A-1 preferred stock to seven investors. Oberon
Securities LLC of New York sold the shares for VCampus. The sale was necessary
to raise enough capital to keep VCampus listed on the Nasdaq stock market.

   Compiled by Terence O'Hara and Bloomberg News.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2006


                              771 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                     Copyright 2006 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                            January 15, 2006 Sunday
                                THIRDeco EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. L1

LENGTH: 887 words

HEADLINE: GUIDANT BATTLE SIGNALS ANOTHER BRISK YEAR FOR BIOTECH MERGERS

BYLINE:  BY ROBERT GAVIN, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Strong profits, low interest rates, and hordes of cash have sparked a wave of
mergers that underlie Boston Scientific's battle to buy a rival medical device
maker.

   Merger and acquisitions last year topped $1 trillion nationally, the most
since 2000, and $170 billion in New England, the most since 1998, according to
Thomson Financial. This year, US mergers are off to one of the fastest starts
ever, with $46 billion in deals announced in the first 11 days, according to
Thomson.

   In Massachusetts, where mergers have swept away some the state's biggest
corporations, specialists expect another year of brisk activity, according to
the Association for Corporate Growth, a Chicago trade group. In a recent survey
of Bay State deal makers, more than two-thirds predicted mergers to increase
again this year.

   Although takeovers, such as the Bank of America Corp.'s absorption of
FleetBoston Financial Corp. or Procter & Gamble Co.'s acquisition of Gillette
Co., can mean job losses, they can also boost the Massachusetts economy and not
only if the buyer is local, analysts aid.

   In emerging, capital-intensive industries such as biotechnology, acquisition
can pump much-needed money into research and development and keep companies
alive. And lately, with big pharmaceutical companies flush with cash, but
struggling to find new drugs, acquiring all or part of promising biotech
companies has become an attractive strategy.

   Specialists expect life sciences to remain among the hottest merger sectors.
Last week Boston Scientific of Natick raised its bid to $26 billion to buy
Guidant Corp. of Indianapolis. Nationally, merger activity in this sector rose
42 percent in 2005, according to Thomson.

   "Life sciences is a key driver of job growth in Massachusetts, but you still
have a lot of these biotechnology companies starved for capital," said Damon
Barglow, an analyst at Eastern Investment Advisors, a unit of Eastern Bank in
Boston. "So, where you have pharma willing to invest, whether by acquisition or
partnerships, it's a good thing for these companies, and ultimately, a good
thing for the Massachusetts economy."

   That increased interest in biotech was illustrated last week by reports of an
emerging battle for Serono SA, a Swiss firm with its US headquarters in Rockland
. Both Novartis AG of Basel, Switzerland, and GlaxoSmithKline PLC of London are
considering bids for Serono, which has a market value of about $13 billion,
Bloomberg News reported.

   Last year, British firm Shire Pharmaceuticals Group PLC acquired Cambridge
biotech Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., while Schering-Plough Corp. of Kenilworth,
N.J., bought another Cambridge biotech, NeoGenesis Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Pharmaceutical companies have also formed partnerships with other Massachusetts
firms, buying minority stakes and underwriting research.

   For example, Novartis last fall agreed to buy about 20 percent of Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. of Cambridge and spend up to $700 million to develop drugs
based on Alnylam's technology, which shuts down harmful genes. The deal, said
Alnylam president John Maraganore, "provides critical mass for the development
of a whole new class of drugs and centers these activities in Cambridge."

   The increase in mergers is in part a product of the nation's economic
expansion, which has meant solid sales growth for corporations, analysts said.
In addition, corporations have enjoyed stronger worker productivity, meaning
leaner workforces and lower labor costs. The result: big profits.

   "It's all gone right to businesses' bottom line," said Mark Zandi, chief
economist at Moody's Economy.com in West Chester, Pa. "Businesses now have lots
of cash on their balance sheet that they need to put to work."

   Aggregate profits of the nation's 500 biggest publicly traded companies have
grown at a double-digit rates in each of the past 11 quarters, while cash
reserves have risen 16 percent to $772 billion since 2003, according to Thomson.

   Meanwhile, a lackluster stock market is not only making acquisitions
affordable but also creating pressure on executives to boost share prices by
buying and selling, analysts said.

   Mergers also allow companies to quickly acquire technologies, particularly
important in sectors such as life sciences.

   Boston Scientific's aggressive efforts to outbid Johnson & Johnson for
Guidant, for example, have been driven by a need for new products to augment
slowing sales of the Natick company's blockbuster Taxus stent.

   Guidant makes implantable cardiac defibrillators, electric devices used to
prevent the heart from stopping suddenly.

   Analysts say such products fit well with Boston Scientific's stents, which
prevent heart attacks by keeping arteries open after surgery.

   Bill Whelan, a partner in the biotechnology group at the Boston law firm
Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky and Popeo PC, said pharmaceutical companies
also need new products.

   He expects that to further boost investment in biotechnology firms, sometimes
by outright acquisition, but more often by forming research partnerships and
buying minority stakes.

   "They're like other big public companies," Whelan said. "They need to drive
revenues and market value, and they're all under pressure to find the next big
thing."

   Robert Gavin can be reached at rgavin@globe.com.

   SIDEBAR:

   MERGER SURGE

   PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA.

GRAPHIC: CHART

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2006


                              772 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                           January 14, 2006 Saturday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: OBITUARY; Pg. B-4

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: DR. IRA B. BLACK;
DIED JAN. 10, 2006;
LEADER IN NEW JERSEY STEM CELL EFFORT

BYLINE: Jeremy Pearce, The New York Times

BODY:

   Dr. Ira B. Black, a neuroscientist and brain researcher who became an early
advocate for stem-cell research and a founder of the Stem Cell Institute of New
Jersey, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Philadelphia. He was 64.

   The cause was an infection related to a tumor, his family said.

   Dr. Black argued forcefully that medicine would gain from laboratory research
involving stem cells taken from tissue and human embryos. He said the cells
derived from embryos, while controversial, could constitute "the gold standard"
in repairing damaged nerve cells and developing therapies to treat Alzheimer's
disease, cancer and other ailments.

   When, in 2004, New Jersey became the second state, after California, to adopt
legislation approving stem-cell research, Dr. Black was appointed the first
director of the state-financed Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey. He was also
chairman of the department of neuroscience and cell biology at the University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.

   Dr. Black's own research involved investigations of neurons and brain
function as well as the origins of neurons, the nerve cells found throughout the
body. In 2000, Dr. Black and others reported that they had succeeded in forming
cells similar to neurons from stem cells taken from the bone marrow of humans
and rats. The experiment did not use cells derived from embryos, whose
destruction in other types of stem cell research has angered abortion opponents.

   The scientists added an antioxidant and watched the cells change into cells
with the appearance and properties of neurons. Dr. Black recalled the discovery:
"Over the course literally of minutes, the cells converted from rather
pedestrian, flat, undistinguished stem cells into typical neuron-looking cells."

   "We were disbelieving," he added.

   Perry B. Molinoff, vice provost for research at the University of
Pennsylvania, said that Dr. Black's results, published in The Journal of
Neuroscience Research, were "an incredible achievement," in part because they
hinted at the mechanism that allows stem cells to differentiate into cells
intended for the brain, blood, liver and other organs.

   Mr. Molinoff continued, "It was a finding of enormous importance because it
spoke to a core question of Ira Black's work, which is uncovering the potential
to treat diseases for which there are at present no therapies."

   Dr. Black and others later transplanted the newly formed cells into the
spinal cords and brains of laboratory rats and found that both the cells and the
rats survived without ill effects.

   The finding underscored his argument that stem cells could possibly act as a
vehicle to introduce gene therapy or be employed to rally the body's existing
stem cells.

   As an administrator, Dr. Black expressed impatience with the scarcity of
public financing for stem-cell research and the seeming cross-purposes of
federal and state legislation intended to control or encourage it. This month,
New Jersey legislators decided to postpone proposals that would have provided
about $600 million in state sponsorship for stem cell research.

   "We hope we'll get patients out of bed and out of wheelchairs," he said in an
interview in July, "and that's one of the reasons it's particularly frustrating
to have a federal stance that inhibits this progress."

   Ira Barrie Black was born in the Bronx, N.Y. He attended the Bronx High
School of Science and earned an undergraduate degree from Columbia. In 1965, he
received his medical degree from Harvard.

   From 1975 to 1990, Dr. Black was director of the division of developmental
neurology at Cornell. He was the author of "The Changing Brain: Alzheimer's
Disease and Advances in Neuroscience" (2002) and "Information in the Brain: A
Molecular Perspective" (1991).

   He was president of the Society for Neuroscience in 1992.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                              773 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                            January 13, 2006 Friday
                                 THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO; Pg. C7

LENGTH: 343 words

HEADLINE: Matt Lindsey, junior at Summit High

BYLINE: BY MICHELLE B. MUELLER

BODY:

   What are you most proud of? "Having the opportunity to get into my field of
interest (medicine) this early and having two wonderful scientists alongside
helping me along the way."

   What's the most important lesson you've learned in high school? "To not
follow the crowd. To be true to yourself."

   If you could spend an hour with anybody in the world, whom would you choose?
My cousin, Janet Varner. She really sees me for who I am. She treats me like an
adult."

   What is the best book you've read? "Tuesdays with Morrie," by Mitch Albom

   At age 16, Matt already is getting a jump on a career in medicine. Every
Wednesday, he leaves his traditional classes at Rockwood Summit High School and
heads to a laboratory at Siteman Cancer Center to prepare T-cells with special
suicide genes to be used for clinical trials with leukemia patients this spring.

   As part of the authentic science research class, Matt is working alongside
doctors learning about T-cell suicide gene therapy and conducting lab work to
support his research. Next month Matt plans to submit a professional oncology
article that summarizes his lab work and research as part of the Greater St.
Louis Science Fair. He'll continue his work past the science fair to complete
the three-year course requirements. He's hoping the outcome of his lab work will
prove successful during clinical trials by killing cancer cells, helping
leukemia patients to live longer.

   Matt's project with Dr. Gerhard Bauer and John Walker at Siteman have
convinced him to pursue a career in pediatric oncology. After college, he hopes
to earn M.D. and doctorate degrees so he can split his time between treating
patients and conducting research.

   When he's not in the lab, Matt enjoys extracurricular activities at school.
He is vice president of Student Council, plays the trumpet in the marching band,
is a member of the Renaissance program, sings in the school's Chamber Choir and
performs in school plays.

   Academically, Matt maintains about a 3.6 grade-point average. He lives in
Fenton with his parents, Timothy and Toni Lindsey.

NOTES:  SPOTLIGHT ON EDUCATION | ROCKWOOD SCHOOL DISTRICT St. Louis County

GRAPHIC: PHOTO
 PHOTO - Matt

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2006


                              774 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: Dr. Ira B. Black, 64, Leader In New Jersey Stem Cell Effort

BYLINE: By JEREMY PEARCE

BODY:

   Dr. Ira B. Black, a neuroscientist and brain researcher who became an early
advocate for stem cell research and a founder of the Stem Cell Institute of New
Jersey, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Philadelphia. He was 64.

     The cause was an infection related to a tumor, his family said.

   Dr. Black argued forcefully that medicine would gain from laboratory research
involving stem cells taken from tissue and human embryos. He said the cells
derived from embryos, while controversial, could constitute ''the gold
standard'' in repairing damaged nerve cells and developing therapies to treat
Alzheimer's disease, cancer and other ailments.

     When, in 2004, New Jersey became the second state, after California, to
adopt legislation approving stem cell research, Dr. Black was appointed the
first director of the state-financed Stem Cell Institute of New Jersey. He was
also chairman of the department of neuroscience and cell biology at the
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.

     Dr. Black's own research involved investigations of neurons and brain
function as well as the origins of neurons, the nerve cells found throughout the
body. In 2000, Dr. Black and others reported that they had succeeded in forming
cells similar to neurons from stem cells taken from the bone marrow of humans
and rats. The experiment did not use cells derived from embryos, whose
destruction in other types of stem cell research has angered abortion opponents.

     The scientists added an antioxidant and watched the cells change into cells
with the appearance and properties of neurons. Dr. Black recalled the discovery:
''Over the course literally of minutes, the cells converted from rather
pedestrian, flat, undistinguished stem cells into typical neuron-looking
cells.'' ''We were disbelieving,'' he added.

     Perry B. Molinoff, vice provost for research at the University of
Pennsylvania, said that Dr. Black's results, published in The Journal of
Neuroscience Research, were ''an incredible achievement,'' in part because they
hinted at the mechanism that allows stem cells to differentiate into cells
intended for the brain, blood, liver and other organs.

     Dr. Molinoff continued, ''It was a finding of enormous importance because
it spoke to a core question of Ira Black's work, which is uncovering the
potential to treat diseases for which there are at present no therapies.''

     Dr. Black and others later transplanted the newly formed cells into the
spinal cords and brains of laboratory rats and found that both the cells and the
rats survived without ill effects.

     The finding underscored his argument that stem cells could possibly act as
a vehicle to introduce gene therapy or be employed to rally the body's existing
stem cells.

     As an administrator, Dr. Black expressed impatience with the scarcity of
public financing for stem cell research and the seeming cross-purposes of
federal and state legislation intended to control or encourage it. This month,
New Jersey legislators decided to postpone proposals that would have provided
about $600 million in state sponsorship for stem cell research.

     ''We hope we'll get patients out of bed and out of wheelchairs,'' he said
in an interview in July, ''and that's one of the reasons it's particularly
frustrating to have a federal stance that inhibits this progress.''

     Ira Barrie Black was born in the Bronx. He attended the Bronx High School
of Science and earned an undergraduate degree from Columbia. In 1965, he
received his medical degree from Harvard.

     From 1975 to 1990, Dr. Black was director of the division of developmental
neurology at Cornell. He was the author of ''The Changing Brain: Alzheimer's
Disease and Advances in Neuroscience'' (2002) and ''Information in the Brain: A
Molecular Perspective'' (1991).

     He was president of the Society for Neuroscience in 1992.

     Dr. Black's marriage to Janet Linquist Black ended in divorce in 1999. He
lived in Skillman, N.J., and Andes, N.Y.

     He is also survived by a son, Reed, and by his fiancee, Janet Davis, both
of Skillman.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Ira B. Black in July at the University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey. He led its department of neuroscience and cell biology.
(Photo by Mary DiBiase Blaich for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2006


                              775 of 783 DOCUMENTS


            Copyright 2006 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                              All Rights Reserved
                           Christian Science Monitor

                          January 11, 2006, Wednesday

SECTION: WORLD; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 876 words

HEADLINE: What's next for Korea's stem-cell research?

BYLINE: Donald Kirk Correspondent of The Christian Science Monitor

DATELINE: SEOUL

HIGHLIGHT:

   A report concludes cloning results were faked, but says scandal could
strengthen research in long term.

BODY:

   Exposure of one of history's greatest medical hoaxes may, in the end, be what
Korea needs to emerge as a scientific power.

   A month-long investigation suggested just that in a report released Tuesday,
which saw the scandal as a "stepping stone for better execution and scientific
research" that could even "contribute to scientific advancement in this
country." Moreover, it added, "The young scientists who courageously pointed out
the fallacy and precipitated the initiation of this investigation are our hope
for the future."

   Around the campus of Seoul National University (SNU), home to now discredited
stem-cell researcher Hwang Woo-Suk, professors and researchers share that
philosophical approach. The episode, many say, may mark a turning point in
Korea's drive for global recognition as more than just a commercial or economic
success.

   "This scandal taught us really a lot," says Kim Sun Young, a molecular
biologist with degrees from Oxford, Harvard, and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. "We basically paid a $50 million price for the lesson," he says in
sardonic reference to the total advanced by the government to finance Mr.
Hwang's laboratory.

   Hwang's team published its initial paper in the journal Science in 2004,
claiming to have cloned the first human stem cell. They published their second
seemingly breakthrough paper last year claiming to have cloned 11 human
stem-cell lines.

   It was after the investigation, spurred by dissident scientists in Hwang's
lab, that another SNU team led by medical professor Chung Myung Hee published
its "final report" denouncing both papers as "fabricated."

   Possibly the only consolation is that the report, largely written by Dr.
Chung, acknowledges that an Afghan hound Snuppy, short for Seoul National
University Puppy, was indeed a "cell clone" of its mother, as Hwang claimed last
year in the journal Nature.

   Mr. Kim, who does research in gene therapy and has founded the university's
first venture company, ViroMed, worries that the government "may slow down on
research in general."

   The government's first response after the final report was to pull out of a
global stem-cell project set up at Seoul National University Hospital for
research on individual patients. Beside abandoning a plan to provide more than
$11 million for the project, the health and welfare ministry says it will look
more closely into subsidies for any research - and will call for revising the
law on bioethics.

   In the end, Kim sees tight ethics control as ensuring a revival in government
support.

   The university "should and will set up an office of scientific integrity,"
says Kim. "Probably all institutions will set up such offices." The result, he
believes, "will upgrade the infrastructure and will have real scientific
impact."

   Analysts agree the level of scientific research in Korea may well improve as
a result of the experience with Hwang, though the pall of national and academic
humiliation may be difficult to overcome.

   "They're trying to keep a stiff upper lip," says David Cyranoski, the
Tokyo-based staff correspondent for Nature. "It's been a horrible day for [the
university.]" But, he adds, "because this process has been so painful, it may
stick more."

   Mr. Cyranoski believes one dividend may be "a willingness to question
authority" - seen as sorely needed to elevate research here. "They have a lot of
really good scientists," he says, "but the level's not high because they focus
on manufacturing."

   In a coffee shop near the veterinary school where Hwang ran his laboratory,
professors talk anonymously about obstacles confronting research and development
here.

   "One problem is a strict policy on supporting research," says a business
school professor. "If the research does not produce results in a certain period,
the funds are withdrawn."

   That fear may have driven Hwang to want to show ever greater results - even
though he knew they were false, some say. "Most of the research is very honest,"
says another professor, "but funding agents put a lot of pressure on
researchers."

   Kim denies, though, that the pressure is such that it would spur a brain
drain of promising young scientists. Although most want to do graduate work
abroad, "all want to come back to Korea," he says. The drawback, he adds, is "we
don't have enough positions" for all of them.

   Kim says, moreover, that training abroad tends to elevate ethics. In his own
faculty, he says, 90 percent of the faculty have studied in the United States
and "have the US standard of integrity."

   Hwang's veterinary college, says Kim, is "more traditional, more
conservative, and more hierarchical," all factors that gave him the power to run
his lab free of restraints from peers or subordinates - and to persuade women
working in the lab to serve as donors, in violation of ethics regarding
stem-cell research.

   Kim does not believe, however, that professors and laboratory chiefs abuse
their authority that easily.

   "We may be more conservative in this country, reflecting our culture," he
says, "but we're changing a lot these days" - at a pace that's likely to quicken
as prosecutors question how Hwang got so much government funding and won such
acclaim before younger colleagues blew the whistle.

   (c) Copyright 2006. The Christian Science Monitor

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006


                              776 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2006 Los Angeles Times
                              All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                             January 9, 2006 Monday
                                  Home Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; Features Desk; Part F; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 2120 words

HEADLINE: SPECIAL FITNESS ISSUE / FASTER, STRONGER, SMARTER;
How much, how soon?;
To shorten the recovery from sports injuries, we may have to speed up the body's
healing process.

BYLINE: Greg Miller, Special to The Times

BODY:

   WHEN Alicia Di Rado Dingsdale tore her hip flexor muscle in a soccer game in
2004, she was determined not to let it hold her back.

   A week later she ran a 5-kilometer race in Arcadia. "By the time I finished I
was crawling," she says. She did physical therapy for a few months and eased
back into running -- but not slowly enough.

   "I had missed running so much I started doing too much," says the
36-year-old. Last summer, her doctor told her she'd aggravated the original
muscle tear and probably compounded it with tendinitis.

   The second time around, Dingsdale took a different approach to rehabilitation
that included more cross-training and more gradual increases in the miles she
ran. Now she says she's 100% pain-free and back to her usual 30 miles a week,
running faster than before.

   For many dedicated athletes, finding the fortitude to swim a few extra laps
or play an overtime period is easier than finding the patience to sit on the
sidelines. In recent years, their eagerness to return to play has been supported
by a shift in medical opinion toward more aggressive rehab: Gone are the days
when athletes were banned from working an injured limb for many weeks. But
today, many sports medicine specialists think the pendulum has swung too far in
some cases, raising the risk of further damage.

   Playing injured, they add, is almost always a bad idea.

   Compounding the confusion is the fact that even today, nobody really knows
the right amount of activity. Each injury is unique, and there's surprisingly
little rigorous research on sports injury rehabilitation. Many experts think
that fine-tuning rehab has gone about as far as it can -- and that the biggest
obstacle today to faster recovery is the biological healing process.

   "We're about 90% there in terms of rehab, but only 10% there in terms of
biological healing," says Dr. James P. Tasto, a professor of orthopedics at UC
San Diego.

   Researchers are working on strategies to speed up the biological healing
process with drugs, stem cells and even gene therapy, but most of these
treatments won't be available in the near future.

   In the meantime, injured athletes will have to learn patience -- and seek the
best physical therapist or athletic trainer they can afford.

   There are few hard and fast rules on the best way to rehabilitate a
particular injury and how to know when an injured athlete can safely return to
play, says Dr. Thomas Best, chief of sports medicine at Ohio State University in
Columbus. That's partly because the rigorous clinical trials used to evaluate
drugs for cancer and other ailments are rarely done in this medical arena.

   "Most of sports medicine is expert opinion," Best says, meaning a doctor just
has a preferred way of doing things. Troubled by the lack of hard data, he
co-wrote an editorial in the November issue of the Clinical Journal of Sports
Medicine, urging more of this kind of research.

   There is, at least, broad agreement on how to approach common and less
serious sports injuries such as strains, sprains and stress fractures (see box).
In general, activities that exercise the injured area without causing pain can
speed recovery and can start almost immediately after an injury. Not so for
activities that cause pain or increase swelling. These can slow healing and lead
to worse problems.

   Physical therapy can help immensely with rehab from injuries, but health
insurance doesn't always cover as many sessions as doctors recommend. Many
injured athletes end up paying for therapy out of pocket, or going to a few
sessions to learn the exercises and then doing them on their own, at home or at
a gym.

   Amateur athletes shouldn't expect to bounce back from an injury as fast as
professional athletes do, says Dr. Jonathan Chang, an assistant professor of
orthopedic surgery at the University of Southern California.. Pros usually have
access to the best care and facilities -- and no office job to take time away
from rehab -- so they can get back twice as fast on average as someone who sees
a physical therapist three times a week.

   Pro athletes also have financial incentives and other pressures to recover
quickly. That's not always a good thing. Many sports medicine doctors see a
cautionary tale in the experience of Jerry Rice, the former star wide receiver
for the San Francisco 49ers. In 1997, Rice had reconstructive knee surgery, and
returned to play just 14 weeks later. During his first game back, he broke his
left kneecap.

   Common knee injury

   REHABILITATION after knee surgery, particularly surgery to repair the
anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), is possibly the most controversial area in
sports injury rehab and return to play. ACL tears are common in sports that
involve jumping or quick cuts and turns and are one of the most common ways that
athletes find themselves in an operating room.

   In the 1980s, orthopedic surgeon Dr. K. Donald Shelbourne discovered that his
patients who cheated during rehab and exercised their knees sooner than they
were supposed to recovered faster than those who dutifully followed a doctor's
orders.

   Shelbourne still advocates a fast return to activity at his clinic in
Indianapolis, which specializes in ACL surgery and rehab. He characterizes it as
an "ACL superstore" with surgeons and physical therapists working under one roof
to coordinate the patients' care.

   Coordination is key, Shelbourne says: If physical therapy is left entirely up
to the patient and therapist -- as is more typical -- therapists are often
afraid to push patients too hard, fearing that "if something goes wrong, the
surgeon will blame them."

   In the first week after surgery, the priority for Shelbourne's patients is to
keep the swelling down. After that, they do physical therapy for an hour twice a
day. Shelbourne says his patients usually return to play six weeks after surgery
and are fully recovered within three to four months.

   Other surgeons take a more conservative approach, typically advocating
physical therapy three times a week after ACL surgery. They tell their patients,
even professional athletes, to expect to be out for six to nine months.

   "I've used a certain protocol, and pushed it, and beyond that it's
counterproductive," Chang says. He adds that recent research suggests that
recovery from surgery to repair the rotator cuff, the complex structure of
muscles, tendons and fibrous material that stabilizes the shoulder joint, can
also be slowed by coming back too quickly.

   It all adds up to a slight shift in medical strategy.

   "In the last 10 to 15 years, there's been an attempt to stress rapid rehab,"
says Tasto. "In some cases that's been successful and in some cases we feel
we've pushed the envelope a bit too far and seen recurrent injuries.... If we
are returning people to play before the biological process has taken place, then
the patient is at risk."

   Improved healing

   ONE day doctors may be able to give the biological healing process a boost.

   "The key is going to be to change the biological environment to promote
healing," says Dr. Kurt Spindler, a professor of orthopedics and director of the
Sports Medicine Center at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tenn.

   The tendons, ligaments and cartilage that tend to get frayed in active
athletes aren't very good at healing themselves, Spindler explains. It might be
possible, however, to encourage damaged tissue to regenerate using natural
chemicals called growth factors.

   Researchers have already identified several compounds that promote bone
growth. These might, Spindler says, be useful for treating stress fractures --
tiny cracks in bone that result from repeated pounding, like the abuse taken by
the feet of runners. But no one has tested this idea.

   Researchers have also found growth factors for soft tissues such as tendons,
ligaments and cartilage. These connective tissues are crucial for holding joints
together and keeping them in working order, but in adults, their cells are
relatively inactive. When an injury happens, they don't make the collagen and
other materials needed to make repairs.

   Growth factors might spur them to action and improve healing, says Dr. David
McAllister, an associate professor of orthopedic surgery at UCLA. One
possibility would be to use engineered viruses that carry the genetic
instructions for growth factors, collagen or other compounds to shuttle these
substances into the injured joint.

   Researchers have had some preliminary success in animal studies, delivering
growth factor genes that stimulate healing of injured cartilage in rabbit knee
joints, for example. But such treatments are a long ways from leaving the lab.

   Another approach that may be closer to reality involves coaxing stem cells to
form replacement cells for the injured tissue.

   A trial getting underway at USC is the first attempt to use stem cells to
repair injured knee cartilage.

   Gil Solomon, a 53-year-old triathlete in West Hills, is participating in the
trial, which uses stem cells extracted from the bone marrow of adult volunteers.

   Solomon says he started having knee pain last February. A physician himself,
he suspected the problem was tendinitis. "I knew it would take time [to heal],
and for the most part I was good, but there were times when I became frustrated
and tried to see if it was ready," he says. So he'd run a little more than his
trainer told him to.

   "Sure enough, I was worse for a period of time afterward.... Unfortunately,
the athlete mentality is to push though the pain, which is often the wrong thing
to do," he says.

   On Dec. 9, Solomon had surgery to repair what turned out to be a torn
meniscus, the pad of cartilage that sits between the thigh and shin bones. A
week after that, he got an injection of either stem cells or a placebo.

   He says he hopes he got the stem cells, but he won't find out for two years.

   In the meantime, he's planning to train for the Los Angeles Triathlon in
September. He has participated in the event every year since its inception in
2000 and says he's not going to let his knee problems get in the way of doing it
again.

   "I decided I'm going to do it even if I have to walk the run part," he says.

   If the stem cells kick in, maybe he won't have to.

   *

   ()

   When to get back in the game

   Deciding when to return to play depends on the type and severity of the
injury, the patient's history, the sport involved and other factors that vary
from case to case. It's a decision every athlete should make with a doctor or
physical therapist, ideally one with a good reputation for treating that type of
injury.

   Severe injuries require immediate medical attention and may require surgery.
For less severe injuries such as the ones below, players usually are ready to
return when they can move the injured limb or joint through its full range of
motion, have recovered full strength and can do the motions of their sport
normally and without pain.

   Here are some general guidelines for the two main classes of injuries --
acute injuries to muscles and ligaments and chronic injuries such as tendinitis.

   *

   -- Greg Miller

   Rehab for acute injuries

   Muscle strains (when muscle fibers are stretched or torn by sudden movement)
and sprains (sudden tears of ligaments, the fibrous bands that connect bone to
bone in joints) are among the most common sports injuries.

   Follow the old acronym RICE -- rest, ice, compression, elevation. Avoid
painful movements of the injured area and reduce swelling with ice, a
compression bandage and by keeping the affected area above the heart. Keeping
swelling down can shorten the recovery period.

   Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) help reduce pain and swelling.

   Moving the affected part within the range of motion that doesn't cause pain
can speed healing, and can begin almost immediately after the injury.

   With time, gentle stretching and strengthening exercises can be added.
Activities that increase pain or swelling will make the injury worse.

   Rehab for chronic injuries

   Repeated exercise can wear down joints and bones, causing damage that
accumulates over time. Common examples among athletes are tendinitis (swelling
and irritation of tendons that connect muscle to bone) and stress fractures
(tiny cracks in bone). Rest is the key to both.

   Too much activity on a stress fracture can cause a more serious fracture. Any
activity that causes pain or swelling should be stopped immediately. Scale back
activity to avoid pain during or immediately after exercise, then increase in
small, gradual steps to return to normal.

   For more information

   The following Web sites can lead you to many useful articles on sports injury
prevention and recovery.

   * orthoinfo.aaos.org

   * www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/sportsinjuries.html

   * www.niams.nih.gov/hi/topics/sports_injuries/SportsInjuries.htm

   * www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/tendinitis.html

   * www.acsm.org

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: BALANCED APPROACH: Gretchen Cheung leads triathlete Gil Solomon
through physical therapy for a knee injury.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Brian Vander Brug Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: FACE OF PAIN: Chicago Bulls forward Tyson Chandler hurt his
knee during a Dec. 14 game. He later sprained his ankle in a Jan. 2 game and
remains out.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Peter Jones Reuters

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2006


                              777 of 783 DOCUMENTS


              Copyright 2006 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                          Times-Picayune (New Orleans)

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday

SECTION: ST. TAMMANY PICAYUNE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 144 words

HEADLINE: Stem cell lecture set Jan. 19 in Mandeville

BODY:

   The Covington-Mandeville branch of the American Association of University
Women will sponsor a talk about stem cell research by Dr. Bruce Bunnell, who is
the chairman of the division of gene therapy at Tulane's National Primate
Research Center in Covington.

   This free presentation is open to the public and will take place Jan. 19 at 7
p.m. at Mandeville City Hall.

   Bunnell is an associate professor of pharmacology at Tulane University Health
Sciences Center.

   This general meeting also is an opportunity for the community to learn more
about AAUW and its award-winning local branch in St. Tammany Parish.

   Covington-Mandeville has been designated as a "platinum" or outstanding
nationally recognized branch since the 21st century recognition program began in
2001.

   For more information about membership in the Covington-Mandeville branch,
call Eileen deHaro at 624-9553.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                              778 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                            January 7, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: BRIEFS; Pg. E03

LENGTH: 1275 words

HEADLINE: Business news in brief

BODY:


IN THE REGION

Boiron Laboratories names CEO for its U.S. division

   Boiron Laboratories, a French manufacturer of homeopathic medicines with U.S.
operations in Newtown Square, announced yesterday that Ludovic Rassat had been
appointed president and chief executive officer of its U.S. division. Rassat,
35, has worked for Boiron USA since January 2000 and most recently was vice
president of finance, administration and medical development. Boiron has 3,700
employees in more than 60 countries. The firm employs 60 in Newtown Square and
97 in the United States. Rassat said in a statement that Boiron's expansion
plans included increasing the number of employees by 20 percent and "moving to a
larger facility on the East Coast to accommodate our growth."- Linda Loyd

Protalex raises $5.8 million for product development

   Protalex Inc., a New Hope biotechnology company, said it raised about $5.8
million in a private placement of 2.59 million shares of stock at $2.25 a share.
The publicly held company said it would use the proceeds and its current cash
reserves for product development. Protalex is working on a new class of drug for
treating rheumatoid arthritis and other immune-system disorders. The company
announced Dec. 5 that it began an early-stage Phase 1 trial of its lead
compound.- Linda Loyd

RheoGene gets $4.2 million Michael J. Fox grant

   RheoGene Inc., a Norristown company developing a new gene therapy, has
received a $4.2 million grant from the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's
Research. RheoGene, which is owned by the University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, will use the money to further refine and test its technique, which
adjusts gene activity and could help sufferers of Parkinson's and other
diseases, according to the medical school. Parkinson's disease causes loss of
brain cells that create dopamine, a chemical vital for motor function. Michael
J. Fox, star of television's Spin City, revealed in 1998 that he had the
disease.- Linda Loyd

Lincoln, Jefferson-Pilot investors to vote March 20

   Lincoln National Corp. and Jefferson-Pilot Corp. set shareholders' meetings
March 20 to vote on the merger of the insurance companies. Lincoln announced
Oct. 10 that it would pay $7.5 billion in stock and cash for Jefferson-Pilot,
Greensboro, N.C. Lincoln, Philadelphia, specializes in wealth management and
protection, and retirement-savings plans.- Todd Mason

N.Y. firm acquires Valley Forge Enterprises

   National Investment Managers Inc., New York, said in a statement that it had
completed its acquisition of Valley Forge Enterprises Ltd. Valley Forge
Enterprises provides retirement-planning services, independent
insurance-consulting services, and investment advisory services.- Rhonda Dickey

ELSEWHERE

Chrysler issues recall after complaints of engine fires

   DaimlerChrysler AG's Chrysler Group said it would recall about 265,000 sedans
after receiving dozens of complaints about engine fires. The recall involves
1999-2000 Dodge Stratus, Plymouth Breeze and Chrysler Cirrus sedans equipped
with the 2.4-liter engine. Chrysler has received 168 reports of fires through
November 2005, spokesman Max Gates said. The automaker said the high-pressure
power-steering hose could experience premature aging because of heat and could
leak power-steering fluid, creating the potential for a fire in the engine
compartment.

   Gates said the company had received one report of minor smoke inhalation.- AP


AOL to pay $25 million to settle billing allegations

   America Online Inc. agreed to pay customers as much as $25 million to settle
allegations that it wrongly billed them for some online services and products.
America Online charged customers for services and products such as an AOL Desk
Planner without consumers' consent, the complaint in the proposed class-action
lawsuit contended. The complaint in state court in Belleville, Ill., also said
AOL billed customers for accounts after they tried to cancel them. "AOL
strenuously denies the plaintiffs' allegations, or that a class manageable for
trial is certifiable," the settlement administrator, Garden City Group Inc. in
Melville, N.Y., said in a statement. "AOL is settling this action simply to
avoid the burden and expense of litigation."- Bloomberg News

Merrill Lynch ordered to pay fired brokers

   Merrill Lynch & Co. Inc. was ordered by a New York Stock Exchange arbitration
panel to pay $14 million to three brokers it fired in 2003 in connection with a
probe of illegal trading. Merrill appealed the award. Merrill fired Christopher
Chung, William Savino and Kevin Brunnock in relation to abusive mutual-fund
trading by Steve Markovitz, a client and former trader for hedge fund Millennium
Partners L.P. A day before they were dismissed, Markovitz pleaded guilty to
fraud related to mutual-fund late trading, which regulators contend is illegal.
The brokers contended that Merrill defamed them and that they were unjustly
denied payments because the firings were "for cause." "We strongly disagree with
the panel's ruling," Merrill spokesman Mark Herr said in an e-mailed statement.-
Bloomberg News

Group affirms usefulness of supply-tracking method

   A research firm said Radio Frequency Identification technology, or RFID, has
reached the stage of development where it would be widely adopted, despite some
hiccups in its implementation. A report released by Dallas research firm Regan,
Jacob, & Sydeny said successful RFID use by such large firms as Wal-Mart Stores
Inc. and German software-giant SAP AG suggested RFID use would grow. RFID is a
wireless product-tracking and supply-tracking method. Retailers or manufacturers
can use small, low-power transmitters to tell when items or supplies are running
out. In theory, this increases revenue by having products always available for
customers and by lowering a retailer's cost of warehousing excess inventory. But
many companies have resisted RFID because they say the cost of the transmitter
tags, software installations, and other equipment does not justify the savings.-
Akweli Parker

IRS offers tool to determine alternative minimum tax

   The Internal Revenue Service said in a statement that it was offering a new
online tool to help individual taxpayers determine whether they might be subject
to the alternative minimum tax. The AMT Assistant automates the AMT Worksheet of
the form 1040 instructions, called the Worksheet to See if You Should Fill in
Form 6251 - Line 45. IRS said it estimated that most taxpayers could make
entries and get an answer in five to 10 minutes using the new application.
During the 2006 filing season, the IRS said, the tool will be available on
IRS.gov. To locate it, enter AMT Assistant in the Search box on the Web site.
Taxpayers must complete a draft 1040 through line 44 and have that form
available to use the AMT Assistant, the agency said.- Rhonda Dickey

Northwest's unions vow strikes if judge voids pacts

   Northwest Airlines Corp.'s biggest labor union, the

   International Association of Machinists, said it might go on strike

   if a Bankruptcy Court lets the company scrap its labor contracts. The
machinists union, which represents 15,000 bag handlers, customer-service agents
and other workers, objects to the airline's plan to eliminate almost half its
members' jobs as part of an effort to reduce costs. Northwest's mechanics went
on strike in August, and unions for its flight attendants and pilots have said
they also might strike if contracts were voided. Northwest is still

   in discussions with the three unions and expects to reach agreements "in the
very near future," the company said. "We do not believe that unions have the
right to strike if the judge imposes terms."

   Bloomberg News

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2006


                              779 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 2006 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                             January 6, 2006 Friday
                                 SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: UPMC AFFILIATE GETS $4.2 MILLION GRANT;
ACTOR MICHAEL J. FOX'S FOUNDATION WILL FUND WORK TOWARD GENE THERAPY FOR
PARKINSON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETTE

BODY:

   A foundation established by actor Michael J. Fox is giving $4.2 million to a
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center affiliate called RheoGene Inc. to
develop gene therapy for Parkinson's disease.

   The therapy would involve not only inserting a beneficial gene into brain
cells, but also a technology developed by RheoGene that would make it possible
to turn that gene on or off as needed.

   The ability to turn off the therapeutic gene would be an important safety
feature if the proteins it produced had some unanticipated, harmful effect, said
J. Mark Braughler, RheoGene vice president for therapeutics. It also would make
it possible to regulate the activity of the gene based on the individual needs
of each patient.

   "I think [the project] is going to be watched very closely," said Dr. Howard
Federoff, a neuro-endocrinologist at the University of Rochester Medical Center.

   The grant from the Michael J. Fox Foundation would help prepare the therapy
for clinical trials in about four years.

   The ability to regulate the activity of genes is something many gene therapy
researchers now see as important, particularly when the brain is involved, said
Dr. Federoff, who heads the Parkinson's Disease Gene Therapy Study Group, a
consortium formed by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke.

   RheoGene was originally a subsidiary of Rohm & Haas Co., a Philadelphia
chemical firm. Its technology emerged from Rohm's research and development
efforts, but the company in 2004 donated RheoGene to UPMC because the biotech
unit didn't fit in its long-range business plans.

   Its technique for regulating gene activity is a "switch" attached to the gene
that turns the gene on only when activated by a special molecule. This molecule,
called an activator, is taken by the patient each day in the form of a pill.

   Other researchers have developed their own switches and activators, some
proprietary like RheoGene's. One of RheoGene's collaborators for the Fox
Foundation-sponsored project, Martha C. Bohn of Northwestern University, has
developed a technique in which the gene is always active, but can be turned off
if the patient takes a small dose of the antibiotic doxycycline.

   Dr. Braughler said RheoGene will launch a clinical trial to make sure that
people can safely ingest the activator for long periods. The company also will
adapt its switch to two different genes that have shown promise in animal tests
for treating Parkinson's disease.

   Parkinson's disease is a chronic, progressive disease of the brain that
destroys cells that produce a brain chemical called dopamine. As dopamine levels
decline, patients develop such debilitating symptoms as tremors in the arms,
legs and face, slowed movement and impaired balance and coordination.

   One of the genes RheoGene is adapting produces a chemical called glial cell
line-derived growth factor, or GDNF. This growth factor, said Fox Foundation
spokeswoman Joyce Oberdorf, "has been likened to Miracle-Gro for your brain."
The protein seems to make brain cells more robust and helps prevent the death of
ailing cells.

   In animal studies, GDNF has been shown to stop the progression of the disease
and perhaps even reverse it. The problem has been finding a way to deliver the
growth factor, Ms. Oberdorf said. One clinical trial, the results of which have
yet to be published, used infusion pumps with less than satisfactory results,
she added.

   Mr. Fox has become an advocate for Parkinson's disease research since
announcing in 1998 that he suffers from the disease. His foundation has
sponsored more than $60 million of research aimed at finding a cure.

   The RheoGene work is one of two projects the foundation has funded that is
attempting to use gene therapy to deliver the growth factor. The other project
is a small clinical trial, already under way, by a firm called Ceregene.

   Dr. Braughler said RheoGene also will study a gene for an enzyme called
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase, or AADC. In the normal brain, this enzyme
converts levodopa, or L-dopa, into dopamine. As Parkinson's disease progresses,
however, the brain loses the ability to convert L-dopa. Adding genes that
produce AADC thus could help extend the therapeutic effects of L-dopa and permit
the use of smaller doses.

   In therapeutic uses, the genes would be attached to what's called a viral
vector -- a virus that has been altered so that it doesn't cause illness. These
vectorized genes would be injected directly into the brain, where the vectors
would help the genes get inside the brain cells.

   Animal experiments will be conducted at Dr. Bonn's lab at Northwestern and by
another gene therapy expert, Dr. Krystof Bankiewicz of the University of
California, San Francisco. Dr. Braughler said he isn't sure where the clinical
studies of the activator will take place.

   The inherent risks associated with this approach have to do both with the
biochemical safety of the activator and with the RheoGene switch attached to the
genes, said Rochester's Dr. Federoff. It's possible, for instance, that the
switching "machinery" will stimulate an immune response or somehow interfere
with cell function.

NOTES: Science editor Byron Spice can be reached at bspice@post-gazette.com or
412-263-1578.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2006


                              780 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                  Copyright 2006 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                              All Rights Reserved

                           The Philadelphia Inquirer

                             January 2, 2006 Monday

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1493 words

HEADLINE: Stirring stories from 2005;
The last year in Health & Science has been full of uplifting tales, from
breakthroughs in cancer treatment to doctors helping tsunami victims to ordinary
people overcoming extraordinary medical challenges.

BODY:

   Harvey Harris

   He was the first to be treated for cancer with an experimental gene drug.

   Almost six months after receiving a second dose of gene therapy, Harvey
Harris is living the good life in his new home in Florida, where he fishes,
works on his art, and spends time with his grandchildren.

   Harris broke new ground in July when he became the first patient in a
clinical trial at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania to get two
doses of an experimental gene drug.

   Harris, 62, of Gibbsboro, Camden County, has mesothelioma, an aggressive
cancer of the lining of his chest, caused by a lifetime of working with
asbestos. He was diagnosed in February 2004 and has already survived longer than
most people with the disease.

   His doctor, pulmonologist Daniel Sterman, said tests show that the second
dose of the gene drug may have worked to rev up Harris' immune system to attack
the tumor in his chest.

   Harris has more tests to come, but for now, he focuses on enjoying each day
as it comes.

   "I try to keep a happy face, a smile on my face," Harris said. "I do what I
want to do for myself. I'm being a little selfish because I think I deserve it."

   - Susan FitzGeraldJames Pyrih

   A Cool-Cap spared him serious injury at birth.

   James Pyrih is 7 months old and doing all the normal baby things: crawling,
babbling, and pulling himself up on the sofa to stand.

   His parents, Theresa and Mark, are amazed.

   James had no heartbeat at birth, and it took doctors and nurses about 15
minutes to resuscitate him. He was rushed to the intensive-care nursery at
Thomas Jefferson University Hospital, where he was outfitted with a tiny plastic
cap filled with cold water.

   By using the Cool-Cap to lower the temperature of James' brain, doctors hoped
to prevent damage stemming from the lack of oxygen and perhaps spare him a
lifetime of disability.

   "He's more than we ever hoped for," said Theresa Pyrih, of Holland, Bucks
County. James' five siblings "think he's wonderful and they love him like
crazy."

   James passed his latest checkup with flying colors.

   "His neuromotor exam and his developmental exam were both on target for his
age," said Shobhana Desai, a Jefferson neonatologist.

   Theresa Pyrih credits the Cool-Cap for her son's good fortune. She also
credits prayer.

   "That has a lot to do with this as well," she said.

   - Susan FitzGeraldDrs. Manju and

   E. Balasubramanian

   They continue to help tsunami victims in India.

   It was almost exactly a year ago that Drs. Manju and E. "Bala"
Balasubramanian brought their stethoscopes and sterile instruments to small
towns along India's eastern coast, hoping to help tsunami victims.

   They spent about a month doing everything from replacing hips to soothing
throats made sore by swallowing seawater.

   Now they are traveling anew. The couple, both 53, went back to India last
month, and headed to their hometown of Chennai. They also planned to revisit
Keechankuppam, where 600

   children lost one or both parents.

   "We don't know what we'll find," Manju said before departing. "I guess we'll
see where we're needed."

   The last year has been filled with work - orthopedic surgery at Temple
University Hospital for Bala, and pathology for Manju at Hahnemann University
Hospital. They have had little opportunity to volunteer at their Hindu temple in
Montgomeryville, or enjoy quiet time together, but the hectic pace suits them.

   When they retire, they hope to spend several months- a year volunteering at
another hospital in southern India, and the rest of the year in Philadelphia.

   "It'll take a little more time to find a way to do more," Bala said.

   - Dawn FallikGregory Andre

   A severely burned Haitian boy finds surgery and love in America.

   For Gregory Andre, 2005 was an amazing year. He had a couple of plastic
surgeries, a lot of physical therapy, and as much love as he could contain from
the family that hopes to adopt him. That would be Heather and Glen Maeding of
Nazareth, Pa., and their sons Luke and Logan.

   Heather, a nurse practitioner who has volunteered at Haitian medical clinics,
learned about Gregory from workers at an orphanage near Port-au-Prince after he
was abandoned in early 2004. She brought him home that November on a medical
visa, so he could get treatment for the unexplained third-degree burns and scars
that covered his hands and forearms, feet, face and head.

   Inquirer readers have donated about $15,000 for his medical expenses so far.

   Maeding said that Gregory's adoption - and that of a second child from the
orphanage - may come through this month. "We are anxiously waiting," she said.

   Gregory, 4, who still needs some smaller plastic surgeries, has become fluent
in English, finished potty-training, enrolled in preschool, and started riding a
"big-boy bike" with training wheels.

   "He's grown up so much!" Meading said.

   - Virginia A. SmithZach Carson

   He goes the distance on alternative fuel.

   After driving cross-country in an old bus that runs on vegetable oil, what
does Zach Carson do for an encore?

   He hooks up with 14 other alternative-fuel bus owners and drives back east.

   Carson, 23, reached California on Aug. 27, nearly two months after leaving
his parents' home in Merion.

   The return trip, dubbed the Sustainable Living Roadshow
(www.cleanfuelcaravan.org), is planned for this fall.

   On the way out to California, Carson filled his converted shuttle bus with
used cooking oil, mostly from Chinese restaurants.

   He interviewed renewable energy advocates along the way and held public
outreach sessions. Childhood pal Todd Henkin filmed the whole thing for a
documentary.

   Carson's Veg-E-Bus broke down twice: for three weeks in Colorado, and a week
and a half in Montana. But it wasn't the fault of the system he installed to run
the engine on vegetable oil. Other parts on the used bus simply wore out.

   Next month, Carson plans to go to West Africa to promote biofuels and tour
with a musical group from Ghana.

   For now, he is converting buses to run on vegetable oil, living in Sonoma
County, Calif., on an abandoned plot of land whose residents call it the Veggie
Land Ranch. It's "a vagabond hostel for the renewable energy

   fanatic," Carson says.

   - Tom Avril

   Shana Reif

   A double lung transplant let her live "to the fullest."

   Twenty-one months after undergoing a double lung transplant, cystic fibrosis
patient Shana Reif, 31, has a more normal, active life than when every breath
was a struggle. But the Bensalem resident and her family are acutely aware that
her health remains fragile.

   She has had persistent medical problems related to a stent, or mesh tube,
placed in her main airway to keep it open. Even so, the last year has included
baby-sitting for her toddler nephew, volunteering at a crisis pregnancy center,
and a trip to Maine.

   In October, she felt "like Cinderella at the ball" as she and husband Kurt
attended the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's annual gala dinner, where she was a
guest speaker.

   Just five weeks after that joyous event, she nearly died of a sudden,
overwhelming case of pneumonia. She spent a week on a ventilator, her prognosis
as grim as the night of her transplant in 2004, when her new lungs temporarily
failed.

   As usual, Shana defied the odds, making a remarkable recovery. In the coming
year, she and her University of Pennsylvania physicians face a dilemma about
whether to remove the stent. It keeps clogging, endangering her new lungs, yet
removing it would be a delicate, difficult surgery.

   "You just have to live every day to the fullest," she said last week.

   - Marie McCulloughDavid Wolovitz

   A cancer breakthrough saved and refocused him.

   "I feel good and I feel happy to be here," said David Wolovitz, 57, an
ex-salesman whose life has been saved by one of cancer's few miracle drugs.

   Five years ago, Wolovitz, of Glen Mills, Delaware County, learned he had a
type of leukemia called chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML). Treatments with an
immune-boosting drug weren't working and were making him sicker than his cancer;
he decided to end them. He also ruled out a bone marrow transplant as a remote
hope that would make him feel worse still.

   Without treatment, CML patients typically die within three to five years.
Wolovitz began preparing for the end.

   Then, a medical breakthrough: An experimental Novartis drug called Gleevec
that had put a majority of CML patients in remission won rapid government
approval. Wolovitz took his first pills in May 2001; within six months, he had
no signs of leukemia.

   The drug saved his life - and changed it, too. Wolovitz left his job and
became a volunteer for the Leukemia & Lymphoma Society. "You've got to feel
productive somehow," he said.

   Last June, he had a scare when a blood test came back positive for CML, but
fortunately, follow-up tests were negative.

   When not doing volunteer work, he and wife Lainie enjoy traveling and
spending time with their two grandchildren, including a girl born six months
ago.

   "Every morning when I take my Gleevec pill I honestly thank my doctors in my
mind, [and] the people who created this drug," Wolovitz said.

   Fawn Vrazo

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2006


                              781 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2006 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                             January 1, 2006 Sunday
                                 Final Edition

SECTION: A News; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: 2006 A LOOK AT THE YEAR AHEAD HEALTH The return of gene therapy
research

BYLINE: KAWANZA NEWSON AND JOHN FAUBER, Staff, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

BODY:

   Let's hear it for the comeback kid of medical treatment.

    No, not exercise, though it's likely on the "to-do" list for many this year.
It's gene therapy, an experimental treatment in which scientists tinker with one
of nature's most precious gifts - DNA - to correct defective genes that spark
disease development. Successful clinical trials in Europe and increasing
research in the United States will likely work out some of the safety concerns
associated with its use.

    The promise of gene therapy was tarnished beginning with a 1999 death in a
clinical trial, a life-threatening side effect in a cystic fibrosis patient in
another, and revelations about financial conflicts of interest involving some
researchers in the field.

    But the therapy is being looked at for cancer, heart disease, Parkinson's,
Huntington's and muscular dystrophy, and infectious diseases such as influenza,
HIV and hepatitis. And with stem cell research steadily chugging along, medicine
could ultimately see the marriage of these two dynamic areas to create a complex
union for happy health.

    Speaking of influenza, will the U.S. be any more prepared for a flu pandemic
or will more plans be created without vaccine or anti-virals becoming any more
of a reality?

    - Kawanza Newson and John Fauber,

    health and science reporters

   Copyright 2006, Journal Sentinel Inc. All rights reserved. (Note: This notice
does not apply to those news items already copyrighted and received through wire
services or other media.)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                              782 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk; THE YEAR AHEAD: SCIENCE; Pg.
3

LENGTH: 356 words

HEADLINE: Guess What's In The New Test Tubes

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Here is what will, or won't, happen in science and medicine in 2006:

     A new era of personalized medicine will take off. Gene sequencing will be
so cheap and easy that the way will be cleared for your doctor to determine what
diseases you are susceptible to and what drugs will work for you while you wait.

     A strain of avian flu will jump to humans from birds, causing a global
pandemic.

     By comparing the genomes of humans and chimps, scientists will be able to
figure out what makes us different from the apes.

     The truth is that no one has any idea if such widely predicted developments
will come true -- in 2006, or in 2016 for that matter. The only reliable
prediction in modern scientific research is that the big news is usually
completely unexpected.

     Dolly the cloned sheep was announced in 1997, after many scientists had
decided it was impossible to clone an adult animal. For more than a year, some
in the scientific community thought Dolly might be a hoax. But this year, when
there really was a cloning hoax -- the announcement by Hwang Woo Suk of Seoul
National University that he and his team had created 11 lines of cloned human
stem cells -- the world of science initially hailed his amazing feat.

     History also suggests the folly of predicting even gradual developments.
Remember gene therapy? Hailed a quarter-century ago as the salvation of
medicine, it has achieved no real success. ''Gene therapy still isn't a therapy
last time I checked,'' said Mildred Cho, an ethicist at Stanford University.

     Some suspect the same long demise will be the fate of stem cell therapy,
and cringe when they see patients demanding stem cell research as their last
best hope.

     ''Medicine in the next 20 years is not going to be racks of spare body
parts that you just pop in,'' said Denise Faustman, an associate professor of
medicine at Harvard Medical School.

     High hopes and grand predictions are part of science. And so is the gradual
tempering of those hopes and predictions over time.

     Then again, science is also full of enormous surprises. So the one
prediction sure to come true in 2006 is that the unexpected will happen.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Mario Tama/Getty Images)

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2006


                              783 of 783 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             January 1, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: PASSAGES; Pg. J-1

LENGTH: 2464 words

HEADLINE: Stockdale, McMillin among S.D.'s prominent who died

BYLINE: Jack Williams, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   We gave our final salute to one of the most indomitable and decorated naval
officers in history.

   We lost a civic-minded real estate icon and said goodbye to such community
treasures as the honorary mayors of Barrio Logan and Old Town.

   The year 2005 also marked the death of 111-year-old Henry Hartmann, believed
to be the fourth-oldest man in the world. The longtime La Jollan, who
facetiously maintained that "only the good die young," died in November.

   Another centenarian, 106-year-old World War I veteran John Paul Elliott Sr.,
left a legacy that stretched the boundaries of longevity and credibility.

   An inspiration for future generations, he celebrated his 102nd birthday with
18 holes of golf and broke 100. At 95, he learned to water ski.

   When Mr. Elliott died in Chula Vista on Jan. 14, he was the oldest known
World War I veteran in the state and one of the oldest in the nation.

   Any year-end review of the local deaths must start, however, with retired
Vice Adm. James B. Stockdale. A Medal of Honor recipient with 26 combat
decorations, he endured 7 1/2 years of brutal captivity during the Vietnam War
after his fighter plane was shot down in 1965.

   Adm. Stockdale, who in 1992 ran for vice president on an Independent
presidential ticket headed by Ross Perot, died in July after a five-year battle
with Alzheimer's disease. He was 81 and lived in Coronado.

   The local business and off-road racing communities suffered a jolt in
September with the death of building-industry leader Corky McMillin following a
heart attack at 76.

   In addition to creating the county's largest locally based real estate firm,
he extended his full-service operations into the Imperial Valley, Central
California and Texas.

   But his name was just as likely to show up on the sports page as in the home
or business sections. Mr. McMillin, patriarch of an off-road vehicle racing
family, was a three-time overall winner of the Baja 500.

   Although far from household names, Richard B. Yale Sr. and Mike Amador Jr.
showed how much colorful unsung heroes can mean to a community.

   Mr. Yale, who died in January at 94, was the honorary mayor of Old Town. From
1967 until his retirement in 1999, he greeted generations of visitors to the
venerable state park in stylish Old West attire. He looked like a clean-shaven
Col. Sanders and took on a litany of roles: historian, publisher, photographer,
bibliophile, printer and journalist.

   In the heart of Barrio Logan, Mr. Amador was, as state Assemblyman Juan
Vargas said, "the glue who held everybody together."

   Although he lived in North Park, he operated a grocery store in the barrio at
National Avenue and Beardsley Street, a few blocks from a store his father
opened in 1912. Moreover, he became a community activist, taking concerns of
residents directly to city officials in a way that made a difference.

   Mr. Amador, who gave out pins and calendars bearing a "Mayor of Barrio Logan"
logo, died in March at 85.

   Here's a list by month of other local notables who died in 2005:

   JANUARY

   Col. Merrill Douglas, 88, a retired Marine Corps veteran of two wars. He
became general manager of what today is Qualcomm Stadium. Years later, at 81, he
took the helm of the Star of India on its first passage beneath the San
Diego-Coronado Bridge.

   Virginia Fletcher Hawk Church, 86, a driving force in the creation of El
Cajon's East County Performing Arts Center and the founder of the vocal
scholarship that bears her name.

   FEBRUARY

   Mary Bear, 88, a fixture at the San Diego Museum of Art, where she was
chairwoman of the arts council and a member of the board of trustees. A retired
educator, she earned a doctorate at age 57 and began a second career with the
museum at 70.

   Doil "Danny" Millsap, 85, a softball pitching legend who once threw a
no-hitter against the world-renowned The King and His Court. He dominated
opponents into his 80s and made his mark as a boxing promoter at the former
Coliseum arena in downtown San Diego.

   MARCH

   James Dallas Clark, 91, a real estate professional, civic leader and
philanthropist who was honored as Mr. San Diego in 1993 by the San Diego Rotary
Club. He and his wife, Mary, provided the lead gift in a capital campaign for
the San Diego Natural History Museum, resulting in a 90,000-square-foot addition
that bears their name.

   APRIL

   Julio "Jay" Ereneta, 103, a Filipino native who joined the U.S. Navy in
February 1919 and was credited with being a World War I veteran because of the
nature of his role in a minesweeping operation in the North Sea after the
armistice was signed. Before he died, he was one of the last two known World War
I veterans in California and one of the few remaining veterans who served in
both World War I and World War II.

   Rabbi Aaron Gottesman, 63, chaplain for three decades for the city's police
and fire departments, who seemed to know intuitively where and when he was
needed. Organizers of the Southern California Irish Congress St. Patrick's Day
Parade named him Man of the Year in 2004.

   Jack Walsh, 71, colorful former San Diego city councilman and county
supervisor who held public office from 1963 to 1976. When his political career
was over, he helped form a real estate firm and focused on building low-income
housing.

   MAY

   Jack Borchers, 94, a distinguished civil servant and advocate for economic
development who headed from 1955 to 1975 what today is the San Diego Regional
Chamber of Commerce.

   Col. Eugene Cheatham Jr., 89, member of the pioneering Tuskegee Airmen, a
black fighter squadron formed by the Army Air Forces in 1941. He flew 150 combat
missions in the Korean War. In 2004, he received an Eagle Scout medal that had
been due him since 1930, when he balked at attending the award presentation
because of his tattered clothing.

   Jack Katz, 81, a decorated fighter pilot in the Korean War who pursued a
career in public service. He rose from budget analyst to chief deputy city
attorney and was "the ultimate public servant," said former Mayor Maureen
O'Connor.

   Lloyd von Haden, 91, two-term Vista councilman who tenaciously opposed
growth, especially redevelopment. In the music realm, he struck a different
note, playing string bass for the San Diego Symphony for 18 years.

   JUNE

   Ray Engle, 87, a Hoover High School contemporary of the legendary Ted
Williams who coached his alma mater to a county football crown in 1956 and three
league titles -- two in football, one in baseball. Old-timers remember him best
for scoring the winning touchdown for Hoover in its first-ever victory over
crosstown rival San Diego High in 1935.

   Milton "Micky" Fredman, 84, a San Diego attorney who became the founding
chairman in 1988 of the San Diego Commission for Arts and Culture and a key
supporter of La Jolla Playhouse. He also was a port commissioner and president
of Fronteras, a border business organization, and chairman of the International
Trade Commission.

   Charles David Keeling, 77, a pioneering climate scientist who confirmed the
steady rise in carbon dioxide worldwide. In 50 years at the Scripps Institution
of Oceanography, his atmosphere measurements became known as the Keeling Curve.

   Rear Adm. John H. "Red" McQuilkin, 91, oversaw the preliminary design of a
series of technically advanced warships, including the first nuclear-powered
aircraft carrier, the Enterprise. A longtime Coronado resident, he was a
supporter of Coronado Hospital and Lamb's Players Theater.

   John Walton, 58, billionaire son of Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton and a member
of the company's board. A quiet force in San Diego philanthropy, Mr. Walton
purchased a historic home in National City in 1986. He died when his
experimental ultralight aircraft crashed shortly after takeoff from the Jackson
Hole Airport in Grant Teton National Park in Wyoming.

   JULY

   Joel Bowdan, 89, a pioneering black firefighter who helped integrate the San
Diego Fire Department in 1951. He spent much of his 26 years at Station 19 in
southeastern San Diego, where black and Latino firefighters were assigned before
the department became one of the first fire agencies in the nation to integrate
its units.

   Robert McGlade, 73, a resourceful and dedicated fundraiser who helped shape
the Old Globe Theatre's growth over three decades. His roles at Old Globe over
the years included box office assistant, actor, general manager and director of
community relations. He later became Starlight Musical Theatre's first director
of development and planning.

   AUGUST

   Andreas Rechnitzer, 80, pioneer in deep-sea exploration who directed two
undersea vehicles to record depths. He was based at various times at Scripps
Institution of Oceanography and the Naval Electronics Laboratory on Point Loma.

   SEPTEMBER

   Howard H. Carey, 68, president and CEO of the Neighborhood House Association,
one of San Diego's largest nonprofit social service organizations. During his
33-year tenure, the organization grew from 35 employees to a staff of more than
800.

   Lew Fishman, 66, a former newspaperman and author of sports books who became
one of the golf industry's leading equipment experts and a pioneer of testing
methods. As vice president of consumer testing and research for Titleist and
Cobra, he helped develop a state-of-the-art test facility in Oceanside.

   Ferdinand T. Fletcher, 94, longtime civic leader and founding member of one
of San Diego's oldest and largest law firms, Higgs, Fletcher & Mack. The last
surviving son of Col. Ed Fletcher, a legendary land developer, he helped form
the corporate structure of the Salk Institute on Torrey Pines Mesa.

   Delza Martin, 90, the grand dame of Old Globe Theatre who began serving on
the theater's board of directors in 1939. She was responsible for bringing
director Craig Noel to the Old Globe from Fox Studios in Hollywood and
spearheaded efforts to rebuild the theater after a devastating fire in 1978.

   Ed Hale, 67, the winningest auto racer in the history of Cajon Speedway,
where he competed from 1962 until the track closed in 2004. As a bricklayer, he
helped build the speedway before winning three track championships, two of them
in the elite class.

   W. Keith Kellogg II, 98, a philanthropist whose donations helped spawn the
showcase Kellogg Library at California State University San Marcos and resulted
in renaming The Scripps Research Institute's graduate college the Kellogg School
of Science and Technology. Mr. Kellogg, a Rancho Santa Fe resident, was the
grandson of cereal magnate W.K. Kellogg.

   Donald LaChappa, 63, vice chairman of the Barona tribe in East County. He
championed Indian gaming, land acquisition and housing programs. Considered a
dynamic leader, he lobbied state and federal lawmakers on gaming and other
issues.

   Gen. Kenneth McClennan, 80, a decorated veteran of three wars who retired in
1981 as Marine Corps assistant commandant and chief of staff. With U.S.
International University in financial and academic turmoil, Gen. McClennan
helped right the school's course in the 1980s.

   Silvio S. Varon, 81, retired UCSD professor whose research helped lay the
groundwork for the development in 2001 of the first gene therapy to prevent cell
loss in a patient with Alzheimer's disease.

   Eileen Whitaker, 93, acclaimed watercolorist who became the second woman to
be elected as an academician in the watercolor division of what is now the
National Academy Museum and School of Fine Arts in New York. Mrs. Whitaker, who
lived in La Jolla, was the widow of another famed artist, Frederic Whitaker.

   OCTOBER

   Pauline des Granges, 90, a former director of the city Park and Recreation
Department who provided impetus for the growth of Mission Bay, Balboa Park and
other cultural and recreational amenities. She helped found the philanthropic
San Diego Foundation and became the first woman president of the California Park
and Recreation Society.

   Griff Hayes, 81, a sportsman, insurance executive and civic leader. As a
youth, he led off and played second base for a national champion American Legion
baseball team in San Diego. He later became general manager of the Pacific Coast
League San Diego Padres and president of the Century Club, which organizes what
today is the Buick Invitational golf tournament.

   Adm. Herbert G. Stoecklein, 88, spearheaded plans for a new naval hospital at
Camp Pendleton and served as commandant of Balboa Naval Hospital. After retiring
from the Navy in 1974, he was instrumental in the campaign for a new naval
hospital in Balboa Park. Completed in 1987 in Florida Canyon, it was named San
Diego Naval Medical Center.

   NOVEMBER

   Robert V. Guthrie, 75, an author and educator whose 1976 book, "Even the Rat
Was White: A Historical View of Psychology," brought a new perspective to
blacks' roles in psychology while shedding light on racism. His San Diego
connections dated to the 1960s, when he was the first black faculty member at
Mesa College.

   Marine Corps Maj. Gen. Raymond L. Murray, 91, a decorated veteran of two wars
who had been commanding general of Camp Pendleton in the 1960s. The recipient of
two Navy Crosses and an Army Distinguished Service Cross, he retired in 1968
after 33 years of military service.

   Hughes L. Potiker, 80, founder of Entertainment Publications discount coupon
books who became a major philanthropist in San Diego. With his wife, Sheila, his
donations helped create the Sheila and Hughes Potiker Theatre at La Jolla
Playhouse, the cultural arts wing of the San Diego Jewish community Center and
the Potiker Family Senior Residence for low-income retirees.

   DECEMBER

   Henry A. Boney, 91, visionary grocer and patriarch of a family who helped
pioneer a supermarket concept that paired natural-food alternatives with
traditional fare. It started with Windmill Farms more than 30 years ago and
continued with Boney's and Henry's Marketplace stores. He also served two terms
as a county supervisor.

   Ted Bullock, 90, renowned neuroscientist and professor emeritus at UCSD's
Scripps Institution of Oceanography. A widely published authority on comparative
biology, Dr. Bullock pioneered studies in sensory systems (especially fish), the
neurophysiology of nerve cells and electrical activity and the evolution of the
brain.

   Gene Gregston, 80, a onetime sports columnist who had the distinction of
rising to editor of The Tribune and The San Diego Union. A widely published
writer, he wrote two books, including a biography of golfing great Ben Hogan.

   Bill Robinson, 64, retired public information officer for the San Diego
Police Department who commanded the respect of law enforcement and the media. It
was a balancing act that the affable, always-accessible Robinson seemed to
perfect.

   Sam S. Stein, 98, philanthropist who contributed millions to such causes as
children, health care and the aging. His gifts included $8 million in 1985 to
Scripps Clinic and about $7 million over the years to Children's Hospital.

   Jack Williams: (619) 542-4587: jack.williams@uniontrib.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 2006

CORRECTION:

   A Jan. 1 story about local notables who died in 2005 misstated the name of
Col. Merrill Day as "Col. Merrill Douglas." Day, a Marine and a veteran of two
wars, was 88 when he died last January. He became general manager of what today
is Qualcomm Stadium in 1972. When he was 81, he took the helm of the Star of
India on its first passage beneath the San Diego-Coronado Bridge. The
Union-Tribune regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: 22 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. Corky McMillin 2. Retired Vice Adm. James B.
Stockdale, who ran for vice president on an Independent presidential ticket with
Ross Perot in 1992, died in July. He was 81. 3. Mike Amador 4. John Elliott 5.
Richard Yale 6. Mary Bear 7. Aaron Gottesman 8. Charles David Keeling, a climate
scientist who spent 50 years at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
confirmed the steady rise in carbon dioxide worldwide. 9. Jack Walsh 10. Jack
Borchers 11. Col. Eugene Cheatham Jr. 12. Lloyd von Haden 13. Milton Fredman 14.
John Walton 15. Andreas Rechnitzer 16. Ferdinand Fletcher 17. W. Keith Kellogg
II 18. Donald LaChappa 19. Silvio S. Varon 20. Real estate professional, civic
leader and philanthropist James Dallas Clark was honored as Mr. San Diego in
1993 by the San Dieog Rotary Club. He passed away in March. 21. Eileen Whitaker
22. Henry A. Boney; PHOTOBY: 2. Associated Press file photo 8,20. Union-Tribune
file photo

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2009
