
                               2 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 27, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Baby who is living proof gene therapy can really work

BYLINE: Neil Sears

BODY:


    GENE therapy has been shown to have succeeded for the first time, treating a
group of children including a British baby.

    The advance will raise the hopes of countless thousands of people with
currently untreatable disorders.

    The children involved, including one-year-old Shah Rahman, suffered from a
genetic defect in their blood.

    They were born with Severe Combined Immuno-Deficiency, a condition affecting
one in 50,000 babies, in which a defective gene stops white blood cells being
produced.

    Such cells are vital for the body to fight against disease and infection.

    Without them sufferers can contract fatal conditions at any time. Usually,
they have to spend their lives in isolation, with the symptoms of each disease
treated individually. Bone marrow transplants sometimes work, but many children
with SCID die in their first year.

    Doctors in Paris believe that their use of gene therapy on the four children
has cured the condition at its root.

    Bone marrow was taken from each child and injected with a perfect version of
the defective gene, incorporated into a harmless virus.

    The bone marrow was then replaced in the babies. Three were just one month
old, but little Shah, from East London, was ten months old at the time because
his condition was late manifesting itself.

    Final results are still awaited, but it appears that, as hoped, the perfect
gene has 'infected' the body, leading to the creation of white blood cells.

    Shah appears to be doing well, and two of the French babies seem to have
been cured. Their white blood cell levels are normal. Little Shah, who is in
Great Ormond Street Hospital, was transferred to the Necker Hospital in Paris
for the experimental treatment.

    According to Great Ormond Street consultant paediatric immunologist Graham
Davies, all the signs are good.

    'This is the first time it has been unequivocally shown that putting a gene
in has corrected a genetic disorder,' he said. 'Shah is still at a relatively
early stage but we are optimistic.' Shah's restaurant manager father, who is
also called Shah Rahman, said the treatment seemed to offer hope for many
thousands of sick children.

    'Shah had a long history of infections, and they could not find a suitable
bone marrow for a transplant,' he said.

    'Then the doctors told us about this new treatment. It seems to have worked,
and all we can do now is wait.' Some 280 people are involved in gene therapy
experiments in Britain.

    Mr Davies warned against early celebrations of an end to genetic disease.

    'In some ways bone marrow disorders are relatively easy to treat by this
therapy,' he said. 'Genetic disorders affecting the lungs and the brain are very
different.

    But potentially this success shows the approach can work.'

    GENE therapy is being hailed as the future of medicine.

    One day it will enable doctors to cure diseases from within living cells
before they happen.

    It is now accepted that DNA in our cells carries a unique blueprint for our
lives. Sometimes, that blueprint contains errors which will lead to disease and
early death. Gene therapy is an attempt to correct those errors, by replacing
absent or malfunctioning genes with healthy ones.

    Ultimately, it could cure cystic fibrosis and many cancers. Yet so-called
germ-line gene therapy, which involves alteration of eggs and sperm prior to
conception, leads to claims that scientists are playing God and is banned in
Britain.


GRAPHIC: SUCCESS STORY: ONE-YEAR-OLD SHAH RAYMAN HAS A HUG FROM HIS FATHER SHAH
AS HE RECUPERATES

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1999


                               5 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                December 9, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 81

LENGTH: 725 words

HEADLINE: Pearson surges as Net punters log on

BYLINE: Shirley Skeel

BODY:


    INVESTORS who have seen too many slippery Internet stocks get away decided
to try their luck in the calmer waters of media.

    The supposed logic is that, wild and woolly as the future may be for
Internet shares, in the end what will count is 'content, content, content'.

    Many of the biggest content owners have been ponderously slow in putting
their magazines, books, videos and music on the Web. Punters reckon it must only
be a matter of time before some sexy linkups are made with Internet companies.

    Pearson, owner of Thames TV and the Financial Times, surged another 143p to
1781p on rumours of an alliance with US giant America OnLine.

    Traders believe AOL wants to use the vast educational library held by
Pearson's Simon & Schuster offshoot for its Web portal.

    There are also murmurs Pearson may bid for Emap, up 88p to 1311p.

    Matchmaking in the media sector is only just warming up after Carlton
Communications (up 18p to 593p) embraced United News & Media (up 6 1 /2 p to 719
1 /2 p). However, analysts are sceptical that Pearson might return to the
consumer magazine market.

    Music group EMI also perked up 51p to 610p, ahead of the flotation of
20pc-held information technology group Sci-pher.

    Harry Potter books publisher Bloomsbury got caught up in the drift and rose
35p to 635p. It has enjoyed a fourfold surge this year.

    Investors, nagged by the thought of big Christmas bills, chipped off some
profits from telecom stocks. British Telecom sank 68p to 1358 1 /2 p, Vodafone
AirTouch 15p to 312p and Atlantic Telecom 65p to 880p. However, Cable & Wireless
rose 81p to 974 1 /2 p as it won a GBP 24m Asian contract with Reuters.

    This puts it within sight of its all-time high of 995p.

    Irish telecom tiddler Stentor, which almost went bust last year, shot ahead
39p to 92 1 /2 p after a deal to market Cisco Systems' call routing technology
to call centres in Ireland. Cisco is financing Stentor to buy GBP 2.2m of
equipment.

    Economists admit it is 'too close to call' today's decision on UK interest
rates by the Monetary Policy Committee.

    This left banks and insurers nervous.

    Lloyds TSB shed 38 1 /2 p to 725p, CGU 24p to 869p, Abbey National 43p to
976p and Halifax 18 1 /2 p to 662 1 /2 p The overall market was left weaker as
traders limited their fishing to a few choice stocks. The Footsie failed to lift
its head above the previous close, and finished down 41.5 at 6619.4.

    UK gilts slipped after strong German industrial output figures. The euro
rose slightly against sterling to 63.04p, while the pound edged up against the
dollar to $ 1.6255.

    Anglo-Dutch group Reckitt Ben-ckiser tumbled 128 1 /2 p to 593 1 /2 p as it
shocked investors with a profit warning.

    The Disprin-to-Dettol maker blamed sagging sales of household goods and
supply problems in Europe.

    Nine-month profits of GBP 112m in the UK arm, Reckitt & Colman, were
'substantially' below last year, though Benckiser grew net profits 20pc.

    Full-year profits will be below expectations at around GBP 165m.

    Steel-maker Corus rose 5p to 134 1 /2 p in relief that matters were not
worse after its British Steel division was fined GBP 8m by the European
Commission for taking part in an illegal cartel. Eight steel producers,
including Mannes-mann of Germany, were fined a total of GBP 60m.

    Cantab Pharmaceuticals continued its recovery, jumping 40p to 221p, after it
won exclusive rights to licence patents held by US group GenVec.

    These cover gene therapy for nervous disorders like Parkinson's and
Alzheimer's. AstraZeneca gained 161p to 2782p on hopes of positive test results
from a new cholesterol-buster.

    A lick of the magic 'e-business' wand helped media agency Cordiant rise 21p
to 283 1 /2 p. It bought US-based Interactive Edge, which specialises in Web
marketing, for up to GBP 15.6m. Software seller Cedar Group soared 119p to 401 1
/2 p, despite axing its interim dividend, as it talked up its new e-commerce
division.

    OFEX-TRADED health group Healix gained credibility by signing a deal with
Tesco. It will supply travel health tips online in 210 Tesco pharmacies.

    Customers can tap in for free. Healix, up 18p to 117 1 /2p, runs databases
for doctors and plans free health websites for users of Affinity's portals.

    Floated at 25p last year, it is now worth GBP 28m.


LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1999


                               6 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                December 3, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 43

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Gene test teenager dies;
Therapy trial experts told to exercise caution as father says: 'I lost a hero'

BYLINE: William Lowther

BODY:


    A PLEA for new caution in gene-therapy trials was made yesterday following
the first death of a human guinea pig a teenager who was told the work could
help babies born with his complaint.

    It is thought that gene therapy where absent or malfunctioning genes are
replaced by healthy ones could eventually cure many cancers and genetic diseases
such as cystic fibrosis.

    But Jesse Gelsinger, 18, was killed by the virus used to transport new genes
into his body.

    All gene therapy researchers in America have now been ordered to review
their own data for potential problems.

    'We need to go slow, we need to reconsider,' says Dr Jane Bryant, a
geneticist with the American Government's National Institutes of Health.

    Mr Gelsinger had Ornithine Transcarbamylase Deficiency, a rare disorder that
blocks the body's ability to break down ammonia, a normal by-product of
metabolism, and often causes early death. He had his OTD totally under control
using drugs and a strict non-protein diet.

    But within a day of the experiment at the University of Pennsylvania, he
developed a blood disorder followed by respiratory distress and then liver and
kidney failure.

    The preliminary findings of an internal inquiry have just been published.

    It says a review of data before the trial revealed nothing that would have
predicted the death of Mr Gelsinger.

    But it has emerged that in other trials monkeys given a high dose of the
genetically engineered virus died in a similar way.

    A major cause of concern is that most gene therapy experiments use a
modified cold virus known as a vector or adenovirus to carry new genes into the
patient's body.

    There is growing evidence that the adenovirus itself can do huge damage.

    'We may need to slow down and find a new delivery system, even though it
might take a year or two,' said one researcher who did not wish to be named.

    The report into the death of Mr Gelsinger says the adenovirus used
'initiated an unusual and deadly immune-system response.' Dr James Wilson, head
of the research team that conducted the experiment, said: 'The virus did indeed
initiate a sequence of events that led to the patient's death.' He said they
were now trying to learn from the death. 'What is it from the adenovirus that
initiated this inflammatory response?' Mr Gelsinger, from Phoenix, Arizona, had
agreed to the trial hoping it might lead to a cure that would help him he did
not like his diet and children with more deadly forms of the disease.

    The entire gene-therapy team broke down in tears when he died.

    'I lost a hero,' said his father Paul.


LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1999


                               9 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 30, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 54

LENGTH: 219 words

HEADLINE: Gene to stop high pressure

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have developed a gene therapy which may one day protect future
generations from developing high blood pressure.

    The condition leads to thousands of deaths a year from stroke and heart
attack and costs the health service millions of pounds.

    Scientists in the United States have been able to demonstrate that they can
prevent the offspring of rats with blood pressure inheriting the condition from
their parents.

    The development is a breakthrough because it is the first time that gene
therapy has been used to protect future generations, says researchers at the
University of Florida.

    They have used part of a gene which blocks off the action of a harmful
hormone called angiotensin responsible for narrowing of blood vessels and
raising of blood pressure.

    Other scientists have been able to pass on gene particles but without any
therapeutic effect.

    The researchers have also discovered that the gene therapy protects the
heart, kidneys and arteries from other potentially harmful changes.

    'These are very exciting developments although we are some way off being
able to apply it to humans,says Dr Mohan Raizada who carried out the research.

    So far scientists have not been able to find gene markers that show when a
human is going to develop high blood pressure.


LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1999


                              11 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 23, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 55

LENGTH: 201 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis discovery

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    DOCTORS have made a major discovery in the fight against cystic fibrosis.

    Recent work has focused on the use of gene therapy as a treatment for
sufferers. But researchers believe that something as simple as a supplement of
fatty acid found in fish oil and breast milk can restore the chemical balance of
cells affected by the disease.

    In tests, doctors found that raising the levels of a single essential fatty
acid reversed the effects of cystic fibrosis which causes various organs and
glands of the body to malfunction.

    A key problem facing sufferers is an excess of mucus which clogs the air
passages and affects digestion.

    Experts found the fatty acid link by comparing two mice - one with cystic
fibrosis, the other clear. They discovered the cystic fibrosis mouse had
abnormally high levels of arachidonic acid, AA, and low levels of an acid known
as DHA. A similar imbalance has been found in humans.

    When the mouse had its DHA levels raised to correct the imbalance, signs of
the disease were reversed. Doctors at the Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital in
Boston, America, where the fatty acid discovery was made, are working on a
supplement which can be taken by humans.


LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1999


                              15 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                November 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 52

LENGTH: 713 words

HEADLINE: So can the 'Hedgehog' grow hair?

BYLINE: Pat Hagan

BODY:



    AGENE that 'switches on' hair growth when it's injected into the skin could
one day offer hope to thousands of bald men.

    Scientists have discovered that the gene - which goes by the unlikely name
of Sonic Hedgehog - can stir dormant hair follicles back to life.

    The first tests on humans are being planned after laboratory studies on mice
showed they grew thick tufts of new hair within two weeks of the treatment.

    If this success is repeated in human trials, a cure for baldness could be
developed within the next few years.

    The breakthrough treatment is potentially far more effective than the
Propecia regrowth pills about to be launched in Britain.

    Doctors who discovered the genetic therapy believe it will work best on sick
patients who, for example, may have lost their hair through chemotherapy.

    But they are also confident it could trigger new hair growth in men who have
'pattern baldness' - where their hair has receded for no obvious reason.

    Up to half of men over 40 and a significant number of women - may be
affected by hair loss, and although new drugs are coming on the market, they
have had mixed results and are not suitable for everybody.

    The genetic breakthrough by scientists at the Institute of Genetic Medicine
at Cornell University, New York, came after they decided to apply technology
already being used to repair diseased hearts to the problem of hair loss.

    This involves identifying genes known to play an important part in the
development of the body and deploying them to kick-start growth in organs that
are giving up.

    In the case of hair, scientists pinpointed the Sonic Hedgehog gene as the
ideal candidate for the job.

    So-called because the researcher who first identified it thought its shape
resembled the computer-game character, the gene plays a key role in the
embryonic development of the brain, heart, lungs, skeleton, skin and hair.

    It was injected into the mice to see if it could speed up the natural
process of producing hair.

    TO MEASURE if hair around the site of the injection was growing, the
black-haired mice were dyed blonde. After seven days, hair follicles around the
patch being treated had sprung back into action and were showing signs of
thickening.

    After just 14 days, shafts of black hair 1/2 cm long had emerged on the
backs of the mice.

    Everybody has this gene. And, as it seems to be involved in hair growth, we
thought that if we turned up expression of the gene for a few days we could wake
up sleeping hair follicles and make them grow,' says Dr Ronald Crystal, who led
the research team.

    'There are 100,000 hair follicles in your head when you are born and you
don't get any more - that's it.

    'But if you look at someone who has lost their hair through chemotherapy,
they still have those follicles. It's the same for a man who is bald. He has
hair follicles too, but they are sleeping.

    'We don't have the slightest idea if this would work in bald men - humans
are not just big mice. But we are hopeful.' Dr Crystal and his team are
considering trying out the therapy on humans, and several leading drug companies
have already expressed an interest in the technique.

    But one of the biggest problems they face is that over-expression of the
Sonic Hedgehog gene is directly linked to a type of skin cancer called basal
cell carcinoma.

    This is the most common form of skin cancer in the UK with at least 30,000
new cases every year. During laboratory tests, none of the mice developed the
condition.

    'The mice are six months old now and so far as we can tell they look
normal,' says Dr Crystal.

    'There are no adverse effects and what we are essentially doing is
accelerating the normal process.

    THERE are 100,000 genes so you have to choose your gene carefully but it's
not rocket science.

    'It's the same technique we are using to grow new blood vessels in people
with severe cardiovascular disease, though we use different genes.' John Mason,
president of the UK Institute of Trichologists experts in hair loss - said it
was too early to judge whether the treatment could be the answer to baldness.

    'I am rather negative about this. I doubt if there is anything in it, and if
there is, then it's a long way away,' he said.


LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1999


                              17 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           October 26, 1999, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 478 words

HEADLINE: BRAVE WORKMATE TRIES TO SAVE NITRO LEAK PAL;
 LAB MAN COLLAPSES IN CLOUD OF GAS

BYLINE: Robert Hutton

BODY:


    A HEROIC lab technician tried desperately to save his pal yesterday after a
chemical leak at a genetics lab.

    Stewart McKay, 37, dashed into a cloud of nitrogen and pulled his friend
clear after he was found lying in a pool of the liquified gas at Edinburgh's
Western General Hospital.

    Paramedics raced to the Human Genetics Unit from the nearby hospital wing
but the lab worker, who has not been named until his family have been informed,
was already dead.

    It is thought he collapsed while handling the chemical and left the supply
running.

    Police arrived moments later and 40 people were evacuated from the building
until firefighters in chemical protection suits could turn off the nitrogen.

    Stewart, who injured his head in the rescue attempt, was taken to the Royal
Infirmary suffering from shock, along with three female colleagues. All four
were later released.

    Last night speaking at his home in Balerno, he said: "I hope I never have to
go through a situation like that again.

    "I really don't want to say any more until after the post mortem."

    Stewart's actions and bravery were later praised by firefighters.

    Assistant Divisional Officer Ross Wynn said: "It was very dangerous but the
man was just trying to do what he had to do.

    "It was a great risk to himself. I think he is suffering from shock."

    He added that the Health and Safety Executive are now investigating what
happened, and said nitrogen could cause suffocation depending on the level of
concentration.

    It took firefighters more than three hours to enter the room and ensure
there was no further danger to staff.

    The Genetics Unit took part in Britain's first gene therapy trial for cystic
fibrosis and investigating opportunities for gene therapy is one of its main
scientific aims.

    Professor Nicholas Hastie, the Genetics unit's director, spoke of his
anguish at the loss of a colleague in such horrific circumstances.

    He said: "Staff are shocked and stunned. We are all very distressed at
losing a valued colleague, a person who put in many years of good work.

    "We have strict safety procedures in place, and he was very experienced. He
was repeating the same sort of task he did day in and day out - decanting the
liquid nitrogen into the tanks where the human cells are.

    "It is a very routine task."

    Hospitals and laboratories use liquid nitrogen to preserve material such as
human tumour samples.

    Its boiling point of minus 196 degrees celsius makes it ideal for
refrigeration.

    Bob Pirie, a spokesman for BOC, which produces liquid nitrogen, said it
could cause cold burns or frostbite and in high concentrations could also cause
asphyxiation.

    He said: "It is not poisonous as such but if it is present in a sufficiently
high amount there will be less oxygen for you to breathe and the result could be
asphyxiation."

GRAPHIC: TRAGEDY:
Paramedicscarrythebodyofthedeadlabtechnicianoutofthehospitalgenetics laboratory;
FREEZING: Liquid nitrogen boils at minus 196 Celsius;; EMERGENCY: Firemen in
hazard suits

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1999


                              18 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 21, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 39

LENGTH: 260 words

HEADLINE: Hope of end to agony that runs in the family

BODY:


    A GENETIC breakthrough which could one day wipe out a range of hereditary
diseases has been unveiled by scientists.

    For the first time, researchers have created an artificial chromosome which
can be given to a living creature and passed on to its offspring.

    It is hoped that doctors may be able to cure genetic illnesses such as
Huntington's chorea and cystic fibrosis by introducing similar manmade
chromosomes into humans.

    The extra genetic material could eradicate diseases in entire families as it
is passed down the generations.

    Although scientists have created manmade chromosomes before, they have never
been passed on by an animal to its offspring.

    One disease which could be targeted for the treatment is cystic fibrosis,
which affects more than 7,000 people in the UK. It is caused by a single faulty
gene. By introducing a manmade chromosome carrying a healthy copy the problem
could be corrected. If the chromosome was injected into an embryo, it would be
present in every cell allowing the child to pass it on to its offspring.

    The technique was discovered by researchers at Chromos Molecular Systems in
British Columbia, Canada, the magazine New Scientist reports today.

    The company says it has no plans yet to repeat the experiment, which was
carried out on mice, with people.

    Instead it wants to create herds of genetically modified animals whose milk
will contain useful pharmaceutical products.

    Scientists warn that gene therapy is still many years off but stress the
discovery is an important step.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1999


                              23 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 8, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 48, 49

LENGTH: 890 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY HEALTH: DOCS SAID I WOULD NEVER GROW TO BE A MAN

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    ANDI Thomas is a man in a million - and a man with a million reasons to be
thankful.

    At 36 he is the oldest person in the world with a rare medical condition
that affects just one person in 1,000,000 and kills most of them before they
reach adulthood.

    Andi has Hyper-IgM, a genetic disease which damages his immune system,
making him unable to fight infections.

    The illness was only identified two years before Andi was born, and doctors
had little idea how to treat him.

    They warned his parents there was little hope for his survival, but after a
desperately-ill childhood Andi somehow improved.

    And now, although still bugged by colds and chest infections in the winter
months, he leads an active life and enjoys work as a health and safety
consultant.

    Today Andi will be swopping his suit for a pair of jeans in the Jeans for
Genes appeal to raise money for research into the condition that once threatened
to kill him.

    "By rights I should not be here," said Andi from St Neots, Cambridgeshire.

    "I am the oldest known surviving patient - and I intend to keep it that way.
I have problems but I put up with them. Why should I spend days or weeks on end
being ill when I would rather be out and about?

    "I don't look ill and most of the time I don't feel ill.

    "I just have to be careful about my lifestyle, about what I eat, and
immediately I recognise the first symptoms of an infection I go to the GP and
get extra-strong antibiotics.

    "I have infusions of gammaglobulin (a substance from blood which contains
antibodies against infection) every three weeks which have kept me going all
these years."

    BUT it was a very different story when Andi was a child - and his prospects
looked bleak.

    Hyper-IgM is a genetic condition which is passed on through the mother and
affects only boys. It wipes out the immune system leaving sufferers unable to
fight the slightest infection.

    From the age of 18 months to 14 years Andi was very ill with recurring chest
and bowel problems, junior rheumatoid arthritis, and was unable to absorb
nutrients from food.

    "I spent a lot of time in hospital and missed a great deal of school," says
Andi.

    "All I can remember is being in and out of hospital, giving numerous blood
samples, tablets, injections and weekly injections of gammaglobulin.

    "I wasn't able to play with other children and was unable to understand why
I was different.

    "From the age of six months I had recurring infections, but it wasn't until
I was 18 months old that doctors diagnosed the condtion.

    "I had no immune system. I could not fight the slightest infection. Even now
if I get an infection it is likely to be very serious and lasts a lot longer
than it would with a healthy person.

    "I can't have any vacinations so holidays to exotic destinations are out.

    "The worst months are in the winter when so many people have coughs and
colds. I used to commute into work by train but had to give that up as it made
me so ill."

    "I have two brothers who were not affected and three sisters, who have since
been tested and are not carriers of the gene.

    "It was just me and my cousin Peter. We were born 14 days apart, but while
he was healthier as a child and got worse as he grew older it was the opposite
for me."

    Amazingly, from the age of about 14 Andi's symptoms gradually began to
improve.

    The rheumatoid arthritis started to subside and he began to eat properly and
put on weight. He left school at 18 with nine O-levels and two A-levels and
spent the next four years at Liverpool University, graduating with honours in
biology.

    Andi suffered a major setback when his cousin Peter died of the condition
aged just 20.

    But it made him more determined that it would not beat him.

    THANKS to improvements in treatment, Andi has had his gammaglobulin once
every three weeks instead of weekly for the past nine years.

    It can be infused into his body at home via a drip - a process which takes
around four hours and which he does while watching TV.

    "When I go to support group meetings people are amazed that I have the
condition and am still alive," says Andi.

    "They assume I must be the parent of a Hyper-IgM child. There are people
there up to around the age of 18 and then a big gap until you get to me. I
believe my current well-being is down to being diagnosed early, and having
treatment from an early age - and my positive attitude.

    "Anyone with an immune deficiency is going to face problems but it is
important not to be negative about your health.

    "It's easy to become totally enveloped in your health problems but much
better to be positive and say that it is not going to beat you."

    A spokesman for the Primary Immunodeficiency Association said: "People with
Hyper-IgM usually have many problems and severe infections through childhood and
often deteriorate in their teenage years when they tend to develop liver
disease.

    "They usually do not live into adulthood. We believe Andi is the oldest
known person with the condition.

    "The only cure is a bone marrow transplant, but this can only happen if a
suitable donor is found and the patient is well enough to undergo the
transplant.

    "Gene therapy could help develop new treatments, and funds from the Jeans
for Genes Appeal will help carry out such research."

GRAPHIC: SURVIVOR: Andi Thomas with his girlfriend Donna; Picture: DAVID; CAIRNS

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1999


                              25 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                October 1, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 41

LENGTH: 634 words

HEADLINE: Man given a baboon liver is killed by ape disease

BODY:


    A BLOW has been dealt to pioneering medical experiments in animal-to-human
transplants following the death of a patient.

    Doctors in America disclosed yesterday that a man who died after receiving a
baboon liver was infected with a virus from the animal.

    The revelation is likely to raise fresh fears over the safety of patients
receiving animal organs.

    The transmission of the baboon virus to a human has alarmed scientists, who
believed it was not technically possible.

    The man, a 35-year-old HIV patient, died of a liver disease just over two
months after the transplant, which took place in 1992 amid great publicity.

    However, recent tests of his tissues found he had been infected with a virus
from the baboon whose organ he received, said Dr Marian Michaels, of the
University of Pittsburgh.

    'This is the first time that a virus has actually been cultured from a
person who received an animal transplant,' she told a meeting of infectious
disease experts.

    The patient, suffering from liver damage caused by the hepatitis B virus,
received the baboon liver in an experimental procedure and was given antibiotics
plus the antiviral drug ganciclovir. The patient and the animal were also
infected with a herpes virus known as cytomegalovirus (CMV).

    Baboons are known to carry CMV around 98 per cent of animals in the wild and
in the laboratory are infected which does them no harm.

    But CMV, which also infects many humans, was believed to be
'species-specific'.

    That is, the strain that infects one species, such as baboons, was not
believed to be able to infect humans.

    Dr Michaels added: 'I think it is of some concern that an animal virus
thought to be species-specific could be transmitted.' The patient took
ganciclovir for the first 18 days after the transplant, but had to stop because
of side-effects.

    Samples taken 28 days after the operation showed he was clearly infected
with the baboon's CMV.

    He was put back on ganciclovir, and tests showed that after 35 days the
patient was clear of the virus, which may have been killed by the drug, added Dr
Michaels. But he later died of a liver disease.

    She said the finding 'struck a blow' to the idea that primates could be used
for animal-to-human transplants.

    Because of the risk of unknown infections, the Food and Drug Administration
and the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention have put a moratorium on such
transplants.

    A similar moratorium is in place in Britain. But concern over transplants
was eased in August with publication of a study of 160 patients who received pig
organs showing no evidence of viral transmission.

    However, the antivivisection group Uncaged said the U.S. case showed
potential perils.

    'This confirms our suspicions that not enough is known about the dangers of
this form of transplantation,' declared a spokesman.

    Imutran, the Cambridge-based subsidiary of drug firm Novartis, which has
bred genetically-modified

    pigs for transplantation, said the baboon case underlined the problems of
using primates.

    Scientists had always recognised the risk of transmission of viruses was
much greater from primates than from pigs.

    In a separate case, the death of a teenager given controversial gene therapy
at the University of Pennsylvania has led to the suspension of all such
treatment in the U.S. pending an investigation.

    Doctors had infused a batch of modified genes into the 18-year-old's liver
at the highest dose allowed under guidelines approved by the Food and Drug
Administration.

    He had a rare metabolic disease.

    It was the first time the genes, introduced to the body through a virus, had
been shot directly into the liver. Seventeen other patients receiving smaller
doses have apparently suffered no side-effects.


GRAPHIC: ANIMAL-TO-HUMAN TRANSPLANTS UNDER THE MICROSCOPE

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1999


                              26 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                           September 26, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: BREAST CANCER: THE SCANDAL - DEADLY LOTTERY

BYLINE: Karol Sikora

BODY:


    By the time of the Millennium, 35,000 British women will have had a
diagnosis of breast cancer made during 1999. Put another way, the risk of a
woman getting breast cancer in her lifetime is one in 11.

    Can we prevent it? Unfortunately not. The causes are complex. People who eat
more fibre and less fat have a lower incidence, but drastic diet changes don't
always help. About 10 per cent of breast cancers seem to run in families, and
scientists are working on tests to predict who is at risk. The cause is also
bound up with hormonal cycles. The Pill, HRT, early child-bearing, number of
children, breast feeding, diet and alcohol all affect the risk.

    What is it?

    It's a growth abnormality of cells in the breast which can spread, often to
the lymph glands under the armpit and sometimes to the liver, bone and other
organs. Regular mammograms save lives by picking up the disease at an early
stage.

    How do you treat it?

    Surgery to remove the cancer and part or all of the breast is carried out in
nearly every case. The lymph nodes can be either removed or "sampled". This can
be followed by radiotherapy to destroy any remaining cancer cells. Chemotherapy
or hormone tablets such as tamoxifen are also used. The benefits usually
outweigh any side effects.

    Who gets the best care?

    Studies in Glasgow and Huddersfield have shown that women referred to
specialist surgical teams did better. In properly-organised breast clinics the
correct treatment is likely to be given at the start.

    What is being done?

    Getting it right is not just about money - it's about the political will to
do something. We need a network of cancer centres reaching out to every hospital
in Britain where breast cancer is diagnosed. We need to ensure every woman gets
the right treatment from the start. If expensive drugs are needed they should be
available to all.

    Will things get better?

    Exciting advances are on the horizon, including new gene prediction tests,
better drugs and gene therapy to cure the disease after it has spread. But we
must ensure that everyone benefits from the best treatment. Britain leads the
world in many aspects of cancer research. Becoming the best in Europe in
treating breast cancer would save an astonishing 3,000 lives a year. British
women deserve it.

    Professor Karol Sikora is Britain's leading cancer specialist and Director
of Clinical Oncology at Hammersmith Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1999


                              27 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 15, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: Genetic smart-cards;
Doctors predict health map on plastic by 2020

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh

BODY:


    IMAGINE a world in which you know from birth your chances of developing
cancer or other diseases.

    And your personal health profile is kept not in a doctor's filing cabinet
but on a plastic smart card.

    This brave new world of medicine could become reality within 20 years,
doctors said yesterday.

    Health experts at the European Cancer Conference in Vienna said advances in
'genetic profiling' could help prevent cancer and transform treatments.

    Doctors have already identified genes responsible for some common forms of
lung, breast, bowel and prostate cancer.

    Patients identified as having a risk of certain diseases would receive
lifestyle advice and treatment to suit their own genetic profile. The
discoveries followed a British and American project aimed at mapping all 80,000
genes in the human body.

    The Human Genome Project, which is due to finish in 2003, expects to trace
2,000 genes responsible for health, providing scope for a massive advance in
millennial medicine.

    It is thought that further work will pinpoint genes in other conditions such
as heart disease, diabetes and high blood pressure.

    Doctors could use the information to tell patients they are particularly at
risk and help them avoid the diseases from an earlier age.

    Diane Bachelor, of the National Cancer Institute in Holland, said in the
future, patients would be offered treatments tailored to their individual health
profiles rather than a uniform approach.

    'It will become practical to diagnose diseases with a molecular chip-based
diagnostic test that allows us to develop tailor-made therapy,' she said.

    'The computer will analyse the data, predict and diagnose illness and
prescribe the necessary treatment. Current diagnostic and treatment measures
will become obsolete.' Yesterday Professor Gordon McVie, director of the Cancer
Research Campaign, said: 'People are seriously optimistic about the advances
that are going to come as a result of this work on genes and some of the steps
forward we have seen are breathtaking.

    'Within 20 years, people will have genetic information on smart cards, which
will tell them about their propensity to develop anything from cancer to high
blood pressure or diabetes.

    'We will be able to tailor-make treatments specific to an individual type of
cancer.' Dr Lesley Walker, head of science information at the Cancer Research
Campaign, said doctors would even be able to tell whether patients had a
tendency to produce more oestrogen, which can cause cancer.

    SCIENTISTS have reinvigorated ageing monkeys' brains in an experiment that
could bring hope to people with Alzheimer's disease.

    Researchers at the University of California, San Diego, tested eight Rhesus
monkeys with an average age of 23, the equivalent of the late 60s to 70s in
humans.

    A gene that makes human nerve growth factor, an essential chemical found in
the brain, was inserted into skin cells taken from the monkeys. The modified
cells were then injected into the forebrain of four of the monkeys.

    The other four received an injection of cells without the NGF.

    After three months, the brains of the monkeys with the NGF injections
appeared almost youthful. The others showed normal cell loss for animals of
their age.

    Researchers have now applied for permission to test the gene therapy
technique in humans with Alzheimer's disease.


LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                              28 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 15, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: Genetic smart-cards;
Doctors predict health map on plastic by 2020

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh

BODY:


    IMAGINE a world in which you know from birth your chances of developing
cancer or other diseases.

    And your personal health profile is kept not in a doctor's filing cabinet
but on a plastic smart card.

    This brave new world of medicine could become reality within 20 years,
doctors said yesterday.

    Health experts at the European Cancer Conference in Vienna said advances in
'genetic profiling' could help prevent cancer and transform treatments.

    Doctors have already identified genes responsible for some common forms of
lung, breast, bowel and prostate cancer.

    Patients identified as having a risk of certain diseases would receive
lifestyle advice and treatment to suit their own genetic profile. The
discoveries followed a British and American project aimed at mapping all 80,000
genes in the human body.

    The Human Genome Project, which is due to finish in 2003, expects to trace
2,000 genes responsible for health, providing scope for a massive advance in
millennial medicine.

    It is thought that further work will pinpoint genes in other conditions such
as heart disease, diabetes and high blood pressure.

    Doctors could use the information to tell patients they are particularly at
risk and help them avoid the diseases from an earlier age.

    Diane Bachelor, of the National Cancer Institute in Holland, said in the
future, patients would be offered treatments tailored to their individual health
profiles rather than a uniform approach.

    'It will become practical to diagnose diseases with a molecular chip-based
diagnostic test that allows us to develop tailor-made therapy,' she said.

    'The computer will analyse the data, predict and diagnose illness and
prescribe the necessary treatment. Current diagnostic and treatment measures
will become obsolete.' Yesterday Professor Gordon McVie, director of the Cancer
Research Campaign, said: 'People are seriously optimistic about the advances
that are going to come as a result of this work on genes and some of the steps
forward we have seen are breathtaking.

    'Within 20 years, people will have genetic information on smart cards, which
will tell them about their propensity to develop anything from cancer to high
blood pressure or diabetes.

    'We will be able to tailor-make treatments specific to an individual type of
cancer.' Dr Lesley Walker, head of science information at the Cancer Research
Campaign, said doctors would even be able to tell whether patients had a
tendency to produce more oestrogen, which can cause cancer.

    SCIENTISTS have reinvigorated ageing monkeys' brains in an experiment that
could bring hope to people with Alzheimer's disease.

    Researchers at the University of California, San Diego, tested eight Rhesus
monkeys with an average age of 23, the equivalent of the late 60s to 70s in
humans.

    A gene that makes human nerve growth factor, an essential chemical found in
the brain, was inserted into skin cells taken from the monkeys. The modified
cells were then injected into the forebrain of four of the monkeys.

    The other four received an injection of cells without the NGF.

    After three months, the brains of the monkeys with the NGF injections
appeared almost youthful. The others showed normal cell loss for animals of
their age.

    Researchers have now applied for permission to test the gene therapy
technique in humans with Alzheimer's disease.


LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1999


                              29 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 10, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 354 words

HEADLINE: Geneticschief's fear at GM crop tests

BODY:


    A LEADING figure in the genetics industry has expressed his fears over the
safety of GM crop tests.

    John Jackson, the chairman of GBP 760million drugs firm Cell-tech
Chiroscience, said he was 'uneasy' about the possible health risk posed by farm
trials.

    He warned that pollen and seeds carried by the wind could spread toxins and
cause allergies.

    And antibiotic marker genes, routinely added to genetically modified crops
to study test results, could contribute to the rise of superbugs.

    Mr Jackson - a major advocate of genetic technology but not involved in GM
foods - said he wants to see trials continue.

    But people need to 'be alert to the possibility of allergy or long-term
toxicity' caused by the introduced genes, he added.

    Tests relied on the assumption that seeds germinated where they landed, he
said.

    But a seed could be moved by animals or birds.

    Mr Jackson, who is also chairman of the Countryside Alliance, added: 'We
have read quite a lot about the possibility of pollen being spread by wind or by
insects from the trial ground and hybridising with related species in the wild.

    'It might be carried a considerable distance and germinate in an area where
it cannot be observed.' Mr Jackson's firm uses genetic science to create new
types of drugs. It also researchs gene therapy - drugs designed to repair faulty
DNA in sick patients.

    In the drugs industry, firms had to go through tough trials before new
products were released, he said. GM food was not subjected to the same rigorous
tests. He also claimed that marker genes could increase resistance to
antibiotics and aid the rise of super-bugs.

    Anti GM campaigners welcomed his comments.

    Friends of the Earth Director Charles Secrett said: 'Mr Jackson has blown
the whistle on the irresponsibility of the GM giants.

    'We welcome a responsible person in the genetics industry voicing concern
about the slackness and dangers of the process of introducing GM foods into
Britain. Surely it is long past time for the Government to respond to the almost
unanimous opposition to the headlong rush into GM food.'


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1999


                              30 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 10, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: Geneticschief's fear at GM crop tests

BODY:


    A LEADING figure in the genetics industry has expressed his fears over the
safety of GM crop tests.

    John Jackson, the chairman of GBP 760million drugs firm Cell-tech
Chiroscience, said he was 'uneasy' about the possible health risk posed by farm
trials.

    He warned that pollen and seeds carried by the wind could spread toxins and
cause allergies.

    And antibiotic marker genes, routinely added to genetically modified crops
to study test results, could contribute to the rise of superbugs.

    Mr Jackson - a major advocate of genetic technology but not involved in GM
foods - said he wants to see trials continue.

    But people need to 'be alert to the possibility of allergy or long-term
toxicity' caused by the introduced genes, he added.

    Tests relied on the assumption that seeds germinated where they landed, he
said.

    But a seed could be moved by animals or birds.

    Mr Jackson, who is also chairman of the Countryside Alliance, added: 'We
have read quite a lot about the possibility of pollen being spread by wind or by
insects from the trial ground and hybridising with related species in the wild.

    'It might be carried a considerable distance and germinate in an area where
it cannot be observed.' Mr Jackson's firm uses genetic science to create new
types of drugs. It also researchs gene therapy - drugs designed to repair faulty
DNA in sick patients.

    In the drugs industry, firms had to go through tough trials before new
products were released, he said. GM food was not subjected to the same rigorous
tests. He also claimed that marker genes could increase resistance to
antibiotics and aid the rise of super-bugs.

    Anti GM campaigners welcomed his comments.

    Friends of the Earth Director Charles Secrett said: 'Mr Jackson has blown
the whistle on the irresponsibility of the GM giants.

    'We welcome a responsible person in the genetics industry voicing concern
about the slackness and dangers of the process of introducing GM foods into
Britain. Surely it is long past time for the Government to respond to the almost
unanimous opposition to the headlong rush into GM food.'


LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1999


                              31 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           September 10, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: BOOKS: THE GENE GENIE IS UNBOTTLED;
 IS THE GENOCIDE OF OUR ENTIRE MALE SPECIES A PRICE WORTH PAYING FOR A COMPLETE
END TO VIOLENT CRIME?

BYLINE: Paul Davies

BODY:


    CRIME ZERO by Michael Cordy (Bantam Press, pounds 9.99)

    Men," according to an insane female scientist in Michael Cordy's new
thriller, as she plots to wipe the entire male population off the face of the
Earth, "have become a cancer. They were once healthy cells in the 'body human'.
But now they are threatening the species. To cure the cancer you have to remove
the malignant cells."

    For those who don't know, Michael Cordy is not the pen name of Germaine
Greer or Fay Weldon (I've checked), but one of the most exciting British
novelists to emerge for years. His debut novel, The Miracle Strain, was one of
the most talked-about books of '97. A thought-provoking, genetic thriller with a
controversial religious twist, it flew out of the shops and made its author a
mint.

    Cordy came to novel writing rather late. For years he was a successful
advertising exec, but always yearned to write books instead. Eventually, he
decided that the only way to realise his ambition would be to quit his well
-paid job and throw himself into writing full time. The rest is history.

    The Miracle Strain was translated into 25 languages and the Disney
Corporation offered him $ 1.5 million for the movie rights.

    His second novel, Crime Zero, continues the futuristic, genetic theme,
taking as its premise a very timely ethical quandary: If you could isolate the
gene which causes men to commit violent crime, to what lengths would you go to
eradicate it?

    It's the year 2008 and covert trials are under way in the States into a
genetic cure for crime. The DNA of convicted male killers has been modified to
produce feelings of remorse, thus preventing them from breaking the law again.

    The gene therapy is a triumph, but a small group of female scientists,
politicians, and a dangerously single-minded (female) FBI director want to take
the experiment to its logical yet catastrophic conclusion: destroy the criminal
gene altogether and remove violent urges from males all over the world - at any
price.

    Luke Decker, a disillusioned FBI agent (and a man, thank goodness) uncovers
their murderous plan, known as Project Crime Zero, and with the help of an old
flame, top geneticist Kathy Kerr, sets out to save the world (or the male half,
at least).

    Despite some two-dimensional characterisation (the bloodthirsty FBI chief is
like a feminist version of Austin Powers' nemesis, Doctor Evil) and the
occasional silly plot device, the author cleverly taps into our scientific fears
and raises some fascinating questions.

    How closely is our behaviour linked to our genes? Would the world be a
better place if men were less aggressive? Or would this make them less driven to
achieve?

    Michael Cordy has given the British thriller a much-needed adrenalin
injection and Crime Zero should cement his reputation as our answer to Michael
Crichton. It's a storming, action-packed thriller, full of big, topical ideas
and backed up by meticulous research.

    The plot twists and turns like a DNA double-helix and the tough, devious
female villains are most welcome in what's often a predictable, macho genre,
populated by willy-waving bozos.

    Crime Zero certainly brings a whole new meaning to Girl Power.

GRAPHIC: CANCEROUS: Men have become malignant cells threatening the human
species

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 1999


                              32 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC SUPER BABIES STORM;
Key discovery raises spectre of designer children with high IQs

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh;Neil Sears

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS in the U.S. claimed yesterday to have found a way of increasing
intelligence.

    They created super-bright mice by giving them an extra copy of a gene which
controls production of a key brain chemical.

    News of the research triggered widespread alarm that it could pave the way
for the horrifying

    creation of 'designer babies' with massive IQs.

    There were warnings that genetic engineering is out of control and demands
for an immediate public debate.

    Dr Vivienne Nathanson, head of ethics at the British Medical Association,
said: 'Society is learning to celebrate people for their individuality, not just
because they are particularly bright. This discovery leads to the spectre of
designer babies and the concept of children being rejected because they do not
have these qualities.' Nuala Scarisbrick, spokeswoman for the antiabortion group
Life, called the research 'an insult to humanity'.

    But some experts said it could lead to therapy to cure learning disorders in
children and dementia problems like Alzheimer's in the elderly.

    The controversial research, carried out by scientists at Princeton and
Washington universities and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is published
in today's issue of the journal Nature.

    They said their mice learned more quickly and remembered what they had
learned for longer.

    The enhanced abilities lasted into adulthood, when learning ability and
memory naturally taper off, and were passed on to their offspring.

    The scientists say the study has identified a common biochemical function as
the centre of learning.

    'This points to the possibility that enhancement of learning and memory or
even IQ is feasible through genetic engineering,' team leader Professor Joe
Tzien said last night.

    Scientists said it was just a matter of time before the procedure was
carried out on humans.

    Dr Robert Malenka, a behavioural sciences specialist at Stanford University
in the U.S. said: 'To jump from this very elegant molecular work in a mouse to
humans is a very, very big jump. Nevertheless, it is a jump we can make and will
make eventually.' But James Yeandel of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority which regulates all test-tube baby procedures in Britain said:
'Creating super-intelligent babies would be deeply unacceptable and would not be
allowed in the UK.

    'The genetic mechanisms behind these kind of developments are extremely
complex and poorly understood in humans.' Lord Alton, an independent peer and
outspoken opponent of human cloning, said the very fact that the research had
taken place was alarming. 'It's as though experimentation now has no limits,' he
said. 'Gene research is becoming like a juggernaut that's running out of
control.

    'Science is not being informed by ethics there's no consideration of the
desirability of many of the experiments.

    There seems to be an insatiable desire to hanker after forbidden knowledge,
as though we don't accept there should be any limits to what we do. The human
intelligence which produced Shakespeare and Einstein seems to me to be perfectly
adequate.' Mrs Scarisbrick said: 'People should be valued for what they are this
would give parents a pick-and-mix choice of children's characteristics, as if
they were in a human supermarket.' Lord Winston, a Labour peer and
world-renowned expert on fertility treatment, said brain research on animals
could produce invaluable results but must be handled carefully.

    He said: 'The brain is incredibly complicated and very poorly understood.

    One has to be very cautious about results like this. Inserting genes is
hugely unpredictable. Half the time the genes don't work anyway, and there is
risk of them causing damage to other genes.' Dr Amin Gregory, clinical director
and ethics committee member at the private London Fertility Centre, said
interference with the genes of human embryos would be fraught with dangers and
the risk of side effects not seen in the mice.

    Dr Gregory said: 'Gene therapy is far from perfected and there could be
horrendously bad effects. It is worth trying with plants and lower animals, but
I don't think it's right to apply it to humans.'


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                              33 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 706 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC SUPER BABIES STORM;
Key discovery raises spectre of designer children with high IQs

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh;Neil Sears

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS in the U.S. claimed yesterday to have found a way of increasing
intelligence.

    They created super-bright mice by giving them an extra copy of a gene which
controls production of a key brain chemical.

    News of the research triggered widespread alarm that it could pave the way
for the horrifying creation of 'designer babies' with massive IQs.

    There were warnings that genetic engineering is out of control and demands
for an immediate public debate.

    Dr Vivienne Nathanson, head of ethics at the British Medical Association,
said: 'Society is learning to celebrate people for their individuality, not just
because they are particularly bright. This discovery leads to the spectre of
designer babies and the concept of children being rejected because they do not
have these qualities.' Nuala Scarisbrick, spokeswoman for the antiabortion group
Life, called the research 'an insult to humanity'.

    But some experts said it could lead to therapy to cure learning disorders in
children and dementia problems like Alzheimer's in the elderly.

    The controversial research, carried out by scientists at Superbabies storm
Continued from Page One Princeton and Washington universities and Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, is published in today's issue of the journal Nature.

    They said their mice learned more quickly and remembered what they had
learned for longer.

    The enhanced abilities lasted into adulthood, when learning ability and
memory naturally taper off, and were passed on to their offspring.

    The scientists say the study has identified a common biochemical function as
the centre of learning.

    'This points to the possibility that enhancement of learning and memory or
even IQ is feasible through genetic engineering,' team leader Professor Joe
Tzien said last night.

    Scientists said it was just a matter of time before the procedure was
carried out on humans.

    Dr Robert Malenka, a behavioural sciences specialist at Stanford University
in the U.S. said: 'To jump from this very elegant molecular work in a mouse to
humans is a very, very big jump. Nevertheless, it is a jump we can make and will
make eventually.' But James Yeandel of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority which regulates all test-tube baby procedures in Britain said:
'Creating super-intelligent babies would be deeply unacceptable and would not be
allowed in the UK.

    'The genetic mechanisms behind these kind of developments are extremely
complex and poorly understood in humans.' Lord Alton, an independent peer and
outspoken opponent of human cloning, said the very fact that the research had
taken place was alarming. 'It's as though experimentation now has no limits,' he
said. 'Gene research is becoming like a juggernaut that's running out of
control.

    'Science is not being informed by ethics there's no consideration of the
desirability of many of the experiments.

    There seems to be an insatiable desire to hanker after forbidden knowledge,
as though we don't accept there should be any limits to what we do. The human
intelligence which produced Shakespeare and Einstein seems to me to be perfectly
adequate.' Mrs Scarisbrick said: 'People should be valued for what they are this
would give parents a pick-and-mix choice of children's characteristics, as if
they were in a human supermarket.' Lord Winston, a Labour peer and
world-renowned expert on fertility treatment, said brain research on animals
could produce invaluable results but must be handled carefully.

    He said: 'The brain is incredibly complicated and very poorly understood.

    One has to be very cautious about results like this. Inserting genes is
hugely unpredictable. Half the time the genes don't work anyway, and there is
risk of them causing damage to other genes.' Dr Amin Gregory, clinical director
and ethics committee member at the private London Fertility Centre, said
interference with the genes of human embryos would be fraught with dangers and
the risk of side effects not seen in the mice.

    Dr Gregory said: 'Gene therapy is far from perfected and there could be
horrendously bad effects. It is worth trying with plants and lower animals, but
I don't think it's right to apply it to humans.'


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                              34 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC SUPER BABIES STORM;
Key discovery raises spectre of designer children with high IQs

BYLINE: Beezy Marsh;Neil Sears

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS in the U.S. claimed yesterday to have found a way of increasing
intelligence.

    They created super-bright mice by giving them an extra copy of a gene which
controls production of a key brain chemical.

    News of the research triggered widespread alarm that it could pave the way
for the horrifying creation of 'designer babies' with massive IQs.

    There were warnings that genetic engineering is out of control and demands
for an immediate public debate.

    Dr Vivienne Nathanson, head of ethics at the British Medical Association,
said: 'Society is learning to celebrate people for their individuality, not just
because they are particularly bright. This discovery leads to the spectre of
designer babies and the concept of children being rejected because they do not
have these qualities.' Nuala Scarisbrick, spokeswoman for the antiabortion group
Life, called the research 'an insult to humanity'.

    But some experts said it could lead to therapy to cure learning disorders in
children and dementia problems like Alzheimer's in the elderly.

    The controversial research, carried out by scientists at Superbabies storm
Continued from Page One Princeton and Washington universities and Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, is published in today's issue of the journal Nature.

    They said their mice learned more quickly and remembered what they had
learned for longer.

    The enhanced abilities lasted into adulthood, when learning ability and
memory naturally taper off, and were passed on to their offspring.

    The scientists say the study has identified a common biochemical function as
the centre of learning.

    'This points to the possibility that enhancement of learning and memory or
even IQ is feasible through genetic engineering,' team leader Professor Joe
Tzien said last night.

    Scientists said it was just a matter of time before the procedure was
carried out on humans.

    Dr Robert Malenka, a behavioural sciences specialist at Stanford University
in the U.S. said: 'To jump from this very elegant molecular work in a mouse to
humans is a very, very big jump. Nevertheless, it is a jump we can make and will
make eventually.' But James Yeandel of the Human Fertilisation and Embryology
Authority which regulates all test-tube baby procedures in Britain said:
'Creating super-intelligent babies would be deeply unacceptable and would not be
allowed in the UK.

    'The genetic mechanisms behind these kind of developments are extremely
complex and poorly understood in humans.' Lord Alton, an independent peer and
outspoken opponent of human cloning, said the very fact that the research had
taken place was alarming. 'It's as though experimentation now has no limits,' he
said. 'Gene research is becoming like a juggernaut that's running out of
control.

    'Science is not being informed by ethics there's no consideration of the
desirability of many of the experiments.

    There seems to be an insatiable desire to hanker after forbidden knowledge,
as though we don't accept there should be any limits to what we do. The human
intelligence which produced Shakespeare and Einstein seems to me to be perfectly
adequate.' Mrs Scarisbrick said: 'People should be valued for what they are this
would give parents a pick-and-mix choice of children's characteristics, as if
they were in a human supermarket.' Lord Winston, a Labour peer and
world-renowned expert on fertility treatment, said brain research on animals
could produce invaluable results but must be handled carefully.

    He said: 'The brain is incredibly complicated and very poorly understood.

    One has to be very cautious about results like this. Inserting genes is
hugely unpredictable. Half the time the genes don't work anyway, and there is
risk of them causing damage to other genes.' Dr Amin Gregory, clinical director
and ethics committee member at the private London Fertility Centre, said
interference with the genes of human embryos would be fraught with dangers and
the risk of side effects not seen in the mice.

    Dr Gregory said: 'Gene therapy is far from perfected and there could be
horrendously bad effects. It is worth trying with plants and lower animals, but
I don't think it's right to apply it to humans.'


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                              36 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 31, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 307 words

HEADLINE: Blue genes that make you tired and miserable

BODY:


    COCOA and a good book may be a wasted effort. The secret of a good night's
sleep is in the genes, according to researchers.

    Some people's body clocks simply run to a different time, waking them up
when they ought to be asleep, and the trait is inherited, scientists have found.

    They are now working on isolating the gene which governs the sleep cycle and
believe gene therapy could one day not only help insomniacs, but could also
combat jet lag and the effects of shift work.

    Previously, experts thought sleep habits were largely due to childhood
bedtimes. The new work suggests the problem is out of parents' hands.

    Researchers at the University Utah in the U.S. monitored several generations
of three families with specific sleep disorder, called advanced sleep-phase
syndrome (ASPS).

    They concluded that a single gene is responsible for the circadian cycle,
the body's internal clock which tells it when to sleep and when to wake.

    If isolated from light and other people sufferers would tend to fall asleep
around 7pm and get up around 4am or 5am.

    Non-sufferers keep to a more normal pattern, sleeping from around 11pm to
7am, the team led by Louis Ptacek report in the journal Nature Medicine.

    However, British sleep expert Jim Hall, of Loughborough University, said he
had yet to be convinced that sleep disturbance was purely genetic.

    'There may be some element of a genetic disposition towards disturbed sleep,
but our view is still very much that it's a learned habit,' he said.

    'If people have been put to bed early as children, or if their parents are
early risers, they may tend to have similar sleep patterns.' He said those who
suffered ASPS could be helped to have a normal sleep pattern by taking a couple
of short naps in the day, to ward off tiredness and extend their waking hours.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1999


                              37 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 31, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: Blue genes that make you tired and miserable

BODY:


    COCOA and a good book may be a wasted effort. The secret of a good night's
sleep is in the genes, according to researchers.

    Some people's body clocks simply run to a different time, waking them up
when they ought to be asleep, and the trait is inherited, scientists have found.

    They are now working on isolating the gene which governs the sleep cycle and
believe gene therapy could one day not only help insomniacs, but could also
combat jet lag and the effects of shift work.

    Previously, experts thought sleep habits were largely due to childhood
bedtimes. The new work suggests the problem is out of parents' hands.

    Researchers at the University Utah in the U.S. monitored several generations
of three families with specific sleep disorder, called advanced sleep-phase
syndrome (ASPS).

    They concluded that a single gene is responsible for the circadian cycle,
the body's internal clock which tells it when to sleep and when to wake.

    If isolated from light and other people sufferers would tend to fall asleep
around 7pm and get up around 4am or 5am.

    Non-sufferers keep to a more normal pattern, sleeping from around 11pm to
7am, the team led by Louis Ptacek report in the journal Nature Medicine.

    However, British sleep expert Jim Hall, of Loughborough University, said he
had yet to be convinced that sleep disturbance was purely genetic.

    'There may be some element of a genetic disposition towards disturbed sleep,
but our view is still very much that it's a learned habit,' he said.

    'If people have been put to bed early as children, or if their parents are
early risers, they may tend to have similar sleep patterns.' He said those who
suffered ASPS could be helped to have a normal sleep pattern by taking a couple
of short naps in the day, to ward off tiredness and extend their waking hours.


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1999


                              38 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 25, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Lazing about may be down to your genes

BYLINE: Stephen Smith

BODY:


    IT could be the scientific breakthrough that couch potatoes have been
waiting for.

    Researchers are investigating whether the inability of some people to take
exercise is not due to chronic laziness, but is all in their genes.

    A new centre at Glasgow University is launching groundbreaking research into
the genetic makeup of the many Scots who find themselves incapable of making it
to the gym.

    If they are able to prove a link between the DNA pattern and intolerance of
exercise, it will open up the possibility of scientists being able to alter a
'laziness gene' and improve health.

    While that could be good news for Scotland's appalling health record, it
would be certain to spark widespread ethical concerns.

    The prospect of 'gene therapy' would also prove a nightmare for sports
authorities trying to cut out cheating. The university's new Centre for Exercise
Science and Medicine, which is launched on Thursday, will test samples from
dozens of people who have health problems in an attempt to find a pattern.

    The possibility emerges from studies in genetics on fruit flies. A
distinction was found between 'sitters', who tended to fly about less, and
'rovers' who were more active, it was discovered which category new-born flies
would come into.

    Professor Susan Ward, who is director of the centre, said: 'The scientific
evidence at the moment is pretty circumspect and we have to remember that there
are environmental factors which can also have an influence.

    'But in the absence of anything else, it is possible that a low tolerance
for exercise could be genetic.

    We are getting to the stage where genetic therapy may be available.

    'However, whether it should be is not a question for us, because that is
where there is an ethical question.' Professor Ward says the creation of such a
therapy might help people exercise but would be certain to change the face of
sport. 'As soon as there is a treatment to treat a genetic defect at the
clinical level it will find its way into the athletics field.' Research results
could be published as early as a year from now.


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                              39 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 25, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Lazing about may be down to your genes

BYLINE: Stephen Smith

BODY:


    IT could be the scientific breakthrough that couch potatoes have been
waiting for.

    Researchers are investigating whether the inability of some people to take
exercise is not due to chronic laziness, but is all in their genes.

    A new centre at Glasgow University is launching groundbreaking research into
the genetic makeup of the many Scots who find themselves incapable of making it
to the gym.

    If they are able to prove a link between the DNA pattern and intolerance of
exercise, it will open up the possibility of scientists being able to alter a
'laziness gene' and improve health.

    While that could be good news for Scotland's appalling health record, it
would be certain to spark widespread ethical concerns.

    The prospect of 'gene therapy' would also prove a nightmare for sports
authorities trying to cut out cheating. The university's new Centre for Exercise
Science and Medicine, which is launched on Thursday, will test samples from
dozens of people who have health problems in an attempt to find a pattern.

    The possibility emerges from studies in genetics on fruit flies. A
distinction was found between 'sitters', who tended to fly about less, and
'rovers' who were more active, it was discovered which category new-born flies
would come into.

    Professor Susan Ward, who is director of the centre, said: 'The scientific
evidence at the moment is pretty circumspect and we have to remember that there
are environmental factors which can also have an influence.

    'But in the absence of anything else, it is possible that a low tolerance
for exercise could be genetic.

    We are getting to the stage where genetic therapy may be available.

    'However, whether it should be is not a question for us, because that is
where there is an ethical question.' Professor Ward says the creation of such a
therapy might help people exercise but would be certain to change the face of
sport. 'As soon as there is a treatment to treat a genetic defect at the
clinical level it will find its way into the athletics field.' Research results
could be published as early as a year from now.


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1999


                              40 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 18, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 60

LENGTH: 216 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY ROUNDUP

BODY:


    TV service Money Channel appointed Tony Hugh Hob-man, 44, a director.

    He is chief executive of ProShare.

    Autologic, the motor services group, raised half-year pre-tax profits 9pc to
GBP 6.3m and dividends 9pc to 3p.

    Oxford Biomedica, the gene therapy group, turned in first-half losses of GBP
2.1m, up from GBP 1.8m, with no dividend.

    MILS Technology, which produces low-level lighting systems, closed at 28 1
/2 p, a 3 1 /2 p premium on first-day dealings on Ofex.

    Ultimate Leisure finance director Graham Forrest quit to devote more time to
his job as chief executive of Lady in Leisure, scene of a recent boardroom
split.

    Vodafone Australia is buying Vodafone New Zealand for GBP 500m as part of
plans for its GBP 800m flotation next year.

    Helphire (up 10p to 265p) is paying at least GBP 0.5m, depending on future
profits, for credit hire company 1st Automotive.

    Advertiser WPP's Ogilvy-One Worldwide offshoot is buying Brazilian marketing
consultancy DataSearch for an undisclosed sum.

    Virgin Music, part of EMI, has signed a worldwide recording agreement with
David Bowie. His first record for Virgin will be out on October 5.

    Raglan Properties completed the sale of six properties for GBP 10.1m and
bought a warehouse in Peterborough for GBP 3.25m.


LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                              41 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 18, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 60

LENGTH: 217 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY ROUNDUP

BODY:


    TV service Money Channel appointed Tony Hugh Hob-man, 44, a director.

    He is chief executive of ProShare.

    Autologic, the motor services group, raised half-year pre-tax profits 9pc to
GBP 6.3m and dividends 9pc to 3p.

    Oxford Biomedica, the gene therapy group, turned in first-half losses of GBP
2.1m, up from GBP 1.8m, with no dividend.

    MILS Technology, which produces low-level lighting systems, closed at 28 1
/2 p, a 3 1 /2 p premium on first-day dealings on Ofex.

    Ultimate Leisure finance director Graham Forrest quit to devote more time to
his job as chief executive of Lady in Leisure, scene of a recent boardroom
split.

    Vodafone Australia is buying Vodafone New Zealand for GBP 500m as part of
plans for its GBP 800m flotation next year.

    Helphire (up 10p to 265p) is paying at least GBP 0.5m, depending on future
profits, for credit hire company 1st Automotive.

    Advertiser WPP's Ogilvy-One Worldwide offshoot is buying Brazilian marketing
consultancy DataSearch for an undisclosed sum.

    Virgin Music, part of EMI, has signed a worldwide recording agreement with
David Bowie. His first record for Virgin will be out on October 5.

    Raglan Properties completed the sale of six properties for GBP 10.1m and
bought a warehouse in Peterborough for GBP 3.25m.


LOAD-DATE: August 19, 1999


                              43 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             July 30, 1999, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 830 words

HEADLINE: CANCER: THE SCOURGE THAT ATTACKS US ALL;
 LYNN FAULDS WOOD .. BUT THERE IS HOPE

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    Medical CorrespondentIT IS the disease we fear the most and which knows no
boundaries. Rich or poor. Famous or unknown. Top boss or unemployed.

    Cancer is no respecter of wealth or status, as Cilla Black can testify today
following news that husband Bobby, 57, has it in his liver and lungs.

    It claimed the life of Roy Castle who died of lung cancer in September,
1994, blaming passive smoking in nightclubs where he worked.

    Comedienne Marti Caine died of cancer of the lymph glands in November, 1995.
Sir James Goldsmith succumbed to cancer of the pancreas in 1997.

    Last year saw the death of Linda McCartney from breast cancer, despite her
healthy lifestyle and vegetarian diet. Shortly afterwards, singer-songwriter
Carly Simon revealed she, too, was fighting the disease.

    The Duchess Of Westminster, wife of Britain's wealthiest man, is battling
breast cancer and former snooker world champion Alex "Hurricane" Higgins is
seriously ill with throat cancer.

    TV presenter Helen Rollason was given three months to live in August, 1997
but has continued to fight bravely against bowel cancer, which has now spread to
her lungs.

    Presenter Lynn Faulds Wood was struck by bowel cancer seven years ago but
has made a remarkable recovery and now runs her own Beating Bowel Cancer
charity.

    But for every celebrity affected, there are dozens of others daily being
diagnosed with the dreaded disease. Every day, 400 of us lose our lives to it.

    It will strike one in three of us at some time and one in four will
eventually die of it. It affects 260,000 people every year in this country and
claims 160,000 lives.

    Top of the list is lung cancer which is the commonest form in Britain,
affecting more than 42,000 people every year - 16 in every 100. Yet it is one of
the few cancers that is easily preventable in most cases. Ninety-five per cent
of all lung cancer is caused by smoking. Stub out cigarettes and you virtually
eliminate lung cancer. In fact, a third of all cancers are linked to lifestyle -
smoking and diet.

    ANOTHER easily preventable variety is skin cancer, caused by over-exposure
to the sun.

    Yet in the majority of cancer cases, and all too often, doctors have no idea
what might have caused the disease or clue as to what triggered the original
malignant change and turned a healthy cell into a cancerous one. There is no
doubt that some families have a genetic predisposition to cancer.

    Up to one in ten of common cancers, particularly breast, bowel, ovary,
prostate and testicular, run in families to some extent.

    But cancer is no longer an automatic death sentence. For every person who
dies, there are many more living and coping.

    Forty years ago, virtually no cancers were curable. Today, many can be cured
while many more can be controlled, enabling sufferers to enjoy better and longer
lives. Modern medicine is beginning to win strategic battles against this deadly
enemy.

    Breakthroughs are announced almost daily as exciting new techniques become
available. Thanks to screening, earlier diagnosis, improved radiotherapy and
chemotherapy and sophisticated surgery, there is a growing army of survivors.

    Child deaths from cancer have fallen by half in the last decade. Deaths in
the 25-49 age group have dropped substantially. Stomach cancer has decreased
significantly thanks to better diets and the refrigeration of food.

    Breast cancer is claiming few lives among younger women because of screening
and drug treatments.

    Ironically, these improvements come at a time when cancer is on the
increase.

    The number of cases has risen by more than 10 per cent in the past 10 years.
But much of this is because cancer is mainly an old person's disease and we are
all living longer.

    Progress against lung, bowel and prostate cancers - all major killers - has
been disappointing. Skin cancer is spiralling out of control. Lung cancer in
women in going up, threatening to become an epidemic as more teenage girls start
smoking.

    BUT optimism is still high. Experts say new techniques and increased
knowledge should not only reduce the risk from certain forms, but improve
treatment.

    High-tech radiotherapy, radioactive implants, cocktails of chemotherapy
drugs and "magic bullets" which target cancer cells are among new weapons
already saving lives.

    They are being joined by more powerful, high-tech weapons. Gene therapy is
one of the most likely to lead to the breakthrough in the search for a cure.

    Scientists have already identified two of the major genes responsible for
breast cancer, BRCA1 and BRCA2. This means women in high-risk families can be
identified and told if they are likely to develop the disease.

    Scientists believe that within the next decade, gene therapy could be a
reality in prevention and treatment, including possible vaccines and targeting
drugs to individual cells.

    We are winning the war against cancer. There has never been a greater time
for hope.

GRAPHIC: Linda McCartney; Alex Higgins; Helen Rollason; James Goldsmith;; Carly
Simon; Roy Castle; Marti Caine; PAGE 6 THE MIRROR, Friday, July 30,; 1999

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1999


                              44 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 20, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 45

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Looking for the love genes;
GOOD HEALTH

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    FAILING love lives may soon be genetically modified. Only months after the
launch of Viagra, doctors have revealed that they are developing a gene therapy
that could revolutionise treatment for impotence.

    In tests on animals the beneficial effects of the gene therapy lasted for up
to four months, and researchers found that older animals were more active than
those less than half their age that did not have the treatment.

    The therapy involves injecting genes or DNA into the impotent male which
triggers the production of proteins that are often missing for a variety of
reasons. Other genes being tried release chemicals that heighten sensitivity.

    At the University of California in Los Angeles one team of doctors is using
a gene which switches on the body's production of nitric oxide, a chemical which
plays an essential role

    in male arousal.

    A second team of researchers is looking at using a different gene that makes
body cells release a chemical whose effect on the smooth muscle cells is to make
body tissue hypersensitive.

    A third team is studying the use of yet another gene which works on
strenthening muscle tissue.

    Doctors say that one of the big advantages of gene therapy for impotence is
that the effects of one injection last for months afterwards. That, they say,
means it would be the first treatment to provide spontaneous arousal.

    A large number of animals have so far been given the gene treatment and
human clinical trials are expected to begin shortly. The gene therapy produced
the same results in young and old animals and there have been no side-effects.

    The development of the gene treatment is another major change in the
treatment of impotence.

    Until the relatively recent arrival of drugs and other treatments, impotence
was thought to be solely a psychological problem for men with little or no
treatment available other than a course of psychotherapy.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1999


                              45 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 20, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 45

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Looking for the love genes;
GOOD HEALTH

BYLINE: Roger Dobson

BODY:


    FAILING love lives may soon be genetically modified. Only months after the
launch of Viagra, doctors have revealed that they are developing a gene therapy
that could revolutionise treatment for impotence.

    In tests on animals the beneficial effects of the gene therapy lasted for up
to four months, and researchers found that older animals were more active than
those less than half their age that did not have the treatment.

    The therapy involves injecting genes or DNA into the impotent male which
triggers the production of proteins that are often missing for a variety of
reasons. Other genes being tried release chemicals that heighten sensitivity.

    At the University of California in Los Angeles one team of doctors is using
a gene which switches on the body's production of nitric oxide, a chemical which
plays an essential role

    in male arousal.

    A second team of researchers is looking at using a different gene that makes
body cells release a chemical whose effect on the smooth muscle cells is to make
body tissue hypersensitive.

    A third team is studying the use of yet another gene which works on
strenthening muscle tissue.

    Doctors say that one of the big advantages of gene therapy for impotence is
that the effects of one injection last for months afterwards. That, they say,
means it would be the first treatment to provide spontaneous arousal.

    A large number of animals have so far been given the gene treatment and
human clinical trials are expected to begin shortly. The gene therapy produced
the same results in young and old animals and there have been no side-effects.

    The development of the gene treatment is another major change in the
treatment of impotence.

    Until the relatively recent arrival of drugs and other treatments, impotence
was thought to be solely a psychological problem for men with little or no
treatment available other than a course of psychotherapy.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1999


                              46 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 July 11, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 43

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: Suspended gene doctor was set for trials in UK

BYLINE: Alison Gordon

BODY:


    THE doctor suspended over genetic experiments in Denmark was only weeks away
from starting trials in Britain, it was revealed last night.

    Nagy Habib, head of liver surgery at Hammersmith Hospital in London, had
been cleared to start treating 19 dying liver cancer patients in September.

    Now the ground-breaking research, which could have offered hope to thousands
of terminally ill cancer sufferers, has been halted while a top-level NHS
investigation is set up.

    Mr Habib, 46, a leading liver expert, planned to inject human cells combined
with an influenza virus to replace bad genes and make tumours wither and die.

    The flu virus is one of the most infectious known, and the allegations
against Mr Habib centre on safety controls.

    He said in a statement obtained by The Mail on Sunday that his suspension
was 'potentially ruining, both personally and professionally'.

    It follows allegations about trials he conducted as head of a joint British
and Danish project at the Arhus Community Hospital in Denmark. One of the strict
guidelines laid down for the treatment was that patients should be kept in
isolation for three days after treatment.

    But in Denmark some reportedly left hospital within hours.

    In Britain, the Medicines Control Agency and the Government's gene therapy
advisory committee had given approval for the treatment to start in September.

    The ethical committee at Hammersmith Hospital had also given it the green
light.

    Now an independent inquiry is to investigate allegations that Mr Habib was
carrying out gene therapy before approval had been given.

    But Mr Habib is 'astounded' by his suspension.

    He said: 'All regulatory procedures had been satisfied by February, but the
trial has not started because the gene therapy product has not yet been supplied
by the manufacturer.' He added: 'No patient, British or foreign, has been
treated or recruited to the study. Allegations that there has been a violation
of protocol are without any foundation whatsoever.' Hammersmith Hospital refused
to comment.


GRAPHIC: RESEARCH: NAGY HABIB HAD LINED UP 19 PATIENTS

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                              47 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 July 11, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 43

LENGTH: 345 words

HEADLINE: Suspended gene doctor was set for trials in UK

BYLINE: Alison Gordon

BODY:


    THE doctor suspended over genetic experiments in Denmark was only weeks away
from starting trials in Britain, it was revealed last night.

    Nagy Habib, head of liver surgery at Hammersmith Hospital in London, had
been cleared to start treating 19 dying liver cancer patients in September.

    Now the ground-breaking research, which could have offered hope to thousands
of terminally ill cancer sufferers, has been halted while a top-level NHS
investigation is set up.

    Mr Habib, 46, a leading liver expert, planned to inject human cells combined
with an influenza virus to replace bad genes and make tumours wither and die.

    The flu virus is one of the most infectious known, and the allegations
against Mr Habib centre on safety controls.

    He said in a statement obtained by The Mail on Sunday that his suspension
was 'potentially ruining, both personally and professionally'.

    It follows allegations about trials he conducted as head of a joint British
and Danish project at the Arhus Community Hospital in Denmark. One of the strict
guidelines laid down for the treatment was that patients should be kept in
isolation for three days after treatment.

    But in Denmark some reportedly left hospital within hours.

    In Britain, the Medicines Control Agency and the Government's gene therapy
advisory committee had given approval for the treatment to start in September.

    The ethical committee at Hammersmith Hospital had also given it the green
light.

    Now an independent inquiry is to investigate allegations that Mr Habib was
carrying out gene therapy before approval had been given.

    But Mr Habib is 'astounded' by his suspension.

    He said: 'All regulatory procedures had been satisfied by February, but the
trial has not started because the gene therapy product has not yet been supplied
by the manufacturer.' He added: 'No patient, British or foreign, has been
treated or recruited to the study. Allegations that there has been a violation
of protocol are without any foundation whatsoever.' Hammersmith Hospital refused
to comment.


GRAPHIC: RESEARCH: NAGY HABIB HAD LINED UP 19 PATIENTS

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1999


                              51 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  July 4, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 1;2

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: GENE DOCTOR SUSPENDED

BYLINE: Alison Gordon;Martyn Halle

BODY:


    A LEADING doctor has been suspended from his prestigious NHS post amid
allegations that safety controls in a pioneering gene therapy trial on dying
liver cancer patients were breached.

    The treatment being tested on patients by Nagy Habib, head of liver surgery
at London's Hammersmith Hospital, involved using an influenza virus .

    . . one of the most infectious viruses known to man.

    The Government's gene therapy advisory committee has set up the first
investigation of its kind into the controversial research project.

    It is expected to examine which safety controls were in place to prevent
possible spread of any infection from terminally ill foreign patients to others
and exactly what experiments took place at the Hammersmith Hospital, one of
Britain's top teaching hospitals.

    Among the allegations are that doctors involved in the joint British and
Danish research project led by Mr Habib were not keeping their patients in
isolation for the three days required under the trial protocol.

    The Danish authorities have said there is no reason for concern but have
suspended the study at Arhus Community Hospital, Denmark's biggest hospital, a
full investigation. The Danish

    Press has reported that some patients left the hospital within hours of the
treatment.

    Treatment carried out in Denmark involved the injection of human liver cells
combined with an influenza virus designed to reduce cancer growth.

    The Danish hospital chiefs alerted the Department of Health in London about
their concerns.

    Mr Habib is also facing other inquiries by the NHS Executive and Imperial
College school of medicine, where the consultant lectures. The 46-year-old liver
expert was suspended from his post as head of liver surgery at Hammersmith last
week.

    Gene therapy on patients is closely monitored in the UK and cannot go ahead
without approval from the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee. There are safety
concerns about genetically altered material being transmitted to the wrong
patients and strict protocols have to be followed.

    A Health Department spokesman said last night: 'An investigation was
launched after we were alerted by the Danish authorities.

    'It is the first time a doctor has been alleged to have breached guidelines
surrounding gene therapy treatment.' Danish doctor Steen Lindkear, who was
jointly leading the research project with Mr Habib, has also been suspended.

    Mr Habib said at his home in Ealing last night: 'I have been a consultant
liver surgeon for ten years and have successfully treated thousands of patients.

    I am distressed at allegations which I strenuously deny. I will vigorously
defend my professional practice and reputation.' The gene therapy advisory
committee insists all applicants for a licence give full information on safety
precautions.

    Researchers must detail the tests they do to prevent the spread of any
organism used by them.


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1999


                              52 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                  July 4, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 1;2

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: GENE DOCTOR SUSPENDED

BYLINE: Alison Gordon;Martyn Halle

BODY:


    A LEADING doctor has been suspended from his prestigious NHS post amid
allegations that safety controls in a pioneering gene therapy trial on dying
liver cancer patients were breached.

    The treatment being tested on patients by Nagy Habib, head of liver surgery
at London's Hammersmith Hospital, involved using an influenza virus .

    . . one of the most infectious viruses known to man.

    The Government's gene therapy advisory committee has set up the first
investigation of its kind into the controversial research project.

    It is expected to examine which safety controls were in place to prevent
possible spread of any infection from terminally ill foreign patients to others
and exactly what experiments took place at the Hammersmith Hospital, one of
Britain's top teaching hospitals.

    Among the allegations are that doctors involved in the joint British and
Danish research project led by Mr Habib were not keeping their patients in
isolation for the three days required under the trial protocol.

    The Danish authorities have said there is no reason for concern but have
suspended the study at Arhus Community Hospital, Denmark's biggest hospital, a
full investigation. The Danish

    Press has reported that some patients left the hospital within hours of the
treatment.

    Treatment carried out in Denmark involved the injection of human liver cells
combined with an influenza virus designed to reduce cancer growth.

    The Danish hospital chiefs alerted the Department of Health in London about
their concerns.

    Mr Habib is also facing other inquiries by the NHS Executive and Imperial
College school of medicine, where the consultant lectures. The 46-year-old liver
expert was suspended from his post as head of liver surgery at Hammersmith last
week.

    Gene therapy on patients is closely monitored in the UK and cannot go ahead
without approval from the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee. There are safety
concerns about genetically altered material being transmitted to the wrong
patients and strict protocols have to be followed.

    A Health Department spokesman said last night: 'An investigation was
launched after we were alerted by the Danish authorities.

    'It is the first time a doctor has been alleged to have breached guidelines
surrounding gene therapy treatment.' Danish doctor Steen Lindkear, who was
jointly leading the research project with Mr Habib, has also been suspended.

    Mr Habib said at his home in Ealing last night: 'I have been a consultant
liver surgeon for ten years and have successfully treated thousands of patients.

    I am distressed at allegations which I strenuously deny. I will vigorously
defend my professional practice and reputation.' The gene therapy advisory
committee insists all applicants for a licence give full information on safety
precautions.

    Researchers must detail the tests they do to prevent the spread of any
organism used by them.


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1999


                              53 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 30, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 486 words

HEADLINE: Drug to make breast cancer self- destruct

BYLINE: Neil Sears

BODY:


    HOPES of a cure for breast cancer were raised last night after it was
revealed that a drug which attacks the disease like a 'smart missile' had proved
successful in tests.

    The treatment involves injecting a 'suicide gene' directly into tumours and
results in the cancer cells effectively self-destructing.

    Similar cures have been floated in the past, but it has always been feared
that healthy cells could also die alongside cancerous cells.

    However, in a preliminary trial, the technique worked in nine out of a dozen
cases by affecting only cancerous cells and not spreading beyond the tumours.

    Professor Nick Lemoine, who headed the testing at Hammersmith Hospital, West
London, said that although development of the treatment is at an early stage, it
is looking promising.

    The experiment was carried out to see if gene therapy can work against
cancer, and involved 12 women whose breast cancer had spread, leading to the
growth of tumours on their skin. The women, who had failed to respond to
conventional treatment, had an injection of a combination of two genes erbB-2
and cytosine deaminase into one of their tumours.

    The injected genes then induced the cancerous cells to change their
character.

    Two days after the initial injection, a harmless drug called 5-FC was added
to the patients' bloodstream a drug which left all the healthy cells completely
unaffected for all 12 women.

    With nine of the women, however, when the drug reached the cancer cells
which had undergone gene therapy, there was a change.

    The gene therapy meant the cells converted the harmless 5-FC into a drug
called 5-FU, which is lethal to the cancer.

    There were no adverse affects in the three women for whom the experiment was
not successful.

    All 12 were suffering from advanced breast cancer. Professor Lemoine said:
'This ability to target tumour cells based on their molecular profile is very
encouraging. It's like a smart missile which homes in on the cancer cell we can
pick it out even when it's surrounded by a crowd of normal cells.' A spokesman
for the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which paid for the test, said it showed
that there is great potential for the suicide gene.

    He added: 'The researchers demonstrated that the gene was able to convert a
harmless chemical into a powerful anticancer drug precisely where it was
needed.' Now the protein will be tested on other types of cancer, such as
ovarian and pancreatic.

    Despite the positive finds, Professor Lemoine said the introduction of
therapy based on this technology is still several years away.

    But the hopes raised by his work are great. Healthy cells and cancer cells
are so similar that it has previously proved difficult to destroy one while
leaving the other undamaged.

    The experiment shows that in principle at least, gene therapy can be used to
promote the self-destruction of cancer cells.

    -


LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1999


                              54 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 30, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: Drug to make breast cancer self- destruct

BYLINE: Neil Sears

BODY:


    HOPES of a cure for breast cancer were raised last night after it was
revealed that a drug which attacks the disease like a 'smart missile' had proved
successful in tests.

    The treatment involves injecting a 'suicide gene' directly into tumours and
results in the cancer cells effectively self-destructing.

    Similar cures have been floated in the past, but it has always been feared
that healthy cells could also die alongside cancerous cells.

    However, in a preliminary trial, the technique worked in nine out of a dozen
cases by affecting only cancerous cells and not spreading beyond the tumours.

    Professor Nick Lemoine, who headed the testing at Hammersmith Hospital, West
London, said that although development of the treatment is at an early stage, it
is looking promising.

    The experiment was carried out to see if gene therapy can work against
cancer, and involved 12 women whose breast cancer had spread, leading to the
growth of tumours on their skin. The women, who had failed to respond to
conventional treatment, had an injection of a combination of two genes erbB-2
and cytosine deaminase into one of their tumours.

    The injected genes then induced the cancerous cells to change their
character.

    Two days after the initial injection, a harmless drug called 5-FC was added
to the patients' bloodstream a drug which left all the healthy cells completely
unaffected for all 12 women.

    With nine of the women, however, when the drug reached the cancer cells
which had undergone gene therapy, there was a change.

    The gene therapy meant the cells converted the harmless 5-FC into a drug
called 5-FU, which is lethal to the cancer.

    There were no adverse affects in the three women for whom the experiment was
not successful.

    All 12 were suffering from advanced breast cancer. Professor Lemoine said:
'This ability to target tumour cells based on their molecular profile is very
encouraging. It's like a smart missile which homes in on the cancer cell we can
pick it out even when it's surrounded by a crowd of normal cells.' A spokesman
for the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, which paid for the test, said it showed
that there is great potential for the suicide gene.

    He added: 'The researchers demonstrated that the gene was able to convert a
harmless chemical into a powerful anticancer drug precisely where it was
needed.' Now the protein will be tested on other types of cancer, such as
ovarian and pancreatic.

    Despite the positive finds, Professor Lemoine said the introduction of
therapy based on this technology is still several years away.

    But the hopes raised by his work are great. Healthy cells and cancer cells
are so similar that it has previously proved difficult to destroy one while
leaving the other undamaged.

    The experiment shows that in principle at least, gene therapy can be used to
promote the self-destruction of cancer cells.

    -


LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1999


                              58 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  June 3, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 50

LENGTH: 2352 words

HEADLINE: Could this simple jab defeat cancer?;
In the final part of our indispensable series on cancer, we take a look at
groundbreaking scientific procedures which doctors hope may one day rid us of
this terrible disease

BYLINE: Stephanie Zinser

BODY:


    JOHN DAVIES is visiting his GP for a new kind of check-up. Sitting down in
the surgery, he rolls up his sleeve and his doctor gently slides a gleaming
needle into John's arm.

    A few drops of viscous blood trickle into the syringe canister.

    The blood is processed in a small, high-tech machine in the corner of the
office, linked to a powerful central processor by modem.

    Within minutes the doctor has the result - a lengthy printout revealing the
exact sequence of John's genetic makeup.

    The GP instantly sees John's vulnerable area in a defective gene associated
with bowel cancer.

    But luckily the p53 gene - another of John's genes that protects against
cancer cells developing - looks OK.

    A plan is devised to keep John at minimal risk of developing bowel cancer,
including regular checks, dietary advice and an exercise regime. If necessary,
John's risk can be eradicated using gene therapy, which injects perfect copies
of the defective gene into his body.

    John walks away knowing that this crucial early warning may enable him to
escape the fate of his father, Gordon, who died of bowel cancer 15 years ago,
aged 53.

    Sounds futuristic? In fact, the reality is closer than you think. The
likelihood of this scenario becoming an everyday occurrence is little more than
ten years away, and could be the biggest breakthrough in cancer care and
diagnosis we have ever seen.

    Scientists worldwide are collaborating on the Human Genome Project, which
aims to catalogue the entire genetic library carried in human cells. The search
for genes that curb cancer growth - known as tumour-suppressor genes has, until
now, been agonisingly slow. It is labour-intensive, the techniques are clumsy
and scientists often end up relying on blind luck.

    But once the entire human genetic pattern is known, valuable information
about tumour-suppressor genes will become available, and cancer treatments
exploiting this knowledge will burgeon.

    We already know that damaged genes cause cancer. But their effects may be
even more far-reaching than that.

    'Recent reports say that certain mutated genes can even explain the failure
or success of radiotherapy or chemotherapy,' according to Professor Gordon
McVie, director-general of the Cancer Research Campaign.

    By discovering the causes of many tumours, doctors will be better able to
prevent them, treat them and achieve permanent cures.

    So what are the most promising developments in the war against cancer?

    DESIGNER CHEMOTHERAPY

    DR ALISON JONES, consultant medical oncologist at London's Royal Free
Hospital, says: 'One of the areas which

    promises great things for the future is rational drug design.' Because
scientists are learning so much about the specific proteins in cancer cells,
drugs will be developed that can accurately target tumours but leave normal
cells unharmed. This way, many of the horrible side-effects of chemotherapy will
become a thing of the past.

    'New drug discovery is fundamental,' agrees Professor McVie. 'Taxol and
Taxotere are new drugs which have already been approved for ovarian cancer.

    Their registration for use in breast and lung cancer is on the way. Within
five years these two drugs will be active in clinics against three of the most
common cancers.

    'Only last month, Temodal was registered in Europe for brain cancer, and may
later be approved for treating melanoma. There is no doubt that conventional
drug development will be the mainstay of clinical development for the next 20
years.' And it's not just new drugs, but new combinations of drugs that may lead
the way. A new treatment, using a combination of new and old drugs, could
potentially reduce the mortality rate of colon cancer sufferers from 60 pc to
just 5 pc. Researchers in Maryland, U.S., are optimistic about the dramatic
results they have achieved with Irinotecan, a new drug, combined with
Leucovorin, a standard drug, and Flourouracil, which has been around for 45
years.

    MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES

    MONOCLONAL antibody (mAb) treatments are also showing promise. Antibodies -
made in mice - attach to specific human proteins that are found on cancer cells,
ignoring all other cells.

    They act like infallible target missiles and can accurately deliver toxins
or anticancer drugs to targeted cancer cells.

    While several mAb drugs are still in early trials, others are already poised
to enter mainstream medicine. Herceptin, a monoclonal antibody treatment used
for breast cancer, will become available next summer. It targets the HER2
protein that is found in unusually high concentrations on the surface of breast
cancer cells.

    Dr Neville Davidson, consultant oncologist at the North Middlesex Hospital,
has given several patients Panorex, a new mAb therapy for colorectal cancer,
with some promising results.

    He says: 'I see monoclonal antibodies as the way forward, although it's
still

    very early stages yet.' General UK approval for Panorex is expected soon.

    MabThera, which treats non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, was approved last summer.

    GENE THERAPY 'GENE therapy is the most futuristic therapy under
development,' says Professor McVie, 'but it does work in the test tube. The best
work that has been done so far is with bowel cancer and the p53 gene.'

    Dubbed the 'guardian angel' gene, p53 encourages potential cancer cells to
stop growing or to commit suicide. Faulty or damaged p53 genes are now known to
be the most important factor in cancer development.

    He explains: 'If a good copy of the p53 gene is injected into bowel cancer
cells, they become normal again.

    But at the moment each cell has to be injected separately, which is
impractical except in a test tube.

    'If you "piggyback" p53 onto viruses, you could get the replication needed
to treat the billions of cancer cells in a tumour, but this is still in the
future. The dozen or so laboratory trials using direct injection of p53 into
tumour nodules have, however, proved that the principle works.'

    'Hundreds of experiments are going to happen. With a fair following wind we
could see Phase II trials of gene therapy within five years, and Phase III
random trials by the year 2010 to 2020.' Phase II trials primarily assess the
safety of a drug, while Phase III are large-scale trials which have to prove the
effectiveness of a treatment before it is licensed.

    Also under the developmental spotlight is a new family of therapeutic cancer
vaccines, which, according to Dr Alison Jones, 'are really a part of gene
therapy'. Hundreds of vaccines are being developed across a spectrum of cancers
including some of our biggest killers - colon, lung, prostate and breast cancer.

    Dr Jones says: 'They stimulate a person's immune system to recognise cancer
cells as foreign,' and they are best used after surgery has removed most of a
cancer.'

    EXTRACTED from the following books: Say No To Cancer by Patrick Holford,
Piatkus Books, GBP 5.99.

    (c)Patrick Holford 1999; Food For Life: Preventing Cancer Through A Healthy
Diet by Oliver Gillie, Hodder & Stoughton, GBP 9.99. (c)The World Cancer
Research Fund 1998; Fighting Cancer by Jonathan Chamberlain, Headline, GBP 9.99
(c)Jonathan Chamberlain 1997. To order any of these books (p&p free), please
telephone 0870 161 0870.

    SEVEN-DAY ANTICANCER DIET

    DAY SIX

    BREAKFAST: Oat Muesli with Berries OATS are packed with fibre, which helps
reduce the amount of hormone disrupters, believed to be responsible for
hormone-related cancers such as ovarian, cervical, breast and testicular cancer.

    (serves 4) 4 tbs rolled oats 1 tbs oat germ and bran 100ml warmed soya milk
150g plain yoghurt 2 tbs honey 2 tbs lemon juice 1 red apple and 1 green apple,
washed, cored and grated 4 tbs chopped hazelnuts SOAK oats, oat germ and bran in
soya milk for at least two hours. Stir in yoghurt, honey and lemon juice.

    Add the apples, hazelnuts and berries just before serving.

    LUNCH: Recovery Soup THIS soup is blended raw then heated gently, providing
a high-energy meal. Soya may lower the risk of cervical cancer.

    Broccoli is thought to play a key role in protecting against liver cancer.

    (serves 1) 2 organic carrots, chopped 3 heads broccoli 1 bunch watercress
75g tofu 100ml soya milk 2 teaspoons vegetable bouillon Tomato paste, spices or
herbs BLEND everything in food processor. Serve hot with oat cakes.

    DINNER: Salad Nicoise THERE is evidence that tomatoes, which contain
lycopine, decrease the risk of breast, uterine, stomach and possibly even lung
cancer.

    (serves 4) 4 medium tomatoes, sliced 4 cooked potatoes, quartered 8 anchovy
fillets, halved 2 hardboiled eggs, quartered 250g cooked green beans 8 pitted
black olives 1 tbs chopped parsley or 5 chopped basil leaves 2 tbs olive oil 1
1/2 tbs white wine vinegar PLACE all ingredients in a salad bowl, toss with oil
and vinegar, and season with black pepper.

    DESSERT: Greek Rice Pudding RICE is a good source of starch. In general,
high-starch diets are low in fat and decrease chances of developing heart
disease.

    (serves 4) 2 teaspoons cornflour 55g sugar 1 litre skimmed milk 140g
short-grain pudding rice 2-3 strips lemon zest Powdered cinnamon MIX cornflour
and sugar with a little milk. Cook rice with rest of milk and lemon zest over
low heat for 30 mins. Add cornflour mixture and stir. Cook for another 20 mins.

    When cool, remove zest and sprinkle with cinnamon.

    DAY SEVEN BREAKFAST: Simple Table Muesli TRY to include flax seeds, the best
vegetarian source of Omega-3 fats which may protect against prostate cancer.

    (serves 1) 2 handfuls porridge oats 1 handful sultanas Nuts - almonds,
hazelnuts, sunflower seeds Dried fruit - pitted prunes, dried apricots, chopped
dates Skimmed milk LUNCH: LAMB STEW PULSES such as chickpeas and lentils may
protect against several cancers because they are high in fibre and contain folic
acid. In keeping with many spices, there is also a suggestion that cumin may
also exert a protective effect.

    (serves 4) 500g vegetables (courgettes, aubergines, tomatoes, green beans,
okra, cabbage, spinach or artichoke hearts) 1 large onion, chopped 1 tbs olive
oil 300g stewing lamb, chopped 4 tbs tomato paste Chopped fresh parsley 2-3 tbs
ground allspice, cumin or coriander Freshly ground black pepper 250g potatoes,
peeled and cubed 150g cooked chickpeas or lentils FRY onion in oil for two
minutes, than add meat and fry until brown.

    Add remaining vegetables and cook for a few minutes. Cover with water and
stir in tomato paste, parsley and spices. Simmer for 1 1/2 hours.

    Add potatoes and pulses 20 minutes before end of cooking.

    DINNER: Fish Balls (Koftas) THE oil in root ginger can induce enzymes that
may prevent DNA being attacked by cancer-causing agents. It also contains
several antioxidants, which protect cells.

    (serves 4-6) 500g white fish 1 medium onion, chopped 2 tbsp fresh chopped
coriander 1 tbs ground cumin 3 slices root ginger, chopped 1 egg, beaten
Breadcrumbs (wholemeal) Oil for frying COARSELY mince the fish using a blender
or knife. Mix with onion, coriander, ginger and cumin. Add egg to bind and shape
into balls.

    Roll in breadcrumbs and shallow fry in oil. Drain on kitchen paper.

    DESSERT: Flambe Bananas THIS is a simple, yet tasty dessert.

    Bananas are high in fibre, vitamin C and potassium. There is evidence that
diets high in citrus fruit reduce the risk of stomach cancer and may help
prevent mouth, pharynx and oesophagal cancers.

    (serves 4-6) 5 bananas 2 oranges 2 tsp sugar 2 tsp powdered cinnamon 4 tbs
rum PEEL bananas and place in a greased baking dish. Squeeze oranges and pour
juice over the bananas, then sprinkle sugar and cinnamon on top. Pour over the
rum, stand back and ignite. Serve immediately the flames die down.

    This new drug has given me so much hope

    CASE STUDY

    WHEN Nicki Perrier-Flint was told she had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma - having
already survived skin cancer - she was devastated. 'I had a malignant melanoma
in 1984, and the black mole on my chest was removed successfully with surgery,'
says the mother-of-three, 47, from Colindale, North London.

    'I was still attending outpatient checks several years later when I
mentioned a lump in my groin. After a biopsy, my oncologist came back with the
shattering news that I had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma - cancer of the lymph glands
and immune system.

    'I didn't understand how I could get a second, completely different cancer
and doctors said it was very unusual.' Nicki underwent several courses of
chemotherapy, each lasting four to six months. 'Every time I finished a course,
the lymph nodes would grow back quicker and bigger. My immunity was low, I lost
all my hair, and felt exhausted and sick.' Last July, Nicki's oncologist at the
Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, Dr Peter Amlot, suggested she try the
monoclonal antibody drug MabThera.

    'It had just become available and, because everything else had failed her,
Nicki was eligible to try it,' he says.

    'It's very expensive, and tends to work effectively in only a small number
of people. We would expect a complete clearance in 6 pc of patients, and a
partial response in 60 to 70 pc, where their cancers would stop growing.'

    After the first injection, Nicki felt faint, had heart palpitations and a
numb mouth. 'They found the right balance of drugs to counter my reaction,' she
says.

    So how did MabThera differ from the previous chemotherapy? 'I felt tired for
a couple of months, but nothing like the wretched tiredness I had felt before.
Maybe this was because, unlike chemotherapy, MabThera affected only my cancer
cells.' And how successful has the treatment been so far? 'Eight months on, I
feel fine. I have one new lymph node in my groin, but all the others have either
disappeared or greatly reduced. I feel I'm getting somewhere,' says Nicki, who
has returned part-time to her job as a passenger agent with Air Canada.

    'I will have MabThera again at some stage it's a lot more promising. I want
to see my boys grow up, and MabThera has given me the best chance of that,' she
adds.


GRAPHIC: LAST CHANCE: NICKI PERRIER-FLINT

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1999


                              59 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  June 3, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 50

LENGTH: 2353 words

HEADLINE: Could this simple jab defeat cancer?;
In the final part of our indispensable series on cancer, we take a look at
groundbreaking scientific procedures which doctors hope may one day rid us of
this terrible disease

BYLINE: Stephanie Zinser

BODY:


    JOHN DAVIES is visiting his GP for a new kind of check-up. Sitting down in
the surgery, he rolls up his sleeve and his doctor gently slides a gleaming
needle into John's arm.

    A few drops of viscous blood trickle into the syringe canister.

    The blood is processed in a small, high-tech machine in the corner of the
office, linked to a powerful central processor by modem.

    Within minutes the doctor has the result - a lengthy printout revealing the
exact sequence of John's genetic makeup.

    The GP instantly sees John's vulnerable area in a defective gene associated
with bowel cancer.

    But luckily the p53 gene - another of John's genes that protects against
cancer cells developing - looks OK.

    A plan is devised to keep John at minimal risk of developing bowel cancer,
including regular checks, dietary advice and an exercise regime. If necessary,
John's risk can be eradicated using gene therapy, which injects perfect copies
of the defective gene into his body.

    John walks away knowing that this crucial early warning may enable him to
escape the fate of his father, Gordon, who died of bowel cancer 15 years ago,
aged 53.

    Sounds futuristic? In fact, the reality is closer than you think. The
likelihood of this scenario becoming an everyday occurrence is little more than
ten years away, and could be the biggest breakthrough in cancer care and
diagnosis we have ever seen.

    Scientists worldwide are collaborating on the Human Genome Project, which
aims to catalogue the entire genetic library carried in human cells. The search
for genes that curb cancer growth - known as tumour-suppressor genes has, until
now, been agonisingly slow. It is labour-intensive, the techniques are clumsy
and scientists often end up relying on blind luck.

    But once the entire human genetic pattern is known, valuable information
about tumour-suppressor genes will become available, and cancer treatments
exploiting this knowledge will burgeon.

    We already know that damaged genes cause cancer. But their effects may be
even more far-reaching than that.

    'Recent reports say that certain mutated genes can even explain the failure
or success of radiotherapy or chemotherapy,' according to Professor Gordon
McVie, director-general of the Cancer Research Campaign.

    By discovering the causes of many tumours, doctors will be better able to
prevent them, treat them and achieve permanent cures.

    So what are the most promising developments in the war against cancer?

    DESIGNER CHEMOTHERAPY

    DR ALISON JONES, consultant medical oncologist at London's Royal Free
Hospital, says: 'One of the areas which

    promises great things for the future is rational drug design.' Because
scientists are learning so much about the specific proteins in cancer cells,
drugs will be developed that can accurately target tumours but leave normal
cells unharmed. This way, many of the horrible side-effects of chemotherapy will
become a thing of the past.

    'New drug discovery is fundamental,' agrees Professor McVie. 'Taxol and
Taxotere are new drugs which have already been approved for ovarian cancer.

    Their registration for use in breast and lung cancer is on the way. Within
five years these two drugs will be active in clinics against three of the most
common cancers.

    'Only last month, Temodal was registered in Europe for brain cancer, and may
later be approved for treating melanoma. There is no doubt that conventional
drug development will be the mainstay of clinical development for the next 20
years.' And it's not just new drugs, but new combinations of drugs that may lead
the way. A new treatment, using a combination of new and old drugs, could
potentially reduce the mortality rate of colon cancer sufferers from 60 pc to
just 5 pc. Researchers in Maryland, U.S., are optimistic about the dramatic
results they have achieved with Irinotecan, a new drug, combined with
Leucovorin, a standard drug, and Flourouracil, which has been around for 45
years.

    MONOCLONAL ANTIBODIES

    MONOCLONAL antibody (mAb) treatments are also showing promise. Antibodies -
made in mice - attach to specific human proteins that are found on cancer cells,
ignoring all other cells.

    They act like infallible target missiles and can accurately deliver toxins
or anticancer drugs to targeted cancer cells.

    While several mAb drugs are still in early trials, others are already poised
to enter mainstream medicine. Herceptin, a monoclonal antibody treatment used
for breast cancer, will become available next summer. It targets the HER2
protein that is found in unusually high concentrations on the surface of breast
cancer cells.

    Dr Neville Davidson, consultant oncologist at the North Middlesex Hospital,
has given several patients Panorex, a new mAb therapy for colorectal cancer,
with some promising results.

    He says: 'I see monoclonal antibodies as the way forward, although it's
still

    very early stages yet.' General UK approval for Panorex is expected soon.

    MabThera, which treats non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, was approved last summer.

    GENE THERAPY 'GENE therapy is the most futuristic therapy under
development,' says Professor McVie, 'but it does work in the test tube. The best
work that has been done so far is with bowel cancer and the p53 gene.'

    Dubbed the 'guardian angel' gene, p53 encourages potential cancer cells to
stop growing or to commit suicide. Faulty or damaged p53 genes are now known to
be the most important factor in cancer development.

    He explains: 'If a good copy of the p53 gene is injected into bowel cancer
cells, they become normal again.

    But at the moment each cell has to be injected separately, which is
impractical except in a test tube.

    'If you "piggyback" p53 onto viruses, you could get the replication needed
to treat the billions of cancer cells in a tumour, but this is still in the
future. The dozen or so laboratory trials using direct injection of p53 into
tumour nodules have, however, proved that the principle works.'

    'Hundreds of experiments are going to happen. With a fair following wind we
could see Phase II trials of gene therapy within five years, and Phase III
random trials by the year 2010 to 2020.' Phase II trials primarily assess the
safety of a drug, while Phase III are large-scale trials which have to prove the
effectiveness of a treatment before it is licensed.

    Also under the developmental spotlight is a new family of therapeutic cancer
vaccines, which, according to Dr Alison Jones, 'are really a part of gene
therapy'. Hundreds of vaccines are being developed across a spectrum of cancers
including some of our biggest killers - colon, lung, prostate and breast cancer.

    Dr Jones says: 'They stimulate a person's immune system to recognise cancer
cells as foreign,' and they are best used after surgery has removed most of a
cancer.'

    EXTRACTED from the following books: Say No To Cancer by Patrick Holford,
Piatkus Books, GBP 5.99.

    (c)Patrick Holford 1999; Food For Life: Preventing Cancer Through A Healthy
Diet by Oliver Gillie, Hodder & Stoughton, GBP 9.99. (c)The World Cancer
Research Fund 1998; Fighting Cancer by Jonathan Chamberlain, Headline, GBP 9.99
(c)Jonathan Chamberlain 1997. To order any of these books (p&p free), please
telephone 0870 161 0870.

    SEVEN-DAY ANTICANCER DIET

    DAY SIX

    BREAKFAST: Oat Muesli with Berries OATS are packed with fibre, which helps
reduce the amount of hormone disrupters, believed to be responsible for
hormone-related cancers such as ovarian, cervical, breast and testicular cancer.

    (serves 4) 4 tbs rolled oats 1 tbs oat germ and bran 100ml warmed soya milk
150g plain yoghurt 2 tbs honey 2 tbs lemon juice 1 red apple and 1 green apple,
washed, cored and grated 4 tbs chopped hazelnuts SOAK oats, oat germ and bran in
soya milk for at least two hours. Stir in yoghurt, honey and lemon juice.

    Add the apples, hazelnuts and berries just before serving.

    LUNCH: Recovery Soup THIS soup is blended raw then heated gently, providing
a high-energy meal. Soya may lower the risk of cervical cancer.

    Broccoli is thought to play a key role in protecting against liver cancer.

    (serves 1) 2 organic carrots, chopped 3 heads broccoli 1 bunch watercress
75g tofu 100ml soya milk 2 teaspoons vegetable bouillon Tomato paste, spices or
herbs BLEND everything in food processor. Serve hot with oat cakes.

    DINNER: Salad Nicoise THERE is evidence that tomatoes, which contain
lycopine, decrease the risk of breast, uterine, stomach and possibly even lung
cancer.

    (serves 4) 4 medium tomatoes, sliced 4 cooked potatoes, quartered 8 anchovy
fillets, halved 2 hardboiled eggs, quartered 250g cooked green beans 8 pitted
black olives 1 tbs chopped parsley or 5 chopped basil leaves 2 tbs olive oil 1
1/2 tbs white wine vinegar PLACE all ingredients in a salad bowl, toss with oil
and vinegar, and season with black pepper.

    DESSERT: Greek Rice Pudding RICE is a good source of starch. In general,
high-starch diets are low in fat and decrease chances of developing heart
disease.

    (serves 4) 2 teaspoons cornflour 55g sugar 1 litre skimmed milk 140g
short-grain pudding rice 2-3 strips lemon zest Powdered cinnamon MIX cornflour
and sugar with a little milk. Cook rice with rest of milk and lemon zest over
low heat for 30 mins. Add cornflour mixture and stir. Cook for another 20 mins.

    When cool, remove zest and sprinkle with cinnamon.

    DAY SEVEN BREAKFAST: Simple Table Muesli TRY to include flax seeds, the best
vegetarian source of Omega-3 fats which may protect against prostate cancer.

    (serves 1) 2 handfuls porridge oats 1 handful sultanas Nuts - almonds,
hazelnuts, sunflower seeds Dried fruit - pitted prunes, dried apricots, chopped
dates Skimmed milk LUNCH: LAMB STEW PULSES such as chickpeas and lentils may
protect against several cancers because they are high in fibre and contain folic
acid. In keeping with many spices, there is also a suggestion that cumin may
also exert a protective effect.

    (serves 4) 500g vegetables (courgettes, aubergines, tomatoes, green beans,
okra, cabbage, spinach or artichoke hearts) 1 large onion, chopped 1 tbs olive
oil 300g stewing lamb, chopped 4 tbs tomato paste Chopped fresh parsley 2-3 tbs
ground allspice, cumin or coriander Freshly ground black pepper 250g potatoes,
peeled and cubed 150g cooked chickpeas or lentils FRY onion in oil for two
minutes, than add meat and fry until brown.

    Add remaining vegetables and cook for a few minutes. Cover with water and
stir in tomato paste, parsley and spices. Simmer for 1 1/2 hours.

    Add potatoes and pulses 20 minutes before end of cooking.

    DINNER: Fish Balls (Koftas) THE oil in root ginger can induce enzymes that
may prevent DNA being attacked by cancer-causing agents. It also contains
several antioxidants, which protect cells.

    (serves 4-6) 500g white fish 1 medium onion, chopped 2 tbsp fresh chopped
coriander 1 tbs ground cumin 3 slices root ginger, chopped 1 egg, beaten
Breadcrumbs (wholemeal) Oil for frying COARSELY mince the fish using a blender
or knife. Mix with onion, coriander, ginger and cumin. Add egg to bind and shape
into balls.

    Roll in breadcrumbs and shallow fry in oil. Drain on kitchen paper.

    DESSERT: Flambe Bananas THIS is a simple, yet tasty dessert.

    Bananas are high in fibre, vitamin C and potassium. There is evidence that
diets high in citrus fruit reduce the risk of stomach cancer and may help
prevent mouth, pharynx and oesophagal cancers.

    (serves 4-6) 5 bananas 2 oranges 2 tsp sugar 2 tsp powdered cinnamon 4 tbs
rum PEEL bananas and place in a greased baking dish. Squeeze oranges and pour
juice over the bananas, then sprinkle sugar and cinnamon on top. Pour over the
rum, stand back and ignite. Serve immediately the flames die down.

    This new drug has given me so much hope

    CASE STUDY

    WHEN Nicki Perrier-Flint was told she had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma - having
already survived skin cancer - she was devastated. 'I had a malignant melanoma
in 1984, and the black mole on my chest was removed successfully with surgery,'
says the mother-of-three, 47, from Colindale, North London.

    'I was still attending outpatient checks several years later when I
mentioned a lump in my groin. After a biopsy, my oncologist came back with the
shattering news that I had Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma - cancer of the lymph glands
and immune system.

    'I didn't understand how I could get a second, completely different cancer
and doctors said it was very unusual.' Nicki underwent several courses of
chemotherapy, each lasting four to six months. 'Every time I finished a course,
the lymph nodes would grow back quicker and bigger. My immunity was low, I lost
all my hair, and felt exhausted and sick.' Last July, Nicki's oncologist at the
Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, Dr Peter Amlot, suggested she try the
monoclonal antibody drug MabThera.

    'It had just become available and, because everything else had failed her,
Nicki was eligible to try it,' he says.

    'It's very expensive, and tends to work effectively in only a small number
of people. We would expect a complete clearance in 6 pc of patients, and a
partial response in 60 to 70 pc, where their cancers would stop growing.'

    After the first injection, Nicki felt faint, had heart palpitations and a
numb mouth. 'They found the right balance of drugs to counter my reaction,' she
says.

    So how did MabThera differ from the previous chemotherapy? 'I felt tired for
a couple of months, but nothing like the wretched tiredness I had felt before.
Maybe this was because, unlike chemotherapy, MabThera affected only my cancer
cells.' And how successful has the treatment been so far? 'Eight months on, I
feel fine. I have one new lymph node in my groin, but all the others have either
disappeared or greatly reduced. I feel I'm getting somewhere,' says Nicki, who
has returned part-time to her job as a passenger agent with Air Canada.

    'I will have MabThera again at some stage it's a lot more promising. I want
to see my boys grow up, and MabThera has given me the best chance of that,' she
adds.


GRAPHIC: LAST CHANCE: NICKI PERRIER-FLINT

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1999


                              62 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 23, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Safe test that tells if unborn baby is healthy;
DOCTORS CLOSE TO FINDING 'HOLY GRAIL' OF PRENATAL MEDICINE

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A BLOOD test that can safely check if an unborn baby has any abnormalities
is close to being developed.

    The non-invasive procedure will be the first to eliminate the risk of
miscarriage.

    Up to one in 100 women using current prenatal tests for abnormalities such
as Down's Syndrome lose their baby as a result.

    Many others refuse to have the test because of the risk. The new method uses
the mother's blood and is designed to be used as early as seven weeks into
pregnancy.

    A clinical trial will start this summer.

    Dr Irene Roberts, who is part of a team developing the new test, said
yesterday: 'Current methods are excellent in terms of reliability but the main
disadvantage, which cannot be underestimated, is the risk of miscarriage.

    The Holy Grail would be prenatal diagnosis that offers accuracy and rapidity
but removes the chances of losing the baby. It is a low rate of risk, about half
to one per cent, but if it could be removed it would be a major advance.'
Existing techniques for detecting chromosome and genetic abnormalities in
foetuses include amniocentesis which involves placing a needle in the womb.

    The new test searches for cells in blood from the unborn baby and analyses
them for genetic information including the baby's sex.

    The main problem in developing the test has been finding enough cells to
provide accurate information.

    A teaspoon of maternal blood contains around 20,000million maternal red
blood cells, 50million white cells and just five foetal cells.

    But doctors at Imperial College School of Medicine, London, have discovered
a process to multiply these cells up to 900-fold with the use of growth factors
applied in a test tube.

    They can then analyse the haemopoietic stem cells for the baby's sex,
chromosomal abnormalities such as Down's and single gene defects including
sickle cell disease and thalassaemia.

    'It is an extraordinary thing that, throughout pregnancy, foetal cells can
move from the baby's circulation into the circulation of the mother but it's
like looking for a needle in a haystack. We have to increase the number of
needles in the haystack,' said Dr Roberts.

    'I hope we can use the information to diagnose abnormalities so that couples
can be given medical, emotional and social support to cope with the birth of an
affected child.

    'It should also be possible to use techniques in the womb such as genetic
therapy to convert some of those babies which are going to be affected into
healthy babies and achieve what every prospective parent desires,' she told a
London conference called Pregnancy into the Next Millennium.

    She said the new test would not necessarily lead to more abortions it would
just mean abnormalities could be diagnosed earlier.

    She said 'We are aiming for a technique that would work in the first 12
weeks because it could be done from seven weeks' gestation with the results
available in two to three weeks.

    'Most of us feel that if a woman believes termination is the only option
then it is less awful if it can be done in the first three months,' she said.

    The first clinical trial involving 50 women is due to start this summer with
the results due next year. 'We have to be incredibly rigorous because it has to
be as reliable as existing methods but we are cautiously optimistic.'

    A spokesman for the National Childbirth Trust said: 'The prospect of this
test is something we would welcome with open arms.'


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1999


                              63 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 23, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 4

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: Safe test that tells if unborn baby is healthy;
DOCTORS CLOSE TO FINDING 'HOLY GRAIL' OF PRENATAL MEDICINE

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A BLOOD test that can safely check if an unborn baby has any abnormalities
is close to being developed.

    The non-invasive procedure will be the first to eliminate the risk of
miscarriage.

    Up to one in 100 women using current prenatal tests for abnormalities such
as Down's Syndrome lose their baby as a result.

    Many others refuse to have the test because of the risk. The new method uses
the mother's blood and is designed to be used as early as seven weeks into
pregnancy.

    A clinical trial will start this summer.

    Dr Irene Roberts, who is part of a team developing the new test, said
yesterday: 'Current methods are excellent in terms of reliability but the main
disadvantage, which cannot be underestimated, is the risk of miscarriage.

    The Holy Grail would be prenatal diagnosis that offers accuracy and rapidity
but removes the chances of losing the baby. It is a low rate of risk, about half
to one per cent, but if it could be removed it would be a major advance.'
Existing techniques for detecting chromosome and genetic abnormalities in
foetuses include amniocentesis which involves placing a needle in the womb.

    The new test searches for cells in blood from the unborn baby and analyses
them for genetic information including the baby's sex.

    The main problem in developing the test has been finding enough cells to
provide accurate information.

    A teaspoon of maternal blood contains around 20,000million maternal red
blood cells, 50million white cells and just five foetal cells.

    But doctors at Imperial College School of Medicine, London, have discovered
a process to multiply these cells up to 900-fold with the use of growth factors
applied in a test tube.

    They can then analyse the haemopoietic stem cells for the baby's sex,
chromosomal abnormalities such as Down's and single gene defects including
sickle cell disease and thalassaemia.

    'It is an extraordinary thing that, throughout pregnancy, foetal cells can
move from the baby's circulation into the circulation of the mother but it's
like looking for a needle in a haystack. We have to increase the number of
needles in the haystack,' said Dr Roberts.

    'I hope we can use the information to diagnose abnormalities so that couples
can be given medical, emotional and social support to cope with the birth of an
affected child.

    'It should also be possible to use techniques in the womb such as genetic
therapy to convert some of those babies which are going to be affected into
healthy babies and achieve what every prospective parent desires,' she told a
London conference called Pregnancy into the Next Millennium.

    She said the new test would not necessarily lead to more abortions it would
just mean abnormalities could be diagnosed earlier.

    She said 'We are aiming for a technique that would work in the first 12
weeks because it could be done from seven weeks' gestation with the results
available in two to three weeks.

    'Most of us feel that if a woman believes termination is the only option
then it is less awful if it can be done in the first three months,' she said.

    The first clinical trial involving 50 women is due to start this summer with
the results due next year. 'We have to be incredibly rigorous because it has to
be as reliable as existing methods but we are cautiously optimistic.'

    A spokesman for the National Childbirth Trust said: 'The prospect of this
test is something we would welcome with open arms.'


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1999


                              66 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             April 16, 1999, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 36, 37

LENGTH: 938 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY HEALTH: MY TWINS COULD HAVE KILLED ME..;
 ANGELA DEFIES CYSTIC FIBROSIS TO BEAT THE ODDS AND BE A MUM

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    ANGELA Thompson has battled against cystic fibrosis all her life. She needs
physiotherapy and a cocktail of pills every day just to stay alive.

    But it hasn't stopped her falling in love, getting married, and now becoming
the mum of twins. She was warned that pregnancy could worsen her life
-threatening, incurable condition.

    But it was a risk Angela, 27, was prepared to take. And although her
daughters had to be delivered two months early because they were pressing on her
lungs and making it difficult for her to breathe, both were born healthy.

    Emily who weighed 1lb 14oz and Lauren, 2lb 11oz, are now 11 weeks old and
progressing well.

    And thanks to help from husband Andrew and her family, Angela is coping well
with motherhood.

    "I knew I was taking a gamble with my own life having twins but I have
proved that having cystic fibrosis and starting a family can be done," said
Angela from Dewsbury, West Yorks.

    "The pregnancy wasn't easy and I had to be very closely monitored, both for
my health and that of the babies.

    "At one stage I had to be admitted to hospital and tube-fed because my
weight had fallen so much. But thankfully my illness didn't get worse."

    Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease which results in mucus clogging the
lungs, making it difficult to breathe and increasing susceptibility to
infection.

    The pancreas and stomach also become clogged, reducing the body's ability to
digest food.

    Victims need strenuous physiotherapy twice a day to clear the lungs, daily
doses of enzymes and vitamins to help digest food and routine antibiotics to
prevent infections.

    There is no cure and repeated infections, inflammation and lung damage cut
life expectancy.

    Despite her illness Angela was determined to become a mum after marrying 30
-year-old lorry driver Andrew. But first there was the agonising wait to
discover if Andrew was a carrier of the condition.

    One in 25 people in Britain - that's around two million - carry the cystic
fibrosis gene.

    Although they are perfectly healthy and have no idea they are a carrier, it
means they can pass on the disease to their children.

    It can only be inherited if both parents have the faulty gene and then there
is a one-in-four chance.

    "It was a nerve-wracking wait but thankfully Andrew was clear. We were so
relieved. Our baby would not have cystic fibrosis," said Angela.

    But it took another three years before Angela conceived. She feared she
would never get pregnant as cystic fibrosis can cause infertility.

    "We were on the verge of giving up. I feared I would never become a mum,"
she said. "We were both thrilled when I became pregnant."

    Because it was classed as an "at- risk" pregnancy Angela was referred to St
James's Hospital in Leeds.

    Consultants there liaised closely with her cystic fibrosis specialists at
Seacroft Hospital, Leeds.

    The doctors warned Angela her pregnancy would put strain on her already-weak
lungs.

    But she was determined to continue with the pregnancy she thought would
never be, and her doctors backed her decision.

    When Angela was nine weeks pregnant a routine scan showed she was expecting
twins.

    "I burst into tears knowing it would now be twice as hard. It was going to
be difficult with one, but the prospect of carrying twins was almost too much,"
said Angela.

    "Although now they are here I am absolutely thrilled and delighted."

    Angela had a scare at 23 weeks when she was rushed to hospital with a
possible miscarriage.

    But thankfully the pain was a pulled stomach muscle from coughing and extra
pressure on her weakened chest from the babies.

    But eight weeks later doctors decided the problem was worsening. In
addition, one of the twins was not developing as well as her sister.

    On January 27 the babies were born by caesarean section.

    Both were able to breathe unaided and did not need intensive care and six
weeks later were allowed home.

    Angela also made a good recovery and although some days breathing is
difficult, she manages to care for the girls. On bad days Andrew takes over.

    "I am very lucky I have been well enough to give birth to such wonderful
babies.  My biggest battle now is keeping strong to see my daughters grow up,"
said Angela.

    Cystic Fibrosis Week begins tomorrow to raise funds for research. Thanks to
medical breakthroughs, progress in treating the disease is accelerating.

    Life expectancy has risen dramatically and most sufferers no longer die in
childhood. The greatest potential advance was the discovery of the cystic
fibrosis gene 10 years ago.

    Gene therapy is the hope of the future and scientists believe that a cure
may be possible within a decade.

    CYSTIC Fibrosis Trust, 11 London Road, Bromley, Kent, BR1 1BY. Tel 0181 464
7211.

    CF Fact File

    CYSTIC fibrosis is the UK's most common life-threatening, inherited disease.

    THE glands which produce mucus, saliva, and intestinal fluids do not work
properly. This affects vital organs, especially the lungs and the pancreas,
resulting in respiratory and digestive problems.

    TREATMENT is intensive and involves many drugs and daily physiotherapy. Many
youngsters need transplant surgery for any chance of a healthy life.

    EVERY week five babies are born with the condition and three young victims
die.

    ONE in every 25 people carry the defective CF gene. Children must inherit a
defective gene from both parents to contract the disease.

    ALTHOUGH there is no cure, improvements in treatment have contributed to
longer life expectancy. This has risen from five years in the 1960s to 30 years
now.

GRAPHIC: BABY LOVE: Andrew, Angela & twins; WORTH THE RISK: Angela Thompson had
to have her twin daughters delivered two months early because of pressure on her
lungs

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1999


                              67 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 5, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 2026 words

HEADLINE: IS HAPPINESS MAPPED OUT IN THE WOMB?;
THE FIRST PART OF AN INTRIGUING GUIDE THAT SHOWS HOW ARE GENES MAY DETERMINE THE
WAY WE FEEL AND ACT

BYLINE: Diana Appleyard

BODY:


    WHY DO some of us love to take risks, while others are terrified of new
experiences?

    Fascinatingly, this is a genetic trait, handed down from our parents and
determined by the chemical dopamine in our brain.

    Dean Hamer classifies people into 'high' and 'low' novelty seekers. High
novelty seekers find pleasure in varied, new and intense experiences. Low
novelty seekers prefer familiar, conventional and less intense experiences.

    Physical thrill-seeking includes a desire to participate in dangerous sports
such as mountain climbing, surfing or skydiving. Those who fall into the
category of high novelty seekers are more likely to have problems with
drug-taking, drinking, risky sex and gambling.

    Low novelty seekers are more likely to be frugal with money and with their
emotions.

    Typical jobs for high novelty seekers are pilots, fire-fighters, stock
brokers or bank robbers, while low novelty seekers are more likely to be
accountants, librarians, dentists or GENES influence our health and appearance,
determining our predisposition to disease, ageing and longevity.

    But could our genetic makeup also influence our moods and wellbeing? In a
new book genetic expert, Dean Hamer, argues that genes determine complex
personality traits such as shyness, depression and worry as well as how much we
eat and drink. Here, in the first of a two-part series, we explain the effect
our genes have on our emotions . . .

    THRILL-SEEKING

    computer programmers. They prefer jobs with long-term projects and goals
rather than rapidly changing priorities.

    High and low novelty seekers don't differ in their desire to feel good but
in what makes them feel good.

    The former need excitement for the brain to feel good, but the same level of
arousal makes a low novelty seeker anxious.

    Now scientists have discovered the chemical responsible for this feeling of
excitement - dopamine, which is also released during good sex. Each of us has
several hundred genes involved in dopamine signalling - telling us when we feel
good - and what is remarkable is that a gene, called D4DR, has been found which
controls this 'novelty seeking' behaviour.

    This gene varies widely from one person to the next and is passed from
parent to child, determining their thrill-seeking behaviour. This means that we
are genetically programmed from birth to either seek thrills, or live the quiet
life.

    WORRY, defined by psychologists as a fear of emotional or physical harm, is
a lifelong emotional disposition that is deeply rooted in the genes.

    Researchers have found the first signs of harm avoidance even before a child
is born - a fast foetal heartbeat is a sign that an infant will probably be
fidgety and whiny, turning later into a child who will be reluctant to
experience new sensations or situations, and be clingy and fearful.

    People who class themselves as worriers also often have other symptoms,
including depression, anxiety, poor concentration and exhaustion.

    Those with a high 'worry score' tend always to feel nervous and uptight,
WORRY

    are reluctant to meet new people or vary from a set routine. By contrast,
person who scores low is calm and relaxed, uninhibited, confident, enjoys
meeting people and welcomes a change in routine.

    Worrying runs in families, as does the more severe symptom of depression.

    According to one study, genes determine about 40 pc of worry levels while
life events determine about 60 pc.

    So what is responsible for this genetically inherited trait?

    Scientists point to a brain chemical called serotonin which, like dopamine,
is a small, simple molecule.

    Genes give the body the blueprints for the sero-tonin system and then build
it. The system is in place before birth, responding to outside stimuli and the
body's needs.

    The lower the levels of sero-tonin in the brain, the more likely you are to
be a worrier.

    Of course, many people feel happy and secure because of distinct events in
their lives. One unique experience is falling into a lot money. But researchers
from the University of Illinois have found that lottery winners are no happier a
year after winning than they were before.

    Equally surprising is that negative events - such as divorce, losing spouse
or getting married - have only a mild correlation to depression.

    It seems that all of us are genetically disposed towards worry, as if the
brain has a set point for happiness. your parents were worriers or suffered from
depression, then it is far more likely you will too.

    WHEN you become angry, the amyg-dala - the brain's emotional response centre
- delivers a dose quick-acting chemicals that tighten muscles, pump blood to the
skin's surface and make you feel irritable.

    The same organ also releases messages to the adrenal gland, causing to
produce stress hormones that make your brain even more sensitive to the next
insult.

    But why do some of us lash out, while others control their anger? Why do
some of us become criminals and indulge in violent behaviour while others become
model citizens?

    In a study of more than 1,000 families in Iowa, psychologists compared the
biological children of parents trouble with the biological children law-abiding
parents. All the children had been put up for adoption.

    What happened was that the children with 'good' genes stuck on the straight
and narrow, even if their adoptive parents got divorced or abused alcohol or
drugs. When the genes were 'bad', however, the home environment did make the
difference between success and failure.

    Measures of bad behaviour such as lying, stealing and truancy increased
ANGER

    in problem adoptive families by as much as 500 pc. In other words, a child
will not only copy an aggressive parent, they will have inherited his genes and
predilection for anger.

    THE roots of mental ability, thinking and consciousness are as complicated
as the process of thinking itself. The brain is a physical organ, but it isn't
like any other organ.

    A baby raised with a good diet and clean surroundings, but without human
contact, will grow up with a normal set of body parts except one; without human
contact, the brain will not develop.

    The brain begins with genes. Genes from both parents combine to design and
create the brain. The slightest glitch from the DNA code can limit mental
development or cause severe retardation. On the other hand, HOW YOU THINK 'good'
genes make genius possible there is no single factor more important in an
adult's IQ score than genes.

    Research carried out on sea slugs has revealed that memory - both short-term
and long-term - is an electrical signal between nerve cells.

    These nerve cells 'remember' the impulse by synthesising a burst of
proteins, the activator for this being a protein called CREB.

    The amount of new information that nerve cells can deposit into the
long-term memory bank is limited.

    Nerve cells need time to regenerate the CREB activator. This is why it is so
much more efficient to study for exams in multiple short periods.

    We inherit the way our brain is formed from our parents' genes.

    However, this does not mean that upbringing is not important. Just because a
person's genes are in place at conception, it doesn't mean they are all switched
on. Babies and young children need lots of one-to-one contact and physical
stimulation.

    Nutrition is also very important.

    Yet, while we know that IQ is inheritable, we don't yet know which genes are
responsible for intelligence.

    Scientists have identified more than 100 mutated genes which cause
retardation, such as dyslexia. Most dyslexics have at least one other person in
the family who has reading problems, and the rate in identical twins is as high
as 40 pc.

    * Extracted from Living With Our Genes by Dean Hamer, published by Macmillan
on April 9 at GBP 12.99. To order a copy (p&p free) at the special price of GBP
10.99, tel 0870-161 0870.

    IF SO much of our emotional behaviour is predetermined by our genetic
makeup, can we 'cure' people of antisocial behaviour and bad moods?

    According to Dean Hamer, in the future, a person who complains of depression
or anxiety could have a DNA test to check their 'stress' genes.

    People with compulsive behaviour would be checked for dopamine genes which
regulate mood. A new technology called DNA chips is already under development
and will make an entire DNA blueprint as easy to read as a supermarket bar code.

    The second phase of development will be designer drugs tailored to genetic
needs. The ultimate stage of the coming revolution is gene therapy, the
deliberate manipulation of genetic makeup to repair a defective or mutant gene,
to replace it with a 'better' gene or introduce a new gene.

    New genes can already be delivered into cells by packaging them inside
viruses.

    There are hundreds of clinical trials using gene therapy for single-gene
disorders, such as cystic fibrosis.

    However, there are pitfalls. Gene therapy is permanent. Unlike taking a
drug, there is no way to reverse the treatment. A bigger concern is that genes
for personality are so complicated that it's impossible to know what might
happen if one were altered. In our final extract published tomorrow in Good
Health, discover how our genetic makeup affects our most intimate and lifelong
relationships

    I'M NOT a machine, I admit it.

    Flying into London from Los Angeles and going straight into business
meetings is tiring - even with melatonin for my jet lag.

    Luckily, my lovely daughter Jessica practised her massage on me to help me
unwind.

    Both my children, in their early 20s, assure me how much they appreciate all
the workshops and spiritual activity they suffered as they grew up. My daughter
has rejected offers to model so she can learn how to be a healer and trainer. My
son has turned it all into material for his stand-up comedy act.

    Call me a proud mother, but he's very funny about the neurosis of being
re-birthed by his mother at 14. And Jessica's a wonderful healer.

    * ONE of my first stops in London was top colourist Jo Hansford's salon.

    Jo is becoming such a media star she told me she was even recognised at the
cheese counter at Selfridges. She was getting more attention than her client,
Liz Hurley, who was still looking good even with her hair full of clips and
lotions. For years Jo and her team have been changing me from dark red to dark
brown, according to the seasons, and disguising the grey. You can get the
'Hansford' effect without visiting her Mount Street salon - her tints are also
available at Superdrug.

    * CATCHING up with friends, I rang Stephen Russell, aka the Barefoot Doctor,
who was busy preparing for the launch of his Handbook For Heroes, subtitled A
Spiritual Guide To Fame And Fortune. In the book, published by Piatkus in May,
this trendy healer and martial arts expert teaches his mix of Eastern philosophy
and positive thinking in a youthful, down-to-earth way.

    He's had a huge hit with his cult Handbook For The Urban Warrior. Like all
hipsters, he hosts his website www.barefootdoctor.co.uk - where he says you can
relax the mind and chill the soul. I'll try it once I get to grips with surfing
the Net.

    * FOUND time before I left LA for ecstatic dance class where, along with 60
or so enthusiastic Californians, I practised Gabrielle Roth's Five Rhythms. I've
been following Gabrielle's work for a number of years, finally finding an
exercise that moved my whole body,but still ending in peaceful meditation.

    I've seen children, seniors, people in wheelchairs and teenagers play round
the dance floor with the Five Rhythms. They follow their 't'ai chi energy flow',
moving on to abrupt staccato movement, build up to high-energy, chaotic moves,
settle back into a childlike lyrical dance and finish on stillness.

    Two hours of dancing meditation fully exercises the body and gets rid of
stress. There are workshops all over Britain of Roth's work, but make sure you
get trained teachers. I recommend one with Susannah and Ya'Acov Darling Kahn;
they're the best. Call the Moving Centre School UK, tel: 01803 762 255.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1999


                              68 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 5, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 2027 words

HEADLINE: IS HAPPINESS MAPPED OUT IN THE WOMB?;
THE FIRST PART OF AN INTRIGUING GUIDE THAT SHOWS HOW ARE GENES MAY DETERMINE THE
WAY WE FEEL AND ACT

BYLINE: Diana Appleyard

BODY:


    WHY DO some of us love to take risks, while others are terrified of new
experiences?

    Fascinatingly, this is a genetic trait, handed down from our parents and
determined by the chemical dopamine in our brain.

    Dean Hamer classifies people into 'high' and 'low' novelty seekers. High
novelty seekers find pleasure in varied, new and intense experiences. Low
novelty seekers prefer familiar, conventional and less intense experiences.

    Physical thrill-seeking includes a desire to participate in dangerous sports
such as mountain climbing, surfing or skydiving. Those who fall into the
category of high novelty seekers are more likely to have problems with
drug-taking, drinking, risky sex and gambling.

    Low novelty seekers are more likely to be frugal with money and with their
emotions.

    Typical jobs for high novelty seekers are pilots, fire-fighters, stock
brokers or bank robbers, while low novelty seekers are more likely to be
accountants, librarians, dentists or GENES influence our health and appearance,
determining our predisposition to disease, ageing and longevity.

    But could our genetic makeup also influence our moods and wellbeing? In a
new book genetic expert, Dean Hamer, argues that genes determine complex
personality traits such as shyness, depression and worry as well as how much we
eat and drink. Here, in the first of a two-part series, we explain the effect
our genes have on our emotions . . .

    THRILL-SEEKING

    computer programmers. They prefer jobs with long-term projects and goals
rather than rapidly changing priorities.

    High and low novelty seekers don't differ in their desire to feel good but
in what makes them feel good.

    The former need excitement for the brain to feel good, but the same level of
arousal makes a low novelty seeker anxious.

    Now scientists have discovered the chemical responsible for this feeling of
excitement - dopamine, which is also released during good sex. Each of us has
several hundred genes involved in dopamine signalling - telling us when we feel
good - and what is remarkable is that a gene, called D4DR, has been found which
controls this 'novelty seeking' behaviour.

    This gene varies widely from one person to the next and is passed from
parent to child, determining their thrill-seeking behaviour. This means that we
are genetically programmed from birth to either seek thrills, or live the quiet
life.

    WORRY, defined by psychologists as a fear of emotional or physical harm, is
a lifelong emotional disposition that is deeply rooted in the genes.

    Researchers have found the first signs of harm avoidance even before a child
is born - a fast foetal heartbeat is a sign that an infant will probably be
fidgety and whiny, turning later into a child who will be reluctant to
experience new sensations or situations, and be clingy and fearful.

    People who class themselves as worriers also often have other symptoms,
including depression, anxiety, poor concentration and exhaustion.

    Those with a high 'worry score' tend always to feel nervous and uptight,
WORRY

    are reluctant to meet new people or vary from a set routine. By contrast,
person who scores low is calm and relaxed, uninhibited, confident, enjoys
meeting people and welcomes a change in routine.

    Worrying runs in families, as does the more severe symptom of depression.

    According to one study, genes determine about 40 pc of worry levels while
life events determine about 60 pc.

    So what is responsible for this genetically inherited trait?

    Scientists point to a brain chemical called serotonin which, like dopamine,
is a small, simple molecule.

    Genes give the body the blueprints for the sero-tonin system and then build
it. The system is in place before birth, responding to outside stimuli and the
body's needs.

    The lower the levels of sero-tonin in the brain, the more likely you are to
be a worrier.

    Of course, many people feel happy and secure because of distinct events in
their lives. One unique experience is falling into a lot money. But researchers
from the University of Illinois have found that lottery winners are no happier a
year after winning than they were before.

    Equally surprising is that negative events - such as divorce, losing spouse
or getting married - have only a mild correlation to depression.

    It seems that all of us are genetically disposed towards worry, as if the
brain has a set point for happiness. your parents were worriers or suffered from
depression, then it is far more likely you will too.

    WHEN you become angry, the amyg-dala - the brain's emotional response centre
- delivers a dose quick-acting chemicals that tighten muscles, pump blood to the
skin's surface and make you feel irritable.

    The same organ also releases messages to the adrenal gland, causing to
produce stress hormones that make your brain even more sensitive to the next
insult.

    But why do some of us lash out, while others control their anger? Why do
some of us become criminals and indulge in violent behaviour while others become
model citizens?

    In a study of more than 1,000 families in Iowa, psychologists compared the
biological children of parents trouble with the biological children law-abiding
parents. All the children had been put up for adoption.

    What happened was that the children with 'good' genes stuck on the straight
and narrow, even if their adoptive parents got divorced or abused alcohol or
drugs. When the genes were 'bad', however, the home environment did make the
difference between success and failure.

    Measures of bad behaviour such as lying, stealing and truancy increased
ANGER

    in problem adoptive families by as much as 500 pc. In other words, a child
will not only copy an aggressive parent, they will have inherited his genes and
predilection for anger.

    THE roots of mental ability, thinking and consciousness are as complicated
as the process of thinking itself. The brain is a physical organ, but it isn't
like any other organ.

    A baby raised with a good diet and clean surroundings, but without human
contact, will grow up with a normal set of body parts except one; without human
contact, the brain will not develop.

    The brain begins with genes. Genes from both parents combine to design and
create the brain. The slightest glitch from the DNA code can limit mental
development or cause severe retardation. On the other hand, HOW YOU THINK 'good'
genes make genius possible there is no single factor more important in an
adult's IQ score than genes.

    Research carried out on sea slugs has revealed that memory - both short-term
and long-term - is an electrical signal between nerve cells.

    These nerve cells 'remember' the impulse by synthesising a burst of
proteins, the activator for this being a protein called CREB.

    The amount of new information that nerve cells can deposit into the
long-term memory bank is limited.

    Nerve cells need time to regenerate the CREB activator. This is why it is so
much more efficient to study for exams in multiple short periods.

    We inherit the way our brain is formed from our parents' genes.

    However, this does not mean that upbringing is not important. Just because a
person's genes are in place at conception, it doesn't mean they are all switched
on. Babies and young children need lots of one-to-one contact and physical
stimulation.

    Nutrition is also very important.

    Yet, while we know that IQ is inheritable, we don't yet know which genes are
responsible for intelligence.

    Scientists have identified more than 100 mutated genes which cause
retardation, such as dyslexia. Most dyslexics have at least one other person in
the family who has reading problems, and the rate in identical twins is as high
as 40 pc.

    * Extracted from Living With Our Genes by Dean Hamer, published by Macmillan
on April 9 at GBP 12.99. To order a copy (p&p free) at the special price of GBP
10.99, tel 0870-161 0870.

    IF SO much of our emotional behaviour is predetermined by our genetic
makeup, can we 'cure' people of antisocial behaviour and bad moods?

    According to Dean Hamer, in the future, a person who complains of depression
or anxiety could have a DNA test to check their 'stress' genes.

    People with compulsive behaviour would be checked for dopamine genes which
regulate mood. A new technology called DNA chips is already under development
and will make an entire DNA blueprint as easy to read as a supermarket bar code.

    The second phase of development will be designer drugs tailored to genetic
needs. The ultimate stage of the coming revolution is gene therapy, the
deliberate manipulation of genetic makeup to repair a defective or mutant gene,
to replace it with a 'better' gene or introduce a new gene.

    New genes can already be delivered into cells by packaging them inside
viruses.

    There are hundreds of clinical trials using gene therapy for single-gene
disorders, such as cystic fibrosis.

    However, there are pitfalls. Gene therapy is permanent. Unlike taking a
drug, there is no way to reverse the treatment. A bigger concern is that genes
for personality are so complicated that it's impossible to know what might
happen if one were altered. In our final extract published tomorrow in Good
Health, discover how our genetic makeup affects our most intimate and lifelong
relationships

    I'M NOT a machine, I admit it.

    Flying into London from Los Angeles and going straight into business
meetings is tiring - even with melatonin for my jet lag.

    Luckily, my lovely daughter Jessica practised her massage on me to help me
unwind.

    Both my children, in their early 20s, assure me how much they appreciate all
the workshops and spiritual activity they suffered as they grew up. My daughter
has rejected offers to model so she can learn how to be a healer and trainer. My
son has turned it all into material for his stand-up comedy act.

    Call me a proud mother, but he's very funny about the neurosis of being
re-birthed by his mother at 14. And Jessica's a wonderful healer.

    * ONE of my first stops in London was top colourist Jo Hansford's salon.

    Jo is becoming such a media star she told me she was even recognised at the
cheese counter at Selfridges. She was getting more attention than her client,
Liz Hurley, who was still looking good even with her hair full of clips and
lotions. For years Jo and her team have been changing me from dark red to dark
brown, according to the seasons, and disguising the grey. You can get the
'Hansford' effect without visiting her Mount Street salon - her tints are also
available at Superdrug.

    * CATCHING up with friends, I rang Stephen Russell, aka the Barefoot Doctor,
who was busy preparing for the launch of his Handbook For Heroes, subtitled A
Spiritual Guide To Fame And Fortune. In the book, published by Piatkus in May,
this trendy healer and martial arts expert teaches his mix of Eastern philosophy
and positive thinking in a youthful, down-to-earth way.

    He's had a huge hit with his cult Handbook For The Urban Warrior. Like all
hipsters, he hosts his website www.barefootdoctor.co.uk - where he says you can
relax the mind and chill the soul. I'll try it once I get to grips with surfing
the Net.

    * FOUND time before I left LA for ecstatic dance class where, along with 60
or so enthusiastic Californians, I practised Gabrielle Roth's Five Rhythms. I've
been following Gabrielle's work for a number of years, finally finding an
exercise that moved my whole body,but still ending in peaceful meditation.

    I've seen children, seniors, people in wheelchairs and teenagers play round
the dance floor with the Five Rhythms. They follow their 't'ai chi energy flow',
moving on to abrupt staccato movement, build up to high-energy, chaotic moves,
settle back into a childlike lyrical dance and finish on stillness.

    Two hours of dancing meditation fully exercises the body and gets rid of
stress. There are workshops all over Britain of Roth's work, but make sure you
get trained teachers. I recommend one with Susannah and Ya'Acov Darling Kahn;
they're the best. Call the Moving Centre School UK, tel: 01803 762 255.


LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1999


                              69 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 16, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 69

LENGTH: 699 words

HEADLINE: Telecom tangles torment Footsie;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:


    INVESTORS hung up on highflying telecoms after German utility Veba surprised
the market by selling its 10.2pc stake in Cable & Wireless. Fund managers sold
other telecoms to take up the C&W shares being placed.

    British Telecom dropped 54p before closing 26p lower at 1058p. COLT lost 51p
to 939p, Cable & Wireless Communications dropped 29p to 699p, while Telewest
Communications, which reports annual results today, fell 20p to 243p. Vodafone
dipped 10p to 1120p.

    Securicor declined 17p to 531p, not helped by BT dismissing suggestions that
it has offered $2.5bn for its 40pc stake in Cellnet.

    Telecoms' weakness pulled the plug on the Footsie. It fell 122.8 points
before rallying on Wall Street's 81-point rise to 9957 to finish 75.4 lower at
6206.8. Turnover of 1.5bn was swelled by 528.6m traded in C&W.

    Wall Street's strength followed details of a $ 16bn merger between Fleet
Financial and Bank Boston to create the eighth largest bank in America.

    Plus the DuPont's $ 7.7bn acquisition of seedmaker Pioneer HiBred.

    The pound lost almost 1 cent to $ 1.6217, while the euro edged up from
66.98p to 67.49p.

    Eric Nicoli's appointment as Sir Colin Southgate's successor as executive
chairman of EMI really has gone down like a lead balloon in the City.

    Shares of the music giant fell 19p to 410p on fears that he is the wrong man
to spice up the ailing music giant's life.

    United Biscuits underperformed the All share index by 80pc during Nicoli's
reign as chief executive. UB eased 4p to 187p.

    Reed International rose 25p to 525p on talk that a new chief executive is
about to be appointed and a JP Morgan recommendation.

    Handheld computer company Psion leapt 107p to 860p after its Symbian joint
venture signed a deal with NTT Mobile Communications Network of Japan.

    Shire Pharmaceuticals soared 43p to 516p after broker WestLB Panmure advised
clients to buy following Friday's results and upgraded its current-year pre-tax
profits forecast to $20m from $16m.

    AIM-listed gene therapy company Oxford Biomedia jumped 9p to 27p and the
nil-paid rights 9p to 12p. Colin Blackbourn, the ubiquitous Shore Capital
private client and institutional broker, has acquired a small stake.

    It's official! Chilled foods business Terranova is 'in play'. The company
confirmed it has rejected a bid approach which very significantly undervalued
the business.

    Strongly supported last week on talk of a 125p-a-share offer from Unigate,
Terranova had advanced a further 8p to 112p before the rejection statement
prompted profit-taking. The shares dropped to 96p before punters piled in again
leaving the close unchanged at 104p. Word is Unigate could soon go hostile with
a knockout cash offer of 150p-a-share. Unigate dipped 3p to 410p.

    In the absence of any bid developments, Albright & Wilson eased 2p to 137p.
Speculators are still hoping that French company Rhodia will trump US company
Albemarle's $408m cash offer at 130p.

    Great Lakes Chemical, the big US international producer of special chemicals
for industry, is also now rumoured to be interested in Albright.

    Manchester United scored a 9p gain to 240p on hopes that BSkyB will be
forced to increase its $623.4m - 240p a share - offer for the richest football
club in the world once it gets the green light from the Monopolies & Mergers
Commission. A decision should come before Easter.

    Greg Hutchings' buns-to-guns company Tomkins, which loses its coveted
Footsie place next week, dipped 9 3 /4 p to 224 1 /2 p after outlining plans to
buy back up to 15pc of its shares in a tender offer at between 220p and 250p.

    Shareholders' approval for the move will be sought at an egm on April 16.

    Tomkins plans to sell its US mowers business, Murray, and Hayter mowers in
Britain.

    * AIM-LISTED Private & Commercial Finance, which specialises in credit for
car buyers, edged up 2p to a high of 81 1 /2 p following its first annual
results since floating. Pre-tax profits rose 25pc to $411,000 on turnover 58pc
up at $5.1m. A placing and offer of convertible loan stock will raise cash for
acquisitions.

    New instalment credit business averaged $1m a month in the last six months.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1999


                              70 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 16, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 69

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: Telecom tangles torment Footsie;
MARKET REPORT

BYLINE: Geoff Foster

BODY:


    INVESTORS hung up on highflying telecoms after German utility Veba surprised
the market by selling its 10.2pc stake in Cable & Wireless. Fund managers sold
other telecoms to take up the C&W shares being placed.

    British Telecom dropped 54p before closing 26p lower at 1058p. COLT lost 51p
to 939p, Cable & Wireless Communications dropped 29p to 699p, while Telewest
Communications, which reports annual results today, fell 20p to 243p. Vodafone
dipped 10p to 1120p.

    Securicor declined 17p to 531p, not helped by BT dismissing suggestions that
it has offered $2.5bn for its 40pc stake in Cellnet.

    Telecoms' weakness pulled the plug on the Footsie. It fell 122.8 points
before rallying on Wall Street's 81-point rise to 9957 to finish 75.4 lower at
6206.8. Turnover of 1.5bn was swelled by 528.6m traded in C&W.

    Wall Street's strength followed details of a $ 16bn merger between Fleet
Financial and Bank Boston to create the eighth largest bank in America.

    Plus the DuPont's $ 7.7bn acquisition of seedmaker Pioneer HiBred.

    The pound lost almost 1 cent to $ 1.6217, while the euro edged up from
66.98p to 67.49p.

    Eric Nicoli's appointment as Sir Colin Southgate's successor as executive
chairman of EMI really has gone down like a lead balloon in the City.

    Shares of the music giant fell 19p to 410p on fears that he is the wrong man
to spice up the ailing music giant's life.

    United Biscuits underperformed the All share index by 80pc during Nicoli's
reign as chief executive. UB eased 4p to 187p.

    Reed International rose 25p to 525p on talk that a new chief executive is
about to be appointed and a JP Morgan recommendation.

    Handheld computer company Psion leapt 107p to 860p after its Symbian joint
venture signed a deal with NTT Mobile Communications Network of Japan.

    Shire Pharmaceuticals soared 43p to 516p after broker WestLB Panmure advised
clients to buy following Friday's results and upgraded its current-year pre-tax
profits forecast to $20m from $16m.

    AIM-listed gene therapy company Oxford Biomedia jumped 9p to 27p and the
nil-paid rights 9p to 12p. Colin Blackbourn, the ubiquitous Shore Capital
private client and institutional broker, has acquired a small stake.

    It's official! Chilled foods business Terranova is 'in play'. The company
confirmed it has rejected a bid approach which very significantly undervalued
the business.

    Strongly supported last week on talk of a 125p-a-share offer from Unigate,
Terranova had advanced a further 8p to 112p before the rejection statement
prompted profit-taking. The shares dropped to 96p before punters piled in again
leaving the close unchanged at 104p. Word is Unigate could soon go hostile with
a knockout cash offer of 150p-a-share. Unigate dipped 3p to 410p.

    In the absence of any bid developments, Albright & Wilson eased 2p to 137p.
Speculators are still hoping that French company Rhodia will trump US company
Albemarle's $408m cash offer at 130p.

    Great Lakes Chemical, the big US international producer of special chemicals
for industry, is also now rumoured to be interested in Albright.

    Manchester United scored a 9p gain to 240p on hopes that BSkyB will be
forced to increase its $623.4m - 240p a share - offer for the richest football
club in the world once it gets the green light from the Monopolies & Mergers
Commission. A decision should come before Easter.

    Greg Hutchings' buns-to-guns company Tomkins, which loses its coveted
Footsie place next week, dipped 9 3 /4 p to 224 1 /2 p after outlining plans to
buy back up to 15pc of its shares in a tender offer at between 220p and 250p.

    Shareholders' approval for the move will be sought at an egm on April 16.

    Tomkins plans to sell its US mowers business, Murray, and Hayter mowers in
Britain.

    * AIM-LISTED Private & Commercial Finance, which specialises in credit for
car buyers, edged up 2p to a high of 81 1 /2 p following its first annual
results since floating. Pre-tax profits rose 25pc to $411,000 on turnover 58pc
up at $5.1m. A placing and offer of convertible loan stock will raise cash for
acquisitions.

    New instalment credit business averaged $1m a month in the last six months.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1999


                              72 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 10, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 59

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: Hounds that could cost you pounds

BYLINE: Lynne Bateson

BODY:


    PEDIGREE pooches who will strut their stuff at the world's biggest dog show,
Crufts, from tomorrow could capture our cash as well as our hearts.

    Pedigrees not only cost more than modest mongrels, they can be pricier to
insure because they are prone to inherited physical and behavioural weaknesses.

    More of us are having to find the cash to fund our pedigree pals' trips to
the vet. The percentage of pedigrees is rising because mongrels are routinely
neutered by stray dog charities. Six out of 10 dogs are pedigree.

    Jerry Brownlee, director of Pet Protect, says: 'Responsible dog breeders are
working hard to breed out inherited problems and one day gene therapy may help.

    'Until then pedigree dog owners have to be prepared to pay more.'

    Pedigrees, like all dogs, are living longer with conditions that are
expensive to treat.

    Richard Barrett of Petplan warns: 'People who fall in love with a breed
should do their homework so they know what they could be letting themselves in
for.' Julie Constable of Direct Line adds: 'How much a dog costs to insure
depends on age, price and location but by far the most significant factor is
breed.

    'Location matters because vet bills differ around the country. A
five-year-old London bulldog worth $1,500 could cost $19.92 a month to insure,
but a two-year-old border collie in Falkirk worth $100 costs only $5.60 a
month.' But not all insurers are rough on pedigrees. Primary Direct's new
Primary Pet policy promises it will not load pedigrees for at least three years.
Owners should ask insurers whether they pay up for treatment of inherited
conditions and if this includes behavioural problems.

    Many policies like Pet Protect will, if the condition had not developed when
the policy was taken out.

    Some firms will only allow policyholders to claim for a condition for up to
12 months. At renewal time that condition is excluded.

    INSURING YOUR PEDIGREE CHUM

    A GUIDE to the price of insuring pedigree dogs (1 being cheapest and 7 the
most expensive): 1: Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever, Yorkshire Terrier.

    2: German Shepherd, Toy Poodle, Springer and Cocker Spaniels, Beagle,
Dalmatian.

    3: Dobermann, English and Red Setters, Airedale, Pointers.

    4: Weimaraner, Boxer, Bull Terrier, American Cocker Spaniel, West Highland
White, Pekinese.

    5: Greyhound, Clumber Spaniel, French Bulldog.

    6: Norfolk Labrador, Norsk Lundehund, Otterhound.

    7: St Bernard, Rottweiler, Irish Wolfhound, Bulldog, Bull Mastiff.

    Source: Direct Line

    RATES BONUS FOR YORKSHIRE SAVERS

    WHILE savers see their variable interest rates tumble, some with Yorkshire
Building Society will earn better returns after its latest accounts shake-up.

    Savers in Platinum Key, its 60-day notice account, move to its new Access
Saver, an instant access account paying 4.75 pc before tax.

    Key 90 Plus savers move to Notice Saver, a new 30-day account, where the
rate starts at 5.65 pc for a minimum $100.

    Postal savers in First Class Return or First Class Access will merge into
one account, Postal Saver, starting at 5.5 pc for $1,000 and rising to 6.1 pc at
$10,000.

    The Happy Account for children gets a 1.25 pc rate rise to 6.5 pc before
tax.

    Yorkshire's Tessa, open until April 5, pays 6.95 pc for a minimum $100.

    But the rate on the Monthly Savers account drops by 0.5 pc to 6.5 pc,
including bonus, reflecting the 0.5 pc February fall in base rate.


LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1999


                              73 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 10, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 59

LENGTH: 575 words

HEADLINE: Hounds that could cost you pounds

BYLINE: Lynne Bateson

BODY:


    PEDIGREE pooches who will strut their stuff at the world's biggest dog show,
Crufts, from tomorrow could capture our cash as well as our hearts.

    Pedigrees not only cost more than modest mongrels, they can be pricier to
insure because they are prone to inherited physical and behavioural weaknesses.

    More of us are having to find the cash to fund our pedigree pals' trips to
the vet. The percentage of pedigrees is rising because mongrels are routinely
neutered by stray dog charities. Six out of 10 dogs are pedigree.

    Jerry Brownlee, director of Pet Protect, says: 'Responsible dog breeders are
working hard to breed out inherited problems and one day gene therapy may help.

    'Until then pedigree dog owners have to be prepared to pay more.'

    Pedigrees, like all dogs, are living longer with conditions that are
expensive to treat.

    Richard Barrett of Petplan warns: 'People who fall in love with a breed
should do their homework so they know what they could be letting themselves in
for.' Julie Constable of Direct Line adds: 'How much a dog costs to insure
depends on age, price and location but by far the most significant factor is
breed.

    'Location matters because vet bills differ around the country. A
five-year-old London bulldog worth $1,500 could cost $19.92 a month to insure,
but a two-year-old border collie in Falkirk worth $100 costs only $5.60 a
month.' But not all insurers are rough on pedigrees. Primary Direct's new
Primary Pet policy promises it will not load pedigrees for at least three years.
Owners should ask insurers whether they pay up for treatment of inherited
conditions and if this includes behavioural problems.

    Many policies like Pet Protect will, if the condition had not developed when
the policy was taken out.

    Some firms will only allow policyholders to claim for a condition for up to
12 months. At renewal time that condition is excluded.

    INSURING YOUR PEDIGREE CHUM

    A GUIDE to the price of insuring pedigree dogs (1 being cheapest and 7 the
most expensive): 1: Labrador Retriever, Golden Retriever, Yorkshire Terrier.

    2: German Shepherd, Toy Poodle, Springer and Cocker Spaniels, Beagle,
Dalmatian.

    3: Dobermann, English and Red Setters, Airedale, Pointers.

    4: Weimaraner, Boxer, Bull Terrier, American Cocker Spaniel, West Highland
White, Pekinese.

    5: Greyhound, Clumber Spaniel, French Bulldog.

    6: Norfolk Labrador, Norsk Lundehund, Otterhound.

    7: St Bernard, Rottweiler, Irish Wolfhound, Bulldog, Bull Mastiff.

    Source: Direct Line

    RATES BONUS FOR YORKSHIRE SAVERS

    WHILE savers see their variable interest rates tumble, some with Yorkshire
Building Society will earn better returns after its latest accounts shake-up.

    Savers in Platinum Key, its 60-day notice account, move to its new Access
Saver, an instant access account paying 4.75 pc before tax.

    Key 90 Plus savers move to Notice Saver, a new 30-day account, where the
rate starts at 5.65 pc for a minimum $100.

    Postal savers in First Class Return or First Class Access will merge into
one account, Postal Saver, starting at 5.5 pc for $1,000 and rising to 6.1 pc at
$10,000.

    The Happy Account for children gets a 1.25 pc rate rise to 6.5 pc before
tax.

    Yorkshire's Tessa, open until April 5, pays 6.95 pc for a minimum $100.

    But the rate on the Monthly Savers account drops by 0.5 pc to 6.5 pc,
including bonus, reflecting the 0.5 pc February fall in base rate.


LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1999


                              74 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1999 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                             March 7, 1999, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: DRINKERS' REPRIEVE...A CURE FOR LIVER DAMAGE;
 GENE THERAPY BREAKTHROUGH GIVES NEW HOPE

BYLINE: Exclusive By Sharon Collins Health Correspondent

BODY:


    THOUSANDS of lives could be saved thanks to a pioneering new treatment which
scientists believe can reverse liver damage.

    Until now there has been no cure for cirrhosis and other liver diseases
which kill more than 8,000 people a year in Britain.

    Now researchers using a gene therapy technique have discovered how to reduce
scarred tissue. And they believe it could be developed into a new treatment for
patients with cirrhosis. Scientists already knew a substance called hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) caused liver cells to multiply.

    But two separate studies in Japan found that it also improves the condition
of livers in rats with fatty liver disease - which can progress to cirrhosis.
And there is strong evidence that HGF could be used to treat cirrhosis itself.

    Liver cells in cirrhosis cases suffer chronic damage often due to alcohol
abuse. Internal scarring breaks up the liver's structure which can no longer
cope with removing toxicsubstances from the blood.

    In the two studies the researchers induced fatal cirrhosis in rats, and then
injected the HGF gene into them.

    They found that the rats which did not have the gene therapy died on average
after 34 days. All of those treated survived longer and showed a 70 per cent
reduction in damaged scar tissue.

    Dr Mark Thursz, a consultant physician at St Mary's Hospital in London,
described the treatment as a "potential breakthrough."

    He added: "People who suffer acute liver failure lose liver cells, and this
process has been shown to regenerate those cells.

    "If you could apply the treatment early enough, you could even prevent
cirrhosis."

GRAPHIC: CHEERS: Good news for heavy drinkers

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1999


                              76 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 1405 words

HEADLINE: Midnight's children;
A rare allergy has forced these families to take their holidays in darkness . .
.

BYLINE: Becky Morris

BODY:


    FOR these two children, exposure to daylight can be disastrous.

    Born with a rare genetic condition which means that their skin has no
resistance to the damage caused by ultraviolet rays, they have to stay indoors
during daylight hours to prevent their skin burning and developing cancer. But,
as BECKY MORRIS reports, a special nocturnal holiday in the Alps allowed them to
have fun in the snow like any other child - except it took place at midnight.

    THE scene is magical, but ordinary enough for a winter holiday. Two children
are throwing snowballs at each other and tumbling with glee in snowdrifts at the
top of one of Bavaria's spectacular Alps.

    Their parents watch with proud smiles as the two boys collapse in a
snowdrift, rosy-cheeked and breathless with laughter. But it is midnight, well
beyond the bedtime of any normal child. For little Alex Webb, four, and
Alexander Wasyluk, six, are on a holiday quite unlike any other. Born with
Xeroderma Pigmentosa, a rare genetic condition, they are allergic to daylight.

    Even on cloudy days, a single ray of sunlight can burn their skin and cause
horrific blistering. Their skin has absolutely no defence against cancer, which
means their anxious parents spend their days checking their child's skin for
moles and freckles which could mark the beginning of a fatal malignant melanoma
or other forms of cancer.

    So the chance to take part in Europe's first 'Mondscheinwoche' - moonlight
play week - has been a revelation for the children and their families. Last week
they visited the spectacular castle of Schloss Elmau nestling at the foot of the
Alps and every night went out to build snowmen, ride shaggy ponies along
mountain paths, toboggan and take part in spirited snowball fights.

    'It is wonderful to see Alexander playing in the snow like any normal
child,' says his mother Anna, 42, from Walton-on-Thames, her eyes welling with
tears. 'It is so hard for him to have fun at home and he tends to be quiet and
withdrawn. I've seen him grow so much more cheerful and independent this week.'
MOSAICO Medico, a German charity devoted to children with genetic diseases, paid
for the holiday which was also a welcome break for Alexander's parents, Anna and
her engineer husband John. Since they received the shocking diagnosis when
Alexander was just three months old, their lives have been a long round of
vigilance and worry.

    'We had terrible problems conceiving Alexander,' says Anna. 'We tried for
nearly eight years and when he was born it was like all our dreams coming true
at once.

    'But we soon noticed that he developed terrible burns on his skin. His whole
face was like one big blister, as though he'd had a kettle of boiling water
poured on him. Doctors thought he had some kind of rare flesh-eating bacteria
and put him on intravenous antibiotics for two weeks.

    XP is so rare that most dermatologists never come across a case.

    In the end we had to go to a private consultant to get a diagnosis.

    'We were distraught. We were told that Alexander would never live a normal
life or even be able

    to go to school. And that his life expectancy was 30 at most, because of the
risk of skin cancer.' The Wasyluks were lucky, though - an early diagnosis has
literally saved Alexander's skin. Among the other seven children on the holiday,
from as far afield as Siberia and Turkey, several have badly burnt skin and dark
moles on their faces because they were exposed to daylight as small babies. 'I
cried when I saw those poor little children, but it did make me realise just how
important it is to keep Alexander out of the sun,' says Anna.

    There are only 25 children with XP in Britain. And, thanks to technological
developments, the prognosis is better than it was when Alexander's condition was
diagnosed. A revolutionary plastic made by Milton Keynes firm Plysu covers the
windows of the Wasyluks' home and filters out all damaging ultraviolet rays. If
Alexander keeps out of the sun, he has a normal life expectancy.

    His school also has the plastic covering on its windows, as does the family
car, allowing him to have a normal education. To make the journey from the house
to the car in daylight, Alexander is covered with Factor 50 sun block and wears
a full layer of clothing, including gloves, a hat and a face mask which makes
him look like a diminutive beekeeper. 'It is incredibly tough on Alexander.

    People stare at him and he becomes very shy and reluctant to leave the
house,' says Anna.

    But in the freedom of the night-time snow in Bavaria, her son is tearing
around like a steam train, engaging in a dramatic sword fight with foot-long
icicles with his new friend, four-year-old Alex Webb from Great Missenden in
Buckinhamshire.

    ALEX'S mother, Sandra, is delighted at her little boy's progress this week.

    'Like Anna, I've been so worried. Not only do I have to check Alex
constantly for signs of cancer, I have to try to give him as normal a life as
possible while being totally vigilant.

    'In England he can only really let off steam at our local swimming pool,
where they kindly arrange for us to swim with the blinds down. It's very tough
on a little child to tell him he can't just open the door and run into the
garden.

    'He'll be starting school at Easter and this holiday has given his
confidence a tremendous boost. He knows now that while his condition is very
rare, he is not alone.' XP is caused when two carriers of the faulty gene have a
baby. In a tragic form of Russian roulette, the chances are that one in four of
their children will have skin that lacks the ability to resist the sun's burning
UVB rays. More seriously, the skin cannot repair cells damaged by
cancer-inducing UVA rays. Although advances in gene therapy offer hope that one
day the missing healthy gene could be given to the children, the families know
that is a remote hope.

    Sandra, 42, and her husband Steve, 44, a financial director, have a
daughter, Holly, six, who does not have XP. The Webbs are working hard to
improve awareness of XP. 'Any parent with a child who burns severely in the sun
should take it very seriously,' says Sandra.

    'We've heard absolute horror stories of parents being told to "toughen their
children's skin up" by exposing them to the sun. It's appaling.' At Schloss
Elmau, the charity has coated the windows of a vast playroom with protective
filters.

    The playroom comes complete with toys, crayons and musical instruments, and
there is a steady supply of mouth-watering cakes and coffee for the grownups.

    The children play together as they wait for twilight to free them into the
snowy wonderland of pine forests and winter walks around the castle. As the sun
sets, they struggle into ski suits and mittens for a walk and then a toboggan
ride with flaming torches. It is eight degrees below zero but they are aglow
with excitement, to the delight of their parents.

    'We have to accept that they will probably never be able to go into the
daylight,' says Anna. 'But they are children and need to have a life as well as
just surviving.

    Coming here has been a once-in-a-lifetime treat for all of us.' * TO CONTACT
the British XP society call Sandra and Steve Webb on 01494 890980 or email
s.webb@which.net.

    DIAGNOSIS

    CONSULTANT dermatologist Dr Sheru George of Amersham Hospital says:
'Xeroderma Pigmentosa is a very rare genetic defect in which the DNA in every
skin cell cannot be repaired if it is damaged.

    'Most damage to the skin comes from ultraviolet rays in daylight and
exposure to the rays can lead to skin atrophy - premature ageing - and, more
seriously, to skin cancer.

    'One in 250,000 people have the condition which occurs when two carriers of
the faulty gene have a child together.

    'If affected people are exposed to daylight they develop increasing
disfigurement and without protection malignant skin lesions are often present
before the age of five.

    'There are about eight variants of XP and in a way it is lucky to have the
one which causes sunburn as well as damage to the DNA. At least then people know
straight away that something is wrong.

    'With other variants it is only after years of sun exposure that doctors
realise that something is amiss. It is my belief that many people in Britain who
have lots of moles or prematurely aged skin could have one of the milder sorts
of XP but it has never been diagnosed.'


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1999


                              77 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 March 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 48

LENGTH: 1406 words

HEADLINE: Midnight's children;
A rare allergy has forced these families to take their holidays in darkness . .
.

BYLINE: Becky Morris

BODY:


    FOR these two children, exposure to daylight can be disastrous.

    Born with a rare genetic condition which means that their skin has no
resistance to the damage caused by ultraviolet rays, they have to stay indoors
during daylight hours to prevent their skin burning and developing cancer. But,
as BECKY MORRIS reports, a special nocturnal holiday in the Alps allowed them to
have fun in the snow like any other child - except it took place at midnight.

    THE scene is magical, but ordinary enough for a winter holiday. Two children
are throwing snowballs at each other and tumbling with glee in snowdrifts at the
top of one of Bavaria's spectacular Alps.

    Their parents watch with proud smiles as the two boys collapse in a
snowdrift, rosy-cheeked and breathless with laughter. But it is midnight, well
beyond the bedtime of any normal child. For little Alex Webb, four, and
Alexander Wasyluk, six, are on a holiday quite unlike any other. Born with
Xeroderma Pigmentosa, a rare genetic condition, they are allergic to daylight.

    Even on cloudy days, a single ray of sunlight can burn their skin and cause
horrific blistering. Their skin has absolutely no defence against cancer, which
means their anxious parents spend their days checking their child's skin for
moles and freckles which could mark the beginning of a fatal malignant melanoma
or other forms of cancer.

    So the chance to take part in Europe's first 'Mondscheinwoche' - moonlight
play week - has been a revelation for the children and their families. Last week
they visited the spectacular castle of Schloss Elmau nestling at the foot of the
Alps and every night went out to build snowmen, ride shaggy ponies along
mountain paths, toboggan and take part in spirited snowball fights.

    'It is wonderful to see Alexander playing in the snow like any normal
child,' says his mother Anna, 42, from Walton-on-Thames, her eyes welling with
tears. 'It is so hard for him to have fun at home and he tends to be quiet and
withdrawn. I've seen him grow so much more cheerful and independent this week.'
MOSAICO Medico, a German charity devoted to children with genetic diseases, paid
for the holiday which was also a welcome break for Alexander's parents, Anna and
her engineer husband John. Since they received the shocking diagnosis when
Alexander was just three months old, their lives have been a long round of
vigilance and worry.

    'We had terrible problems conceiving Alexander,' says Anna. 'We tried for
nearly eight years and when he was born it was like all our dreams coming true
at once.

    'But we soon noticed that he developed terrible burns on his skin. His whole
face was like one big blister, as though he'd had a kettle of boiling water
poured on him. Doctors thought he had some kind of rare flesh-eating bacteria
and put him on intravenous antibiotics for two weeks.

    XP is so rare that most dermatologists never come across a case.

    In the end we had to go to a private consultant to get a diagnosis.

    'We were distraught. We were told that Alexander would never live a normal
life or even be able

    to go to school. And that his life expectancy was 30 at most, because of the
risk of skin cancer.' The Wasyluks were lucky, though - an early diagnosis has
literally saved Alexander's skin. Among the other seven children on the holiday,
from as far afield as Siberia and Turkey, several have badly burnt skin and dark
moles on their faces because they were exposed to daylight as small babies. 'I
cried when I saw those poor little children, but it did make me realise just how
important it is to keep Alexander out of the sun,' says Anna.

    There are only 25 children with XP in Britain. And, thanks to technological
developments, the prognosis is better than it was when Alexander's condition was
diagnosed. A revolutionary plastic made by Milton Keynes firm Plysu covers the
windows of the Wasyluks' home and filters out all damaging ultraviolet rays. If
Alexander keeps out of the sun, he has a normal life expectancy.

    His school also has the plastic covering on its windows, as does the family
car, allowing him to have a normal education. To make the journey from the house
to the car in daylight, Alexander is covered with Factor 50 sun block and wears
a full layer of clothing, including gloves, a hat and a face mask which makes
him look like a diminutive beekeeper. 'It is incredibly tough on Alexander.

    People stare at him and he becomes very shy and reluctant to leave the
house,' says Anna.

    But in the freedom of the night-time snow in Bavaria, her son is tearing
around like a steam train, engaging in a dramatic sword fight with foot-long
icicles with his new friend, four-year-old Alex Webb from Great Missenden in
Buckinhamshire.

    ALEX'S mother, Sandra, is delighted at her little boy's progress this week.

    'Like Anna, I've been so worried. Not only do I have to check Alex
constantly for signs of cancer, I have to try to give him as normal a life as
possible while being totally vigilant.

    'In England he can only really let off steam at our local swimming pool,
where they kindly arrange for us to swim with the blinds down. It's very tough
on a little child to tell him he can't just open the door and run into the
garden.

    'He'll be starting school at Easter and this holiday has given his
confidence a tremendous boost. He knows now that while his condition is very
rare, he is not alone.' XP is caused when two carriers of the faulty gene have a
baby. In a tragic form of Russian roulette, the chances are that one in four of
their children will have skin that lacks the ability to resist the sun's burning
UVB rays. More seriously, the skin cannot repair cells damaged by
cancer-inducing UVA rays. Although advances in gene therapy offer hope that one
day the missing healthy gene could be given to the children, the families know
that is a remote hope.

    Sandra, 42, and her husband Steve, 44, a financial director, have a
daughter, Holly, six, who does not have XP. The Webbs are working hard to
improve awareness of XP. 'Any parent with a child who burns severely in the sun
should take it very seriously,' says Sandra.

    'We've heard absolute horror stories of parents being told to "toughen their
children's skin up" by exposing them to the sun. It's appaling.' At Schloss
Elmau, the charity has coated the windows of a vast playroom with protective
filters.

    The playroom comes complete with toys, crayons and musical instruments, and
there is a steady supply of mouth-watering cakes and coffee for the grownups.

    The children play together as they wait for twilight to free them into the
snowy wonderland of pine forests and winter walks around the castle. As the sun
sets, they struggle into ski suits and mittens for a walk and then a toboggan
ride with flaming torches. It is eight degrees below zero but they are aglow
with excitement, to the delight of their parents.

    'We have to accept that they will probably never be able to go into the
daylight,' says Anna. 'But they are children and need to have a life as well as
just surviving.

    Coming here has been a once-in-a-lifetime treat for all of us.' * TO CONTACT
the British XP society call Sandra and Steve Webb on 01494 890980 or email
s.webb@which.net.

    DIAGNOSIS

    CONSULTANT dermatologist Dr Sheru George of Amersham Hospital says:
'Xeroderma Pigmentosa is a very rare genetic defect in which the DNA in every
skin cell cannot be repaired if it is damaged.

    'Most damage to the skin comes from ultraviolet rays in daylight and
exposure to the rays can lead to skin atrophy - premature ageing - and, more
seriously, to skin cancer.

    'One in 250,000 people have the condition which occurs when two carriers of
the faulty gene have a child together.

    'If affected people are exposed to daylight they develop increasing
disfigurement and without protection malignant skin lesions are often present
before the age of five.

    'There are about eight variants of XP and in a way it is lucky to have the
one which causes sunburn as well as damage to the DNA. At least then people know
straight away that something is wrong.

    'With other variants it is only after years of sun exposure that doctors
realise that something is amiss. It is my belief that many people in Britain who
have lots of moles or prematurely aged skin could have one of the milder sorts
of XP but it has never been diagnosed.'


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1999


                              83 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 26, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 314 words

HEADLINE: A spray to end insulin injections;
FEMAIL

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    AN ORAL FORM of insulin to replace injections for diabetes could be
available this year.

    Until recently it was technically impossible to deliver insulin in any other
form except by drip or needle.

    But now - using biotechnology - a Canadian company is offering insulin in a
spray.

    Final trials on Oralin were completed in Canada and the United States last
year and the new treatment could be available in the UK in the autumn.

    'The results are very encouraging,' says Anna Gluskin, chief executive
officer of Generex, the company which developed the spray.

    'In the past it has been impossible to offer insulin in oral form because it
has not been absorbed into the body.

    'The scientific difficulty we have faced is finding a way of getting insulin
into the body via other routes.' One of the biggest problems with diabetes is
getting patients to take insulin injections regularly.

    Without regular doses sufferers can develop complications which can lead to
blindness and amputation of limbs.

    Research into a spray shows that less insulin is required to control
diabetes than conventional injections.

    'Patients find injections a chore,' says Mrs Gluskin. 'Despite the fact that
the treatment is lifesaving there is still a considerable problem with
compliance.

    'Gene therapy to treat diabetes may arrive in about 20 years, but until then
insulin is the only way of keeping alive millions of diabetics.

    'Giving them an easy spray therapy means the majority of patients would
comply with their treatment.' Generex says the technology it has developed can
also be used to treat a whole range of illnesses and disorders which need
injections, including rheumatoid arthritis, heart disease and cancer.

    Researchers believe sprays will also be a more effective way of offering
various vaccines against diseases such as diptheria, tetanus and flu.


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1999


                              84 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 26, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 315 words

HEADLINE: A spray to end insulin injections;
FEMAIL

BYLINE: Martyn Halle

BODY:


    AN ORAL FORM of insulin to replace injections for diabetes could be
available this year.

    Until recently it was technically impossible to deliver insulin in any other
form except by drip or needle.

    But now - using biotechnology - a Canadian company is offering insulin in a
spray.

    Final trials on Oralin were completed in Canada and the United States last
year and the new treatment could be available in the UK in the autumn.

    'The results are very encouraging,' says Anna Gluskin, chief executive
officer of Generex, the company which developed the spray.

    'In the past it has been impossible to offer insulin in oral form because it
has not been absorbed into the body.

    'The scientific difficulty we have faced is finding a way of getting insulin
into the body via other routes.' One of the biggest problems with diabetes is
getting patients to take insulin injections regularly.

    Without regular doses sufferers can develop complications which can lead to
blindness and amputation of limbs.

    Research into a spray shows that less insulin is required to control
diabetes than conventional injections.

    'Patients find injections a chore,' says Mrs Gluskin. 'Despite the fact that
the treatment is lifesaving there is still a considerable problem with
compliance.

    'Gene therapy to treat diabetes may arrive in about 20 years, but until then
insulin is the only way of keeping alive millions of diabetics.

    'Giving them an easy spray therapy means the majority of patients would
comply with their treatment.' Generex says the technology it has developed can
also be used to treat a whole range of illnesses and disorders which need
injections, including rheumatoid arthritis, heart disease and cancer.

    Researchers believe sprays will also be a more effective way of offering
various vaccines against diseases such as diptheria, tetanus and flu.


LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1999


                              88 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 16, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 85

LENGTH: 211 words

BODY:


    VODAFONE: BT Alex Brown says buy at 1075p (now 1068 1 /2 p).

    If the AirTouch transaction succeeds on acceptable terms, the target price
will be $15.

    Cardiff Property: Albert E Sharp says buy at 268p (now 273 1 /2 p).

    Cardiff's core portfolio west of the M25 should weather any storm and looks
set to do better than that.

    Cantab Pharmaceuticals: BancBoston Robertson Stephens says buy at 213p (now
211 1 /2 p). One of the most undervalued clinical-stage immunotherapy/gene
therapy companies. Target price is 400p.

    English China Clays: Williams de Broe says buy at 242p (now 239p).

    Imetal's opportunistic 225p cash bid seriously undervalues the company. It
will have to pay considerably more to gain control.

    Jacobs Holdings: Charles Stanley says buy at 51p (now 50 1 /2 p). Now
standing around asset value, the shares offer an above-average net yield and
growth prospects.

    BROKER BUYS RIO TINTO: Charles Stanley says sell at 712p (now 714 1/2 p).

    Given the current deflationary global environment, a significant improvement
in commodity prices seems unlikely in the near term.

    Billiton: Charles Stanley says sell at 119p (now 119 1/2 p). Deflation means
the shares are unlikely to perform well for some time.

    BROKER SELLS


LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1999


                              89 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 16, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 85

LENGTH: 211 words

BODY:


    VODAFONE: BT Alex Brown says buy at 1075p (now 1068 1 /2 p).

    If the AirTouch transaction succeeds on acceptable terms, the target price
will be $15.

    Cardiff Property: Albert E Sharp says buy at 268p (now 273 1 /2 p).

    Cardiff's core portfolio west of the M25 should weather any storm and looks
set to do better than that.

    Cantab Pharmaceuticals: BancBoston Robertson Stephens says buy at 213p (now
211 1 /2 p). One of the most undervalued clinical-stage immunotherapy/gene
therapy companies. Target price is 400p.

    English China Clays: Williams de Broe says buy at 242p (now 239p).

    Imetal's opportunistic 225p cash bid seriously undervalues the company. It
will have to pay considerably more to gain control.

    Jacobs Holdings: Charles Stanley says buy at 51p (now 50 1 /2 p). Now
standing around asset value, the shares offer an above-average net yield and
growth prospects.

    BROKER BUYS RIO TINTO: Charles Stanley says sell at 712p (now 714 1/2 p).

    Given the current deflationary global environment, a significant improvement
in commodity prices seems unlikely in the near term.

    Billiton: Charles Stanley says sell at 119p (now 119 1/2 p). Deflation means
the shares are unlikely to perform well for some time.

    BROKER SELLS


LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1999


                              92 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 2254 words

HEADLINE: MY FEARS FOR OUR FUTURE;
THE PAST 100 YEARS HAVE SEEN MANKIND CONQUER THE HORRORS OF COMMUNISM AND
FASCISM, BUT PEACE AND MATERIAL WEALTH IN THE NEXT CENTURY COULD RESULT IN US
FACING EVEN GREATER EVILS

BYLINE: Paul Johnson

BODY:


    THE 20th century, in the long perspective of history, will go down as a time
of rapid progress, avoidable horrors and missed opportunities. Two world wars
and the most totalitarian states in history brought manmade misery on an
unprecedented scale.

    In addition to those slain in war, about 150 million people were destroyed
in concentration and death camps, in prisons and torture chambers, on scaffolds
and by firing SATURDAY ESSAY squads.

    This huge evil was produced by one central organic sin: moral relativism,
the assumption that man can make his own laws of good and bad to suit his
material purposes. And by the direct product of moral relativism: social
engineering.

    Fascism, Nazism and communism, and their many imitations, sought to create
Utopia by destroying individuality and treating living humans as mere biological
raw material, to be processed into higher creatures.

    The Nazi experiment was destroyed by war, and the Soviet experiment crashed
in irretrievable ruin in 1989. The totalitarian state is not yet extinct - it
lingers on in North Korea and Cuba and above all in China. But the totalitarian
state itself is intellectually dead.

    The 21st century, then, will produce mainly free societies, practising
democracy of a kind, whose economies are shaped by market forces and whose
ideology is capitalism.

    This means that, granted the restraints and disciplines and punishments of
the trade cycle - whose existence is once more being demonstrated - global
improvements in living standards, albeit unequal in distribution, will continue.

    HOWEVER, let us not delude ourselves that this material improvement will be
without dangers.

    On the contrary: it will generate new unprecedented moral perils. We will
not be content with longer holidays, and better food, and larger houses, and
more labour saving appliances.

    We will want other, more difficult and dangerous things.

    Above all, it is already clear that we will want better bodies, which are
more resistant or immune to disease, and which will give us longer lives.

    When I wrote my history of the 20th century, Modern Times, I dated the start
of the modern epoch with 1915 publication of Einstein's general theory of
relativity, opening up as it did our understanding of the physical and material
world.

    I suspect that a similar history of the 21st century will be dated back to
1953, when Watson and Crick demonstrated the double helix structure of DNA, the
genetic code by which information of life is transmitted. This revelation formed
the basis of what has become the practical science of genetics.

    Here, indeed, is a Pandora's Box which we are trying to open with the
deliberate intention of releasing its contents.

    And, just as Karl Marx was the god of social engineering, genetic
engineering is acquiring its own god and pseudo-religion - Darwin and Darwinism.

    As biology has become the fashionable science on the campus, Charles Darwin
has been dug out of his resting place in Westminster Abbey, revivified rather
like Frankenstein's monster, and placed on a thousand campus altars.

    He was the obvious candidate.

    He had shown how homo sapiens had evolved from the primeval slime by the
process of natural selection. Once evolution was established as a historical
fact as well as a biological process, there was, in theory at least, no limit to
which this improvement in the species might travel.

    Moreover, thanks to the further discovery of genetic processes, this
evolution need no longer be natural. It might be transformed into something
planned and purposeful - into genetic engineering.

    What a vision! What a prospect for mankind over the next century! It makes
social engineering, by comparison, seem primitive and unambi-tious. This new
idea is much more exciting: it is to change each individual man himself, from
his first conception.

    Man is not to be reborn, as in traditional religions. He is to be
genetically determined before his birth, so that he is entirely a New Man, or
superman.

    I call this visionary creed Darwinian Fundamentalism because it is dogmatic,
intolerant, tunnel-visioned, aggressive, proselytising and self-absorbed.

    I first became aware of the existence of Darwinian Fundamentalism when I
focused on the work of Richard Dawkins, a fashionable Oxford don. He is the
leading light of a group of scholars and pseudo-scholars who glorify the work of
Darwin and write books magnifying it.

    The antics of the Darwinian Fundamentalists at the level of the campus
meeting would be of no consequence in themselves, were they not umbili-cally
linked to more important developments, also on campus - the progress of genetic
engineering.

    Professor Dawkins and his ilk can do nothing in themselves, because they are
theorists and propagandists. But they can create, and in fact are creating, a
spiritual atmosphere in which genetic engineering becomes morally respectable.

    The real work, the dangerous work, is taking place in the labs, and until
recently it lacked not only moral respectability but any hope of legal sanction.

    The most radical form of the modern cult is known as human germ-line
engineering, the altering of a human sperm or egg to effect changes that can be
passed on from one generation to another. It is, I believe, important to
distinguish between germ-lining and gene therapy.

    Gene therapy is a comparatively primitive form of operation which can be
conducted with a living adult and, in theory at least, can be used to cure
genetic disorders.

    It does not work very well as yet. The problem is getting new genes into
enough cells of the body, and keeping them there long enough to be effective.

    Germ-line engineering is much more fundamental. To succeed, it is necessary
to treat only one cell, a human egg.

    Once genetic engineering has successfully changed the genome of an egg - its
genetic makeup - which has been fer-tilised in the laboratory, the cells divide
over and over again, to form an embryo ... a foetus ... a baby.

    Every cell of the baby will have exactly the same genetic composition as the
doctored egg, and once the human body is formed on these lines, it can
reduplicate itself indefinitely. A new man has, in effect, been created by
science.

    NEEDLESS to say, the possibilities of germ-line engineering have been taken
seriously by the authorities in Western states, and so far banned.

    But we do not know what some countries, such as communist China, will or may
permit. And such bans are, in any event, hard to enforce.

    Scientists in free societies need to be reasonably exempt from close
supervision by the authorities to get on with their work and follow new
possibilities wherever they lead.

    In any case the state, just because it is democratic, is open to being
swayed by public opinion, and it is by no means clear that public opinion, once
it knows where germ-line engineering can lead, will be hostile to it.

    Already, in-vitro fertilisation has made it possible for hitherto barren
women to have children, and Viagra enables impotent men to enjoy a normal sex
life and conceive children.

    Thus, whatever we may think about it, tinkering with the human body
physically and chemically, in ways hitherto regarded as unthinkable or
unethical, produces practical results and the public likes them. And we live in
a society were the consumer is king and queen.

    Hence, although the notion of a 'designer baby' may be abhorrent in itself,
the idea of ensuring that our children are not only healthy and normal, but
biologically immune to a wide range of diseases is an attractive one.

    I do not believe that people will permit legislative barriers to impede
their desire for better, healthier babies - at least, that is my reading of the
future. The concept of the 'improved' baby is one that many may be only too
willing to finance.

    Certainly, most of the scientists who are working in these and related
fields are pretty sure that any regulatory obstacles will disappear once the
technology becomes available and thus incites public demand.

    So we are already poised on the threshold of genetic engineering, with all
its various possibilities. But before we cross it, we must weigh the risks
carefully and work out properly all the ethical implications.

    There are the risks of something 'going wrong'. Genetic engineering on
animals has produced many 'accidents', so producing human freaks or
Frankensteins is a definite possibility.

    The second possibility is less obvious but to me is more serious. It is to
underrate the importance of individualism in society.

    WE DO not know what makes the individual, what gives each human being his or
her uniqueness. We do not know what relation the individuality of all of us has
to our genetic coding.

    As Sherlock Holmes put it: 'These are deep waters, Watson.' There is a third
objection, more a political and sociological one.

    Intelligence acquired by inheritance, and knowledge acquired by education,
are closely connected and, together, will determine eventual income, too. The
world now belongs to the clever and the skilled to a greater degree than ever
before in history, and it is they and their offspring who will inherit all in
the 21st century.

    Meanwhile, at the other end of the social, educational and intelligence
spectrum, the same process is operating but in reverse. Thus a gap is opening,
and will soon widen, between a highly paid, very clever and well-educated elite,
whose privileges and status become in a sense hereditary, and an underclass,
condemned to their lowly predicament by a self-generating process of breeding.

    As technology advances, unskilled labour tends to disappear, and the rewards
of intelligence, education and skills become ever more bountiful, while the
unskilled sink into unemployment and welfare dependence.

    We have not yet faced up honestly to this problem, which is spreading across
the world, and which will gradually become universal in the 21st century.

    I believe there is a serious risk that genetic engineering will complicate
and exacerbate the problem, and indeed perpetuate it in an unforeseen and
morally unacceptable way. One danger of germ-line engineering, and the concept
of 'designer babies', is that it will be market driven.

    The same couples who are most particular about the education of their
children, and willing to pay for the best, will be the first to take advantage
of designer baby options.

    Those who will be genetically privileged at birth will also be those who are
intellectually privileged by their heredity, and educationally privileged by
their parents' incomes.

    Thus the financial, social and intellectual chasm dividing society will be
immeasurably deepened. We would be well on our way not just to a class system of
a kind we have never seen before in Western societies since feudal days, but to
a caste system on Indian-Hindu lines, with marriage between the
genetically-engineered overclass, and the disease-prone underclass, regarded as
unthinkable. That would be in every sense a regressive step into the past.

    The truth is, we would be entering a new world without physical guidelines,
let alone moral ones. It is commonplace to say that, in the 19th and 20th
centuries, the world's material progress outstripped its moral one.

    That has been obvious to all, and so has our seeming inability to do much
about it, making life ever more fraught and perilous and the self-destruction of
the human race not inconceivable.

    In the 21st century, material progress, especially in the biological
sciences, will clearly be even more rapid.

    BUT our moral progress remains sluggish or even regressive. We have not even
begun to work out the philosophical basis of the complex system of medical
ethics we will clearly require to meet the challenges of advances in genetics
and human reproduction.

    There is, however, one consoling factor, and I would like to end on this
personal note.

    At the beginning of the 20th century, it was confidently prophesied, by H.G.
Wells and George Bernard Shaw and other pundits, that religious belief, as it
had existed since the beginning of humanity, would inexorably disappear as the
20th century proceeded.

    That was the assumption on which such leading social engineers as Lenin and
Hitler calculated. But it did not happen.

    Quite the contrary. It is a testimony to the durability and vitality of
belief in God that no one, on the threshold of the 21st century, is predicting
the death of God this time.

    So, against the alarming and perhaps horrific possibilities of experiments
with the human body of a kind never before conceived - of man playing God -
there is the continued certainty that the real God will continue to exist among
us.

    That is our safeguard. That is our resource. Let us not undervalue or
under-use it.

    By the standards of traditional belief, the totalitarian state of the 20th
century, and the destructive social engineering it practised, was always morally
unacceptable.

    It would have been prevented from developing if those who believed in God
had mobilised against it from the start.

    They failed to do so. It was overcome in the end only after horrible losses,
and moral and physical damage which it will take man many decades to put right.

    Let us learn from this lesson, and let us mobilise in time against the false
values and evil objectives that are likely to be put forward in the 21st
century.


LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1999


                              93 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1999 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 2, 1999

SECTION: Pg. 12

LENGTH: 2255 words

HEADLINE: MY FEARS FOR OUR FUTURE;
THE PAST 100 YEARS HAVE SEEN MANKIND CONQUER THE HORRORS OF COMMUNISM AND
FASCISM, BUT PEACE AND MATERIAL WEALTH IN THE NEXT CENTURY COULD RESULT IN US
FACING EVEN GREATER EVILS

BYLINE: Paul Johnson

BODY:


    THE 20th century, in the long perspective of history, will go down as a time
of rapid progress, avoidable horrors and missed opportunities. Two world wars
and the most totalitarian states in history brought manmade misery on an
unprecedented scale.

    In addition to those slain in war, about 150 million people were destroyed
in concentration and death camps, in prisons and torture chambers, on scaffolds
and by firing SATURDAY ESSAY squads.

    This huge evil was produced by one central organic sin: moral relativism,
the assumption that man can make his own laws of good and bad to suit his
material purposes. And by the direct product of moral relativism: social
engineering.

    Fascism, Nazism and communism, and their many imitations, sought to create
Utopia by destroying individuality and treating living humans as mere biological
raw material, to be processed into higher creatures.

    The Nazi experiment was destroyed by war, and the Soviet experiment crashed
in irretrievable ruin in 1989. The totalitarian state is not yet extinct - it
lingers on in North Korea and Cuba and above all in China. But the totalitarian
state itself is intellectually dead.

    The 21st century, then, will produce mainly free societies, practising
democracy of a kind, whose economies are shaped by market forces and whose
ideology is capitalism.

    This means that, granted the restraints and disciplines and punishments of
the trade cycle - whose existence is once more being demonstrated - global
improvements in living standards, albeit unequal in distribution, will continue.

    HOWEVER, let us not delude ourselves that this material improvement will be
without dangers.

    On the contrary: it will generate new unprecedented moral perils. We will
not be content with longer holidays, and better food, and larger houses, and
more labour saving appliances.

    We will want other, more difficult and dangerous things.

    Above all, it is already clear that we will want better bodies, which are
more resistant or immune to disease, and which will give us longer lives.

    When I wrote my history of the 20th century, Modern Times, I dated the start
of the modern epoch with 1915 publication of Einstein's general theory of
relativity, opening up as it did our understanding of the physical and material
world.

    I suspect that a similar history of the 21st century will be dated back to
1953, when Watson and Crick demonstrated the double helix structure of DNA, the
genetic code by which information of life is transmitted. This revelation formed
the basis of what has become the practical science of genetics.

    Here, indeed, is a Pandora's Box which we are trying to open with the
deliberate intention of releasing its contents.

    And, just as Karl Marx was the god of social engineering, genetic
engineering is acquiring its own god and pseudo-religion - Darwin and Darwinism.

    As biology has become the fashionable science on the campus, Charles Darwin
has been dug out of his resting place in Westminster Abbey, revivified rather
like Frankenstein's monster, and placed on a thousand campus altars.

    He was the obvious candidate.

    He had shown how homo sapiens had evolved from the primeval slime by the
process of natural selection. Once evolution was established as a historical
fact as well as a biological process, there was, in theory at least, no limit to
which this improvement in the species might travel.

    Moreover, thanks to the further discovery of genetic processes, this
evolution need no longer be natural. It might be transformed into something
planned and purposeful - into genetic engineering.

    What a vision! What a prospect for mankind over the next century! It makes
social engineering, by comparison, seem primitive and unambi-tious. This new
idea is much more exciting: it is to change each individual man himself, from
his first conception.

    Man is not to be reborn, as in traditional religions. He is to be
genetically determined before his birth, so that he is entirely a New Man, or
superman.

    I call this visionary creed Darwinian Fundamentalism because it is dogmatic,
intolerant, tunnel-visioned, aggressive, proselytising and self-absorbed.

    I first became aware of the existence of Darwinian Fundamentalism when I
focused on the work of Richard Dawkins, a fashionable Oxford don. He is the
leading light of a group of scholars and pseudo-scholars who glorify the work of
Darwin and write books magnifying it.

    The antics of the Darwinian Fundamentalists at the level of the campus
meeting would be of no consequence in themselves, were they not umbili-cally
linked to more important developments, also on campus - the progress of genetic
engineering.

    Professor Dawkins and his ilk can do nothing in themselves, because they are
theorists and propagandists. But they can create, and in fact are creating, a
spiritual atmosphere in which genetic engineering becomes morally respectable.

    The real work, the dangerous work, is taking place in the labs, and until
recently it lacked not only moral respectability but any hope of legal sanction.

    The most radical form of the modern cult is known as human germ-line
engineering, the altering of a human sperm or egg to effect changes that can be
passed on from one generation to another. It is, I believe, important to
distinguish between germ-lining and gene therapy.

    Gene therapy is a comparatively primitive form of operation which can be
conducted with a living adult and, in theory at least, can be used to cure
genetic disorders.

    It does not work very well as yet. The problem is getting new genes into
enough cells of the body, and keeping them there long enough to be effective.

    Germ-line engineering is much more fundamental. To succeed, it is necessary
to treat only one cell, a human egg.

    Once genetic engineering has successfully changed the genome of an egg - its
genetic makeup - which has been fer-tilised in the laboratory, the cells divide
over and over again, to form an embryo ... a foetus ... a baby.

    Every cell of the baby will have exactly the same genetic composition as the
doctored egg, and once the human body is formed on these lines, it can
reduplicate itself indefinitely. A new man has, in effect, been created by
science.

    NEEDLESS to say, the possibilities of germ-line engineering have been taken
seriously by the authorities in Western states, and so far banned.

    But we do not know what some countries, such as communist China, will or may
permit. And such bans are, in any event, hard to enforce.

    Scientists in free societies need to be reasonably exempt from close
supervision by the authorities to get on with their work and follow new
possibilities wherever they lead.

    In any case the state, just because it is democratic, is open to being
swayed by public opinion, and it is by no means clear that public opinion, once
it knows where germ-line engineering can lead, will be hostile to it.

    Already, in-vitro fertilisation has made it possible for hitherto barren
women to have children, and Viagra enables impotent men to enjoy a normal sex
life and conceive children.

    Thus, whatever we may think about it, tinkering with the human body
physically and chemically, in ways hitherto regarded as unthinkable or
unethical, produces practical results and the public likes them. And we live in
a society were the consumer is king and queen.

    Hence, although the notion of a 'designer baby' may be abhorrent in itself,
the idea of ensuring that our children are not only healthy and normal, but
biologically immune to a wide range of diseases is an attractive one.

    I do not believe that people will permit legislative barriers to impede
their desire for better, healthier babies - at least, that is my reading of the
future. The concept of the 'improved' baby is one that many may be only too
willing to finance.

    Certainly, most of the scientists who are working in these and related
fields are pretty sure that any regulatory obstacles will disappear once the
technology becomes available and thus incites public demand.

    So we are already poised on the threshold of genetic engineering, with all
its various possibilities. But before we cross it, we must weigh the risks
carefully and work out properly all the ethical implications.

    There are the risks of something 'going wrong'. Genetic engineering on
animals has produced many 'accidents', so producing human freaks or
Frankensteins is a definite possibility.

    The second possibility is less obvious but to me is more serious. It is to
underrate the importance of individualism in society.

    WE DO not know what makes the individual, what gives each human being his or
her uniqueness. We do not know what relation the individuality of all of us has
to our genetic coding.

    As Sherlock Holmes put it: 'These are deep waters, Watson.' There is a third
objection, more a political and sociological one.

    Intelligence acquired by inheritance, and knowledge acquired by education,
are closely connected and, together, will determine eventual income, too. The
world now belongs to the clever and the skilled to a greater degree than ever
before in history, and it is they and their offspring who will inherit all in
the 21st century.

    Meanwhile, at the other end of the social, educational and intelligence
spectrum, the same process is operating but in reverse. Thus a gap is opening,
and will soon widen, between a highly paid, very clever and well-educated elite,
whose privileges and status become in a sense hereditary, and an underclass,
condemned to their lowly predicament by a self-generating process of breeding.

    As technology advances, unskilled labour tends to disappear, and the rewards
of intelligence, education and skills become ever more bountiful, while the
unskilled sink into unemployment and welfare dependence.

    We have not yet faced up honestly to this problem, which is spreading across
the world, and which will gradually become universal in the 21st century.

    I believe there is a serious risk that genetic engineering will complicate
and exacerbate the problem, and indeed perpetuate it in an unforeseen and
morally unacceptable way. One danger of germ-line engineering, and the concept
of 'designer babies', is that it will be market driven.

    The same couples who are most particular about the education of their
children, and willing to pay for the best, will be the first to take advantage
of designer baby options.

    Those who will be genetically privileged at birth will also be those who are
intellectually privileged by their heredity, and educationally privileged by
their parents' incomes.

    Thus the financial, social and intellectual chasm dividing society will be
immeasurably deepened. We would be well on our way not just to a class system of
a kind we have never seen before in Western societies since feudal days, but to
a caste system on Indian-Hindu lines, with marriage between the
genetically-engineered overclass, and the disease-prone underclass, regarded as
unthinkable. That would be in every sense a regressive step into the past.

    The truth is, we would be entering a new world without physical guidelines,
let alone moral ones. It is commonplace to say that, in the 19th and 20th
centuries, the world's material progress outstripped its moral one.

    That has been obvious to all, and so has our seeming inability to do much
about it, making life ever more fraught and perilous and the self-destruction of
the human race not inconceivable.

    In the 21st century, material progress, especially in the biological
sciences, will clearly be even more rapid.

    BUT our moral progress remains sluggish or even regressive. We have not even
begun to work out the philosophical basis of the complex system of medical
ethics we will clearly require to meet the challenges of advances in genetics
and human reproduction.

    There is, however, one consoling factor, and I would like to end on this
personal note.

    At the beginning of the 20th century, it was confidently prophesied, by H.G.
Wells and George Bernard Shaw and other pundits, that religious belief, as it
had existed since the beginning of humanity, would inexorably disappear as the
20th century proceeded.

    That was the assumption on which such leading social engineers as Lenin and
Hitler calculated. But it did not happen.

    Quite the contrary. It is a testimony to the durability and vitality of
belief in God that no one, on the threshold of the 21st century, is predicting
the death of God this time.

    So, against the alarming and perhaps horrific possibilities of experiments
with the human body of a kind never before conceived - of man playing God -
there is the continued certainty that the real God will continue to exist among
us.

    That is our safeguard. That is our resource. Let us not undervalue or
under-use it.

    By the standards of traditional belief, the totalitarian state of the 20th
century, and the destructive social engineering it practised, was always morally
unacceptable.

    It would have been prevented from developing if those who believed in God
had mobilised against it from the start.

    They failed to do so. It was overcome in the end only after horrible losses,
and moral and physical damage which it will take man many decades to put right.

    Let us learn from this lesson, and let us mobilise in time against the false
values and evil objectives that are likely to be put forward in the 21st
century.


LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1999


                              97 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 15, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: 'Magic bullet' of youth;
Injection puts new life into muscles, say gene scientists

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:


    A MEDICAL discovery which could allow people to feel young and fit into
their nineties was last night being hailed as a breakthrough.

    Experts believe a one-off injection a so-called 'magic bullet' - will be
enough to prevent muscles from becoming weak in old age.

    They say it could also be used to treat muscle-wasting diseases such as
muscular dystrophy.

    The remarkable discovery, which has been shown to prevent age-related muscle
loss in mice, has been developed by genetic scientists at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

    Young rodents injected with the genetic drug became 15 per cent stronger
than normal.

    Adult mice experienced an even more astonishing improvement. Their muscles
were rejuvenated and their fitness was boosted to that of young adulthood.

    They were 27 per cent stronger in old age than untreated rodents.

    Professor Lee Sweeney, who led the study, said: 'The beneficial effects of
this gene therapy could easily be used in humans for athletic or even cosmetic
enhancements, and not only for limiting age-related muscle loss or for treating
diseases of the muscle.' Muscles repair themselves naturally with the help of an
insulin-like substance known as IGF-I.

    When this chemical is released from damaged muscles, it encourages dormant
cells nearby to turn into fully-fledged muscle cells and migrate to the scene of
the injury.

    As people get older, damaged muscles do not release as much IGF-I. The
therapy corrects this flaw by inserting a fresh copy of the gene for IGF-I into
every cell. Scientists use a genetically-engineered virus to transport copies of
the replacement gene around the body.

    If the new 'magic bullet' treatment is shown to work for people, it could
one day be given as a preventative cure in middle age. Once injected, the
treatment should be permanent.

    The results from the mouse experiment were presented yesterday at the
American Society for Cell Biology in San Francisco and will be published next
week in a scientific journal.

    But researchers stress that their work is still at an early stage and that
it will not be possible to replace muscle that has already been lost.


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1998


                              98 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 15, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: 'Magic bullet' of youth;
Injection puts new life into muscles, say gene scientists

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:


    A MEDICAL discovery which could allow people to feel young and fit into
their nineties was last night being hailed as a breakthrough.

    Experts believe a one-off injection a so-called 'magic bullet' - will be
enough to prevent muscles from becoming weak in old age.

    They say it could also be used to treat muscle-wasting diseases such as
muscular dystrophy.

    The remarkable discovery, which has been shown to prevent age-related muscle
loss in mice, has been developed by genetic scientists at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.

    Young rodents injected with the genetic drug became 15 per cent stronger
than normal.

    Adult mice experienced an even more astonishing improvement. Their muscles
were rejuvenated and their fitness was boosted to that of young adulthood.

    They were 27 per cent stronger in old age than untreated rodents.

    Professor Lee Sweeney, who led the study, said: 'The beneficial effects of
this gene therapy could easily be used in humans for athletic or even cosmetic
enhancements, and not only for limiting age-related muscle loss or for treating
diseases of the muscle.' Muscles repair themselves naturally with the help of an
insulin-like substance known as IGF-I.

    When this chemical is released from damaged muscles, it encourages dormant
cells nearby to turn into fully-fledged muscle cells and migrate to the scene of
the injury.

    As people get older, damaged muscles do not release as much IGF-I. The
therapy corrects this flaw by inserting a fresh copy of the gene for IGF-I into
every cell. Scientists use a genetically-engineered virus to transport copies of
the replacement gene around the body.

    If the new 'magic bullet' treatment is shown to work for people, it could
one day be given as a preventative cure in middle age. Once injected, the
treatment should be permanent.

    The results from the mouse experiment were presented yesterday at the
American Society for Cell Biology in San Francisco and will be published next
week in a scientific journal.

    But researchers stress that their work is still at an early stage and that
it will not be possible to replace muscle that has already been lost.


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1998


                              101 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                           December 13, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 44, 45

LENGTH: 1082 words

HEADLINE: YOUR HEALTH: DIABETES ...HOW A MILLION GET IT AND DON'T KNOW

BYLINE: By Sharon Collins

BODY:


    IT can strike anyone at any time and can lead to blindness, kidney failure
and heart disease.

    Diabetes affects more than a million people in Britain, including stars such
as Olympic rower Steve Redgrave and TV presenter Michael Barry, while another
million victims don't even know they have it.

    Now a new drug has raised hopes of a breakthrough in treatment next year.

    Extreme tiredness, weight loss, blurred vision and increased thirst are all
tell-tale signs that the body is failing to produce insulin - the hormone that
breaks down the body's fuel, sugar.

    There are two distinct strains of diabetes. In Type 1 cases sufferers fail
to produce any insulin at all, while those with Type 2 produce insulin which
fails to control their blood sugar levels.

    The breakthrough is in Type 2 with the new drug Avandia "kickstarting" the
dormant supplies of insulin already in the body. It means sufferers will seen an
improvement in the control of their diabetes, and specialists are predicting
Avandia could be a blockbuster with sales of pounds 600m a year.

    Makers SmithKline Beecham have already carried out trials on 4,000 patients
worldwide.

    "We believe it is safe and hopefully it will be launched in Britain next
year," said a spokesman.

    Avandia is among a class of drugs called glitazones. The first drug in this
class, Rezulin, was withdrawn in Britain last year because of liver problems
with some users.

    "Avandia helps the body's own insulin to work better," said SmithKline
Beecham's medical director Alastair Benbow. "Insulin resistance is the root
cause of Type 2 diabetes."

    The breakthrough is desperately needed. "Someone with Type 2 diabetes is
diagnosed here every five minutes," said Suzanne Lucas of the British Diabetic
Association.  STEVE REDGRAVE, the world's greatest rower, had already won four
gold medals when he realised he had diabetes.

    The tell-tale warning was when he drank three pints of blackcurrant juice in
a row while hardly drawing breath.

    "I felt things were not quite right, " said Steve, 36. "And within hours of
seeing a doctor I was in hospital and on insulin.

    "My first thought was whether I'd forced this upon myself by training at
such high levels for 20 years. But doctors told me I would have developed
diabetes anyway."

    Now he regards his diabetes, controlled with up to six insulin injections a
day, as just part of his disciplined lifestyle as he aims for a fifth Olympic
gold at Sydney in the year 2000.

    "It was a very quick and easy decision to carry on," said Steve, who took a
record eighth world rowing title in Cologne this summer. "I have proved it's
possible to achieve the same things with or without diabetes."

    MICHAEL BARRY star of BBC2's Food And Drink, suffered from the symptoms
without knowing he was diabetic for five years.

    Abscesses appeared on his body and he had severe dizzy spells, while his
sight began to deteriorate rapidly.

    It was only when he was being prepared for an operation to deal with a an
abscess that the correct diagnosis was made...by accident.

    "A doctor arrived and fitted me with a drip that looked as though it could
service the North Sea oil fields," says Michael. "He told me this was to take
care of my diabetes.

    "My reply was, 'What diabetes?' When I came round after the op a nurse told
me how she thought diabetes would affect me. Most of it did not happen, as her
forecast included blindness and impotence.

    "Since I was diagnosed I have received excellent advice and treatment which
in many ways has transformed my life. I no longer feel exhausted and am not
breaking out in ugly boils or falling over with violent nausea."

    CHRIS PARKS, a martial arts instructor is one of the lucky few. He had
diabetes for 27 years but now he is cured of it.

    He has had a pancreatico- renal transplant, where a triangular segment of a
donor pancreas was grafted into his left groin and a donor kidney transplanted
into his right groin.

    "My blood sugar levels have returned to normal and are the same as any non
-diabetic," says Chris, a bio-medical scientist at Arrowpark Hospital in
Liverpool. "The op has cured me of my diabetes."

    He was diagnosed as suffering from diabetes when he was 10 and up until the
operation two years ago he controlled it with two insulin injections a day. But
his kidneys had been slowly failing.

    "I had always been keen on sport and played rugby, cricket and went weight
-training as well as teaching kung fu," says Chris.

    "But in the months before my op I was zonked out. I had to give up kung fu
because I looked awful...and I was the instructor."

    The operations are being carried out at the Royal Liverpool University
Hospital, St James's in Leeds, and St Mary's and Guy's in London. But there is a
waiting list.

    Surgeon Professor Robert Sells of the Royal Liverpool University Hospital
says about 60 patients have had the kidney and pancreas transplant op so far.

    The downside of the operation is that Chris has to take potentially harmful
immuno- suppressive drugs for the rest of his life.

    But Chris feels he made the right decision."The physical differences are
incredible and the mental differences are beyond belief.

    "My thinking is so much clearer, I'm able to concentrate so much better."

    Chris added: "I am living proof that diabetics can do anything anyone else
can do, if not more."

    FACT FILE

    SYMPTOMS of all types of diabetes include a raging thirst, frequent
discharges of urine, weight loss, tiredness and blurred vision In Type 2 cases
these symptoms are more gradual and less obvious. In some cases tell-tale
symptoms may be put down to overwork or just "getting older."

    TYPE 1 TYPE 2

    AGE WHEN Normally adolescent Usually

    DIAGNOSED or young adult middle-aged

    SYMPTOMS Acutely ill Drawn-out

    quite suddenly illness

    APPEARANCE Lean and wasted Overweight

    GENETIC RISK Weak Strong

    INSULIN LEVEL Absent Normal-high

    THE couch potato lifestyle of the 90s has been blamed for the increase in
diabetics. "As a nation we're pretty much overweight and these people are more
vulnerable," says Prof Simon Howell, of London's King's College Hospital.
Another theory is a virus called Coxackie B4 might trigger the disease in those
genetically susceptible. Genetic research is continuing but it could be more
than 30 years before a gene therapy cure is found. For more details call the
British Diabetic Association careline 0171 636 6112.

GRAPHIC: COMMON COMPLAINT: Rower Steve Redgrave, kung fu expert Chris Parks and
Michael Barry all suffer from diabetes

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1998


                              107 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                December 6, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 26;27;28

LENGTH: 2352 words

HEADLINE: HEART BEATERS

BYLINE: John Illman

BODY:



    Floyd Stokes, one of the first people to have had genes injected directly
into his heart, is in Dallas to tell his story at the world's biggest medical
conference. Without this treatment, he might by now have been a cripple, perhaps
dead:and, even by the larger-than-life standards of Dallas, his is an
extraordinary story. Thanks to the rejuvenating gene therapy, the 58-year-old
Texan peanut farmer has grown his own coronary bypass - new blood vessels, the
width of human hair, which go round old blocked ones, bringing nourishment to
the blood-starved muscle.

    Until this summer, Floyd couldn't walk more than 100 yards without
developing crippling angina pain in his chest. This is the same sort of heavy,
crushing pain as a heart attack, but is usually nowhere near as severe. It is
caused by a gradual narrowing of a coronary artery rather than a sudden blockage
of the kind which can cause a heart attack. This narrowing is due to the slow
silting up of the artery with fatty, porridge-like deposits, and the angina is
triggered by physical exertion or mental stress which can influence heart rate.

    This slow, lingering and disabling form of heart disease had turned Floyd
into one of America's quarter of a million cardiac cripples, and reduced him to
running his 1,800-acre farm from a pick-up truck with hired hands. The best
specialists in Texas and California had told him he was too ill for a second
coronary bypass, following his first operation in 1989. There was nothing more
they could do.

    His brother had already died from heart disease in his early fifties, and
Jean, his wife of 40 years, feared that Floyd would be next. It was this terror
that drove her to carry out her own extensive study of heart disease, during
which she came across the name of Dr Jeffrey Isner, chief of vascular medicine
at St Elizabeth's Medical Center and professor of medicine at the Tufts
University School of Medicine, both in Boston.

    Isner had been using gene therapy to grow new blood vessels in patients with
blocked arteries in their legs, and he wanted to extend the technique to
coronary arteries. Jean wanted him to try it on her husband. Floyd's own doctor
warned that he had no more chance of becoming a patient in Boston than of
winning the lottery. But someone had to be lucky, so Floyd contacted the centre
- and hit the jackpot.

    The operation was performed on Jean's birthday, May 26. 'I told him it would
be the most wonderful birthday present I'd ever had,' she says. 'Of course, I
was afraid I'd lose him. I cried and cried. But this gave us hope. The saddest
thing in the world is to have no hope.'

    Genes injected into Floyd's heart muscle directed the cells to manufacture a
specific protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, resulting in the
development of new blood vessels. Ordinarily, this only takes place as the
foetus develops in the womb.

    'One Sunday morning, I woke up and said: 'I feel fantastic.' I hadn't felt
that good for 15 years,' says Floyd. 'Now I can work as hard as I like and walk
as far as I like.'

    This is no isolated success story. Of the 11 patients Isner monitored for
six months, six are free of angina, he told his Dallas audience. This may have
profound implications. In future, instead of having bypass surgery or
angioplasty - a procedure which widens a narrow artery using an inflated balloon
- heart-attack victims may simply have a series of jabs.

    Some specialists have yet to be convinced that the gene treatment really
works. Dr H Kirk Hammondof the University of California, San Diego, says: 'As a
cardiologist, I know all too well the kind of influence psychological factors
have on patients who believe they're getting therapy that works.' In one study,
angina sufferers felt better after taking a 'painkiller' which was, in fact,
bicarbonate of soda.

    But Isner insists that the degree of improvement in his patients is so great
that it is unlikely to be due to a placebo effect; in Dallas, he showed scans
which display improved blood flow to the patients' heart muscles.

    Extensive clinical trials will be needed before this treatment becomes
routinely available, but it could be a 'miracle' for severely afflicted
patients, according to Dr Valentin Fuster, president of the American Heart
Association. And, if it is, the implications for heart patients around the world
are immense.

    THE 71ST SCIENTIFIC sessions of the American Heart Association, held last
month at the Dallas Convention Center, attracted 50,000 delegates and provided
an international shop window for scientists like Isner. The programme alone ran
to 1,000 pages; there were 4,500 research reports to digest and 350 trade
exhibits showing state-of-the-art technology.

    The scale makes sense once you appreciate that, this year, Americans will
spend an estimated $ 274 billion ($170 billion) on cardiovascular disease - on
everything from treatments to disability payments. This compares with $10
billion in Britain, where one in four men and one in five women die from
coronary heart disease (CHD).

    Already, there are several rival teams in the race to commercialise gene
therapy. At the Cornell Medical Center in New York, for example, Dr Ronald
Crystal is attaching the gene to a disabled cold virus. Tests suggest that, once
installed, the gene produces blood vessel-promoting proteins for two or three
weeks, which seems to be long enough to produce a permanent blood supply. If
this can be converted into a reliable, affordable therapy - and the buzzword
with all these new therapies is 'cost-effectiveness' - someone stands to make a
fortune out of it. For this is a multi-billion-dollar game of pharmaceutical
Monopoly, in which winners end up with blockbuster drugs like Viagra.

    Gene therapy had star billing at Dallas, but there were hundreds of other
potential wonder-treatments all vying for delegates' attention, from the latest
in tiny cardiac stents (tiny mesh tubes which hold coronary arteries open like
mini scaffolding) to robotic heart surgery.

    The robots I saw in Dallas controlled miniature instruments such as needles
and 'graspers', and handled a voice-controlled camera for keyhole surgery.

    The secret of the robot lies in the hands: human ones are not so steady. A
robot can spend long periods stitching sutures as fine as a human hair without a
single twitch.

    The stents - which cost up to $1,000 each - were greeted a few years ago as
the biggest step forward in CHD treatment since bypass surgery in the Sixties.
The newest models are coated with radioactive seeds to zap diseased tissue
rather like radiotherapy in cancer treatment. Already, stents have brought a 75
per cent improvement in angioplasty.

    Drugs specifically designed to lower cholesterol levels, called statins, are
also causing great excitement. One, Pravastatin, was tested in a five-year study
costing $20 million among 6,595 men with high cholesterol levels in Glasgow, the
world's heart-attack capital, to see if it would reduce the risk of an attack in
people who had never had one. The reported results of the trial were
spectacular:the drug reduced the risk of fatal heart attacks by nearly a
quarter, and non-fatal ones by a third. For every 1,000 patients, there were 22
fewer heart attacks or deaths, and 22 fewer major operations.

    But, in a letter to the British Medical Journal, doctors from Warwickshire
Health Authority claimed that prescribing guidelines for statin therapy would
break the bank. Treating 'priority groups' would mean prescriptions for 8.2 per
cent of the population, and cost $8 million a year - 20 per cent of the local
drug budget, or an average of $100,000 per GP practice.

    Yet to condemn such preventive expenditure as excessive may be premature,
because society also picks up the bill in the staggering number of cases in
which cardiovascular disease is not prevented. In 1930, CHD accounted for just
one per cent of diagnosed deaths in the UK. Today almost one person in two dies
from cardiovascular disease, nearly 30 per cent from CHD.

    And yet, of the money spent by the NHS on heart disease in 1996, only one
per cent went on prevention:32 per cent ($527 million) went on drugs; and 54 per
cent ($878 million) on in-patient care. In Dallas, I put this to Dr Fuster.
'You're right,' he said. 'We have a problem.' Society, he believes, is far more
interested in treating CHD than in preventing it. 'The fact that money and
attention are invested primarily in treatment not prevention is a sad paradox.'

    To lower his own risk, Fuster exercises daily by walking almost 30 blocks
from his home to the Mount Sinai Institute, where he directs cardiovascular
research. During the summer, he cycles through the Alps and Pyrenees, taking the
same demanding routes as professional cyclists on the Tour de France.

    Born in Barcelona in 1943, he eats a low-fat Mediterranean diet, with lots
of fresh fruit and vegetables. He doesn't smoke. He tries to be relaxed. His
cholesterol and blood pressure levels are normal.

    In the New Year, his research group is to evaluate relaxation therapies
ranging from yoga to Eastern medicine as part of a prevention and rehabilitation
programme. Until recently, scientists have ridiculed the idea that the heart is
the seat of our emotions, insisting that its sole function was to pump oxygen
around the body. Now it seems that the heart really does register and respond to
emotion. According to one new theory, it may do so with the help of its own
nervous system, which is independent of the brain.

    There are now more than 250 'risk factors' for heart disease - and many seem
to be more emotional than physical. In one study, for example, 6,000 men and
women with mild to moderate depression were asked if they had ever been treated
for depression. Those who had were monitored for five years and found to have
twice the number of heart attacks as non-depressed individuals. Regular
churchgoers have also been shown to be less vulnerable to heart disease, perhaps
because they are less prone to depression.

    Learning more about risk factors will help doctors to identify potential
victims - but sufferers can help themselves by seeking help for early warning
symptoms. Hence the presence outside London's Brompton Hospital of a
double-decker bus containing a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, which
shows moving images of the heart ie with them. The bus is the vision of Pr
Longmore, one of the 18-strong team who carried out Britain's first heart
transplant in 1968. If people can actually see why their hearts are at risk, he
believes, then they will switch to a healthier lifestyle. Although, as Professor
Longmore explains, the situation is very complex: 'Often people with no risk
factors drop dead, while people with multiple risk factors live to a ripe old
age.' And, as Dr Robert Greenbaum, consultant cardiologist at the Royal Free
Hospital, in London, admits: 'As doctors, we really don't know how to change
people's behaviour.' One report in Dallas showed that almost three in five
smokers carry on

    puffing after heart surgery.

    In fact, huge numbers of people have given up smoking, but, says Clive Bates
of the pressure group Action on Smoking and Health (Ash), 'the numbers giving up
have levelled off recently. We believe this is because smoking is not taken
seriously as a medically treatable condition. We treat the consequences of
smoking, but we don't treat smoking itself as an addiction.

    Prevention in the NHS takes a back seat - we know that counselling is highly
cost-effective, but provision is very patchy.'

    However, one British patient, 47-year-old Teresa Kinsella, epitomises the
importance of being aware of risk factors. She could have died if she had not
gone to the doctor about the sudden jab of pain radiating from her chest to her
left arm. She didn't actually have a heart attack, but hospital tests confirmed
her worst fears.

    'I wasn't allowed home. They even said I might drop dead at any minute,' she
explains. Severe coronary artery disease was diagnosed and she underwent
triple-bypass surgery at St Bartholomew's Hospital.

    Teresa knew what the symptoms were: her father had died from a heart attack
at the age of 46, when she was 15. As a teenager, she was put on a low-fat diet
and told not to smoke. But she couldn't resist cigarettes and didn't stop until
early this year. She speaks for millions when she says: 'I thought nothing would
ever happen to me.'

    Today, Teresa, 5ft 2in and 14 stone, is working on losing the two-and-a-half
stone she put on after giving up smoking. She takes cholesterol-lowering drugs
and spends up to two hours a day walking, often with her baby grandson, Jake.
Walking has become a lifeline, and not just a physical one.

    'It isn't just a way to lose weight. It's a great way of switching off and
taking in your surroundings. It's very relaxing. I find that things which used
to stress me don't really matter anymore. You really can walk your stress away.
Since my operation, I've been exercising far more. I've got to make the most of
my second chance.'

    'Everyone,' says Professor Longmore, 'wants an answer to three questions:
have I got coronary disease? Is it going to make me drop dead? What can I do
about it? We set out to answer these questions with the machine on the bus.'

    It is now being tested on hundreds of patients, but it may be several years
before the rest of us can climb aboard for a life- saving snap and a souvenir
video. We will also have to wait for gene therapy - perhaps for rather longer
than we would like.

    With 60,000 Britons a year dying early from heart disease, Floyd Stokes's
experience suggests that the wait will be worth it - if we can afford it. Dr
Alan L Hillman, director of the centre for health policy at the University of
Pennsylvania, warns that the new treatments are going to 'break the bank' around
the year 2005. You would never know it in Dallas, where the pulse of the heart
disease industry is racing in anticipation of further financial killings.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1998


                              108 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                December 6, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 26;27;28

LENGTH: 2350 words

HEADLINE: HEART BEATERS

BYLINE: John Illman

BODY:



    Floyd Stokes, one of the first people to have had genes injected directly
into his heart, is in Dallas to tell his story at the world's biggest medical
conference. Without this treatment, he might by now have been a cripple, perhaps
dead:and, even by the larger-than-life standards of Dallas, his is an
extraordinary story. Thanks to the rejuvenating gene therapy, the 58-year-old
Texan peanut farmer has grown his own coronary bypass - new blood vessels, the
width of human hair, which go round old blocked ones, bringing nourishment to
the blood-starved muscle.

    Until this summer, Floyd couldn't walk more than 100 yards without
developing crippling angina pain in his chest. This is the same sort of heavy,
crushing pain as a heart attack, but is usually nowhere near as severe. It is
caused by a gradual narrowing of a coronary artery rather than a sudden blockage
of the kind which can cause a heart attack. This narrowing is due to the slow
silting up of the artery with fatty, porridge-like deposits, and the angina is
triggered by physical exertion or mental stress which can influence heart rate.

    This slow, lingering and disabling form of heart disease had turned Floyd
into one of America's quarter of a million cardiac cripples, and reduced him to
running his 1,800-acre farm from a pick-up truck with hired hands. The best
specialists in Texas and California had told him he was too ill for a second
coronary bypass, following his first operation in 1989. There was nothing more
they could do.

    His brother had already died from heart disease in his early fifties, and
Jean, his wife of 40 years, feared that Floyd would be next. It was this terror
that drove her to carry out her own extensive study of heart disease, during
which she came across the name of Dr Jeffrey Isner, chief of vascular medicine
at St Elizabeth's Medical Center and professor of medicine at the Tufts
University School of Medicine, both in Boston.

    Isner had been using gene therapy to grow new blood vessels in patients with
blocked arteries in their legs, and he wanted to extend the technique to
coronary arteries. Jean wanted him to try it on her husband. Floyd's own doctor
warned that he had no more chance of becoming a patient in Boston than of
winning the lottery. But someone had to be lucky, so Floyd contacted the centre
- and hit the jackpot.

    The operation was performed on Jean's birthday, May 26. 'I told him it would
be the most wonderful birthday present I'd ever had,' she says. 'Of course, I
was afraid I'd lose him. I cried and cried. But this gave us hope. The saddest
thing in the world is to have no hope.'

    Genes injected into Floyd's heart muscle directed the cells to manufacture a
specific protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, resulting in the
development of new blood vessels. Ordinarily, this only takes place as the
foetus develops in the womb.

    'One Sunday morning, I woke up and said: 'I feel fantastic.' I hadn't felt
that good for 15 years,' says Floyd. 'Now I can work as hard as I like and walk
as far as I like.'

    This is no isolated success story. Of the 11 patients Isner monitored for
six months, six are free of angina, he told his Dallas audience. This may have
profound implications. In future, instead of having bypass surgery or
angioplasty - a procedure which widens a narrow artery using an inflated balloon
- heart-attack victims may simply have a series of jabs.

    Some specialists have yet to be convinced that the gene treatment really
works. Dr H Kirk Hammondof the University of California, San Diego, says: 'As a
cardiologist, I know all too well the kind of influence psychological factors
have on patients who believe they're getting therapy that works.' In one study,
angina sufferers felt better after taking a 'painkiller' which was, in fact,
bicarbonate of soda.

    But Isner insists that the degree of improvement in his patients is so great
that it is unlikely to be due to a placebo effect; in Dallas, he showed scans
which display improved blood flow to the patients' heart muscles.

    Extensive clinical trials will be needed before this treatment becomes
routinely available, but it could be a 'miracle' for severely afflicted
patients, according to Dr Valentin Fuster, president of the American Heart
Association. And, if it is, the implications for heart patients around the world
are immense.

    THE 71ST SCIENTIFIC sessions of the American Heart Association, held last
month at the Dallas Convention Center, attracted 50,000 delegates and provided
an international shop window for scientists like Isner. The programme alone ran
to 1,000 pages; there were 4,500 research reports to digest and 350 trade
exhibits showing state-of-the-art technology.

    The scale makes sense once you appreciate that, this year, Americans will
spend an estimated $ 274 billion ($170 billion) on cardiovascular disease - on
everything from treatments to disability payments. This compares with $10
billion in Britain, where one in four men and one in five women die from
coronary heart disease (CHD).

    Already, there are several rival teams in the race to commercialise gene
therapy. At the Cornell Medical Center in New York, for example, Dr Ronald
Crystal is attaching the gene to a disabled cold virus. Tests suggest that, once
installed, the gene produces blood vessel-promoting proteins for two or three
weeks, which seems to be long enough to produce a permanent blood supply. If
this can be converted into a reliable, affordable therapy - and the buzzword
with all these new therapies is 'cost-effectiveness' - someone stands to make a
fortune out of it. For this is a multi-billion-dollar game of pharmaceutical
Monopoly, in which winners end up with blockbuster drugs like Viagra.

    Gene therapy had star billing at Dallas, but there were hundreds of other
potential wonder-treatments all vying for delegates' attention, from the latest
in tiny cardiac stents (tiny mesh tubes which hold coronary arteries open like
mini scaffolding) to robotic heart surgery.

    The robots I saw in Dallas controlled miniature instruments such as needles
and 'graspers', and handled a voice-controlled camera for keyhole surgery.

    The secret of the robot lies in the hands: human ones are not so steady. A
robot can spend long periods stitching sutures as fine as a human hair without a
single twitch.

    The stents - which cost up to $1,000 each - were greeted a few years ago as
the biggest step forward in CHD treatment since bypass surgery in the Sixties.
The newest models are coated with radioactive seeds to zap diseased tissue
rather like radiotherapy in cancer treatment. Already, stents have brought a 75
per cent improvement in angioplasty.

    Drugs specifically designed to lower cholesterol levels, called statins, are
also causing great excitement. One, Pravastatin, was tested in a five-year study
costing $20 million among 6,595 men with high cholesterol levels in Glasgow, the
world's heart-attack capital, to see if it would reduce the risk of an attack in
people who had never had one. The reported results of the trial were
spectacular:the drug reduced the risk of fatal heart attacks by nearly a
quarter, and non-fatal ones by a third. For every 1,000 patients, there were 22
fewer heart attacks or deaths, and 22 fewer major operations.

    But, in a letter to the British Medical Journal, doctors from Warwickshire
Health Authority claimed that prescribing guidelines for statin therapy would
break the bank. Treating 'priority groups' would mean prescriptions for 8.2 per
cent of the population, and cost $8 million a year - 20 per cent of the local
drug budget, or an average of $100,000 per GP practice.

    Yet to condemn such preventive expenditure as excessive may be premature,
because society also picks up the bill in the staggering number of cases in
which cardiovascular disease is not prevented. In 1930, CHD accounted for just
one per cent of diagnosed deaths in the UK. Today almost one person in two dies
from cardiovascular disease, nearly 30 per cent from CHD.

    And yet, of the money spent by the NHS on heart disease in 1996, only one
per cent went on prevention:32 per cent ($527 million) went on drugs; and 54 per
cent ($878 million) on in-patient care. In Dallas, I put this to Dr Fuster.
'You're right,' he said. 'We have a problem.' Society, he believes, is far more
interested in treating CHD than in preventing it. 'The fact that money and
attention are invested primarily in treatment not prevention is a sad paradox.'

    To lower his own risk, Fuster exercises daily by walking almost 30 blocks
from his home to the Mount Sinai Institute, where he directs cardiovascular
research. During the summer, he cycles through the Alps and Pyrenees, taking the
same demanding routes as professional cyclists on the Tour de France.

    Born in Barcelona in 1943, he eats a low-fat Mediterranean diet, with lots
of fresh fruit and vegetables. He doesn't smoke. He tries to be relaxed. His
cholesterol and blood pressure levels are normal.

    In the New Year, his research group is to evaluate relaxation therapies
ranging from yoga to Eastern medicine as part of a prevention and rehabilitation
programme. Until recently, scientists have ridiculed the idea that the heart is
the seat of our emotions, insisting that its sole function was to pump oxygen
around the body. Now it seems that the heart really does register and respond to
emotion. According to one new theory, it may do so with the help of its own
nervous system, which is independent of the brain.

    There are now more than 250 'risk factors' for heart disease - and many seem
to be more emotional than physical. In one study, for example, 6,000 men and
women with mild to moderate depression were asked if they had ever been treated
for depression. Those who had were monitored for five years and found to have
twice the number of heart attacks as non-depressed individuals. Regular
churchgoers have also been shown to be less vulnerable to heart disease, perhaps
because they are less prone to depression.

    Learning more about risk factors will help doctors to identify potential
victims - but sufferers can help themselves by seeking help for early warning
symptoms. Hence the presence outside London's Brompton Hospital of a
double-decker bus containing a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner, which
shows moving images of the heart ie with them. The bus is the vision of Pr
Longmore, one of the 18-strong team who carried out Britain's first heart
transplant in 1968. If people can actually see why their hearts are at risk, he
believes, then they will switch to a healthier lifestyle. Although, as Professor
Longmore explains, the situation is very complex: 'Often people with no risk
factors drop dead, while people with multiple risk factors live to a ripe old
age.' And, as Dr Robert Greenbaum, consultant cardiologist at the Royal Free
Hospital, in London, admits: 'As doctors, we really don't know how to change
people's behaviour.' One report in Dallas showed that almost three in five
smokers carry on

    puffing after heart surgery.

    In fact, huge numbers of people have given up smoking, but, says Clive Bates
of the pressure group Action on Smoking and Health (Ash), 'the numbers giving up
have levelled off recently. We believe this is because smoking is not taken
seriously as a medically treatable condition. We treat the consequences of
smoking, but we don't treat smoking itself as an addiction.

    Prevention in the NHS takes a back seat - we know that counselling is highly
cost-effective, but provision is very patchy.'

    However, one British patient, 47-year-old Teresa Kinsella, epitomises the
importance of being aware of risk factors. She could have died if she had not
gone to the doctor about the sudden jab of pain radiating from her chest to her
left arm. She didn't actually have a heart attack, but hospital tests confirmed
her worst fears.

    'I wasn't allowed home. They even said I might drop dead at any minute,' she
explains. Severe coronary artery disease was diagnosed and she underwent
triple-bypass surgery at St Bartholomew's Hospital.

    Teresa knew what the symptoms were: her father had died from a heart attack
at the age of 46, when she was 15. As a teenager, she was put on a low-fat diet
and told not to smoke. But she couldn't resist cigarettes and didn't stop until
early this year. She speaks for millions when she says: 'I thought nothing would
ever happen to me.'

    Today, Teresa, 5ft 2in and 14 stone, is working on losing the two-and-a-half
stone she put on after giving up smoking. She takes cholesterol-lowering drugs
and spends up to two hours a day walking, often with her baby grandson, Jake.
Walking has become a lifeline, and not just a physical one.

    'It isn't just a way to lose weight. It's a great way of switching off and
taking in your surroundings. It's very relaxing. I find that things which used
to stress me don't really matter anymore. You really can walk your stress away.
Since my operation, I've been exercising far more. I've got to make the most of
my second chance.'

    'Everyone,' says Professor Longmore, 'wants an answer to three questions:
have I got coronary disease? Is it going to make me drop dead? What can I do
about it? We set out to answer these questions with the machine on the bus.'

    It is now being tested on hundreds of patients, but it may be several years
before the rest of us can climb aboard for a life- saving snap and a souvenir
video. We will also have to wait for gene therapy - perhaps for rather longer
than we would like.

    With 60,000 Britons a year dying early from heart disease, Floyd Stokes's
experience suggests that the wait will be worth it - if we can afford it. Dr
Alan L Hillman, director of the centre for health policy at the University of
Pennsylvania, warns that the new treatments are going to 'break the bank' around
the year 2005. You would never know it in Dallas, where the pulse of the heart
disease industry is racing in anticipation of further financial killings.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1998


                              110 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           November 27, 1998, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 58, 59

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: FAMILY HEALTH: GIRL TOO FRAGILE TO HUG;
 BUT RARE SKIN DISEASE CAN'T STOP BRAVE MEL FROM SMILING

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    EVERY year, 15,000 children in the UK are born or diagnosed with a
disability.

    For 1,200 of them, the condition is so rare that it attracts little funding
for research - removing a vital source of hope for sufferers.

    The Rare Disorders Awareness Week launched on Monday aims to bring together
children and adult victims, highlight the need for more research and encourage
information-sharing.

    It is co-ordinated by Contact A Family - the charity which supports families
who care for children with disabilities and special needs. Epidermolysis
Bullosa, or EB, is one of more than 5,000 rare conditions or "orphan diseases"
as they are commonly known.

    It affects one in 50,000 children and there are 5,000 sufferers in Britain.

    Here we tell the story of one brave little girl with EB.

    MELISSA Smith is a bubbly 12-year-old who adores school, loves books and has
a ready smile. She is also in constant pain.

    Little Melissa suffers from Epidermolysis Bullosa, a skin-blistering
condition which causes disfigurement and disability.

    Her body is covered in blisters which often take weeks or even months to
heal. It means she has to be covered in bandages from her neck to her toes to
protect her from the slightest knock.

    Each night, mum Kim spends three hours changing Melissa's dressings,
bursting blisters to ensure they don't spread, covering her in cream and
bandaging her again.

    Even Melissa's mouth, throat and eyes are at risk of blistering. Her food
has to be pureed and she is fed every night through a tube into her stomach to
build up her strength.

    Yet Melissa rarely complains and remains amazingly positive and cheerful.

    "Melissa is a fantastic kid, so full of life. She copes wonderfully," says
Kim from Bromley, Kent.

    "She has so much to put up with. Hands and feet are particularly susceptible
and walking can be excruciating. Can you imagine what it is like having blisters
all over your feet?

    "She gets about as best she can but has to use a wheelchair to go to school.

    "It is very difficult - when you see your child in pain and distress, you
want to pick them up and give them a big hug. But that would be disastrous for
Melissa."

    There are three types of EB and Melissa has one of the most severe forms
which affects just one child in 175,000.

    In fact, Melissa's case is unique.

    SHE inherited the dominant strain of the disease from her father and the
recessive strain from her mother.

    Tragically, Kim had no idea she was a carrier of the recessive strain and
dad Tony did not know the dominant form - which had caused slight blistering on
his hands and feet - was hereditary.

    Kim says: "We were naturally devastated when Melissa was born. Her skin was
such a mess that she looked like she had been burnt in a fire."

    Melissa was taken to Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital in London where
her condition was diagnosed. There was no treatment and no cure.

    All that could be offered was palliative care, easing her pain and distress
as much as possible. I had to be taught how to hold her and dress her without
hurting her," says Kim.

    "Her skin was like tissue paper. If it brushed against anything, it would
come off."

    As Melissa got older, her condition worsened.

    Her toes fused together and today she regularly needs plastic surgery to
separate her fingers.

    "But she is so brave when I dress her blisters every night," says Kim.

    "She buries herself in a book and tries to forget the pain.

    "The worst time is when her eyes blister. That is agony for her."

    Jackie Denyer, EB nurse specialist at Great Ormond Street,says: "This is a
constantly painful and distressing condition.

    "Sufferers are particularly vulnerable in crowded situations as the
slightest knock can cause the skin to blister and separate.

    "Care is a constant round of creams, bandaging and dressings. For many
children, the simple act of swallowing is impossible because of blistering in
the throat.

    "There are many different genes involved but often parents do not realise
they are affected because carriers are healthy.

    BUT IF you have the gene, there is a one-in-four-chance of your child being
affected."

    The only hope for EB victims is gene therapy - although that is still some
years off.

    The charity DEBRA helps to fund research into the condition and support.

    Spokesman David Bendor-Samuel says: "Scientists have identified the genes
involved but each family has a unique mutation .

    "You have to find these first before you can do anything else. In the last
ten years, there have been phenomenal breakthroughs.

    "But we desperately need more money for further research if there is to be
any chance of correcting the faulty genes.

    "We are not talking about a cure. It is too early for that.

    "But we are hoping that perhaps in the next decade we may be able to come up
with an effective treatment."

    DONATIONS to DEBRA, DEBRA House, 13 Wellington Business Park, Dukes Ride,
Crowthorne, Berks, RG45 6LS. Tel 01344 762661. Rare Disorders Alliance, Contact
A Family, 170 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0HA. Tel 0171 383 3555.

GRAPHIC: DAILY BATTLE: Melissa with parents Kim and Tony. Only Mel's face and
fingertips are free of bandages Picture: EMMA CATELL;; APPEAL: Melissa fronts a
DEBRA leaflet

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1998


                              111 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 25, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 68

LENGTH: 173 words

HEADLINE: Antisoma aims for £10m lift on Easdaq

BYLINE: Tim Freeborn

BODY:


    THERE was a rumpus this year when parts of the National Health Service
refused to pay for Taxol, the drug which treats ovarian cancer. It cost $ 10,000
per course and only increased remission from the disease by 18 months. The
survival rate five years after diagnosis remained at just 55pc.

    Drug tiddler Antisoma claims its Theragyn treatment will raise survival to
80pc. It delivers a tiny dose of radiation directly to infected cells. A
300-patient Phase Three trial is under way and the drug should be launched in
2002.

    Antisoma plans to raise $10m next month when it floats for $25m on Easdaq,
the Brussels-based electronic exchange.

    Meantime, vaccine specialist Medeva, run by Dr Bill Bogie, hopes to develop
a viral-based gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. Development and licence fees
will cost $25m.

    Medeva, whose shares have dived since last year, will be up against Glaxo
Wellcome, which has a similar project using a slightly different system. The
annual spend on fibrosis drugs is $500m worldwide.


GRAPHIC: BOGIE: GENE THERAPY HOPE

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1998


                              112 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 25, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 68

LENGTH: 172 words

HEADLINE: Antisoma aims for £10m lift on Easdaq

BYLINE: Tim Freeborn

BODY:


    THERE was a rumpus this year when parts of the National Health Service
refused to pay for Taxol, the drug which treats ovarian cancer. It cost $ 10,000
per course and only increased remission from the disease by 18 months. The
survival rate five years after diagnosis remained at just 55pc.

    Drug tiddler Antisoma claims its Theragyn treatment will raise survival to
80pc. It delivers a tiny dose of radiation directly to infected cells. A
300-patient Phase Three trial is under way and the drug should be launched in
2002.

    Antisoma plans to raise $10m next month when it floats for $25m on Easdaq,
the Brussels-based electronic exchange.

    Meantime, vaccine specialist Medeva, run by Dr Bill Bogie, hopes to develop
a viral-based gene therapy for cystic fibrosis. Development and licence fees
will cost $25m.

    Medeva, whose shares have dived since last year, will be up against Glaxo
Wellcome, which has a similar project using a slightly different system. The
annual spend on fibrosis drugs is $500m worldwide.


GRAPHIC: BOGIE: GENE THERAPY HOPE

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1998


                              113 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 23, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: Transplant livers from the test tube

BYLINE: Charles Morton

BODY:


    SCOTTISH scientists are leading the race to develop the world's first human
liver grown in a laboratory.

    The team from Dundee University is taking part in a multimillion pound
project aimed at establishing an unlimited supply of transplant organs.

    The Dundee scientists are confident they have perfected the genetic
techniques which will make it possible for them to do what other scientists have
been attempting for 50 years.

    Professor Brian Burchell, one of the team leading the race against other
medical researchers around the globe, described the attempt to grow the body's
most complex organ as the 'holy grail' of biomedicine.

    'The liver is an extremely plastic organ. You can remove a lot and it will
grow back, but it is very difficult to grow outside the body,' he said. 'Our
gene therapy involves modifying the regenerative and growth properties each
liver cell possesses.' Professor Burchell, who is working with Professor Roland
Wolf and Dr Thomas Friedberg, added: 'People have been trying to do this for 50
years.' These bids to 'immortalise' liver cells have concentrated on freezing or
preserving them in chemicals.

    But they have all failed to stop the cells losing their specialist functions
once removed from the body. The Dundee team, however, is relying on genetic
engineering for its test tube livers.

    Evidence that this will succeed is expected from the U.S. next year.

    American surgeon Dr Anthony Atala will then attempt to transplant the first
lab-grown bladder into a patient.

    It was grown from a tissue sample from a young male patient.

    The Dundee scientists have developed a method altering liver cells and
making them function in a new way after they have identified and isolated
certain pieces of genetic information.

    The Scottish team is in competition with research teams from Texas, Boston
and Nashville in the U.S. and in Germany and France, but believes it is ahead of
its rivals. The Dundee team has secured the backing of major pharmaceutical
companies.

    This, in part, has been due to Professor Wolf's past success in identifying
the gene responsible for some smokers' resistance to cancer.

    He and his colleagues have been working on liver cell development for six
years, even creating a 'mini liver' used to test human reactions to new drugs.


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1998


                              114 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 23, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: Transplant livers from the test tube

BYLINE: Charles Morton

BODY:


    SCOTTISH scientists are leading the race to develop the world's first human
liver grown in a laboratory.

    The team from Dundee University is taking part in a multimillion pound
project aimed at establishing an unlimited supply of transplant organs.

    The Dundee scientists are confident they have perfected the genetic
techniques which will make it possible for them to do what other scientists have
been attempting for 50 years.

    Professor Brian Burchell, one of the team leading the race against other
medical researchers around the globe, described the attempt to grow the body's
most complex organ as the 'holy grail' of biomedicine.

    'The liver is an extremely plastic organ. You can remove a lot and it will
grow back, but it is very difficult to grow outside the body,' he said. 'Our
gene therapy involves modifying the regenerative and growth properties each
liver cell possesses.' Professor Burchell, who is working with Professor Roland
Wolf and Dr Thomas Friedberg, added: 'People have been trying to do this for 50
years.' These bids to 'immortalise' liver cells have concentrated on freezing or
preserving them in chemicals.

    But they have all failed to stop the cells losing their specialist functions
once removed from the body. The Dundee team, however, is relying on genetic
engineering for its test tube livers.

    Evidence that this will succeed is expected from the U.S. next year.

    American surgeon Dr Anthony Atala will then attempt to transplant the first
lab-grown bladder into a patient.

    It was grown from a tissue sample from a young male patient.

    The Dundee scientists have developed a method altering liver cells and
making them function in a new way after they have identified and isolated
certain pieces of genetic information.

    The Scottish team is in competition with research teams from Texas, Boston
and Nashville in the U.S. and in Germany and France, but believes it is ahead of
its rivals. The Dundee team has secured the backing of major pharmaceutical
companies.

    This, in part, has been due to Professor Wolf's past success in identifying
the gene responsible for some smokers' resistance to cancer.

    He and his colleagues have been working on liver cell development for six
years, even creating a 'mini liver' used to test human reactions to new drugs.


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1998


                              115 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           November 23, 1998, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 390 words

HEADLINE: THE LIVER-SAVER;
 BRITISH TEAM IN RACE TO GROW ORGANS IN THE LAB

BYLINE: Steve King

BODY:


    BRITISH scientists are on the brink of a medical breakthrough which could
save the lives of 150 liver patients every year.

    They are working on a multi-million pound project to grow a human liver in
the laboratory for the first time. Success would mean an endless supply of
organs for transplants.

    One of the team, Professor Brian Burchell, said last night: "People have
been trying to do this for the last 40 or 50 years."

    The Dundee University experts are using genetic engineering to solve
problems encountered in previous projects.

    In the past parts of the liver have been removed for freezing or preserving
in special solutions.

    But the liver cells lose their ability to function within 48 hours.

    The Dundee University team have identified genetic information in liver
cells which "informs" the cells they have been removed from the body and
instructs them to shut down.

    The team believe that by altering this genetic code to stop the cells
degenerating, they will be able to grow a new liver in their laboratory.

    Professor Burchell said: "Our gene therapy involves modifying the
regenerative and growth properties each liver cell possesses.

    "You can remove a lot of it and it will grow back but it is very difficult
to grow outside the body."

    There were 660 liver transplants in Britain last year and around 300
patients are awaiting the operation at any one time.

    Every year more than 150 people die from liver failure.

    Researchers in America, Germany and France are working on similar projects
but the British team, funded by several pharmaceutical companies, are believed
to be winning the race.

    Other organs, such as hearts and kidneys, could eventually be grown with the
technique.

    TRANSPLANT FACTS

    THE liver is the largest organ in the human body

    IN the UK more than 660 liver transplants are carried out every year.

    TWENTY five per cent of patients receiving a new liver reject it after
transplant.

    DALLAS star Larry Hagman was given a liver transplant in November 1995 and
Scotland football legend Jim Baxter has had two.

    THE youngest liver transplant patient was five-day-old Irish girl Baebhen
Schuttke.

    LIVER transplant operations can take up to 12 hours.

    EACH transplant costs between pounds 45,000 and pounds 60,000, excluding
after care in hospital.

GRAPHIC: OPERATION: Hagman

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1998


                              121 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                           October 27, 1998, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: CURE FOR CANCER IS CLOSER

BYLINE: Karl Brophy

BODY:


    IRISH scientists are close to discovering a revolutionary cure for cancer.

    Researchers at University College Cork believe they have made a breakthrough
in the fight against the killer disease.

    They say they have developed revolutionary gene therapy which can make
cancer cells kill themselves.

    The "cell suicide" method has already made cells self-destruct in tests.

    The scientists now believe their method could save cancer sufferers the
agony of surgery and crippling chemotherapy.

    Their findings have already been hailed at an international cancer
conference in Sweden.

    Experts worldwide are awaiting the formal publication of the studies which
is due soon.

    The treatment works by cloning the way the human body itself tackles damaged
cells.

    In the human disease defence mechanism a killer gene, called "p53" by
doctors, attacks and destroys cells at the end of their lifespan.

    But cancer is caused when p53 fails to act and damaged and dying cells keep
on growing and cause tumours.

    Medical research shows that in nearly nine out of 10 human cancers p53 has
failed to act.

    Now, using the latest techniques, the Cork scientists say they are able to
inject a form of p53 into tumour cells.

    This causes the cells to effectively commit suicide and prevents the cancer
spreading.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1998


                              127 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 2, 1998, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 42, 43

LENGTH: 642 words

HEADLINE: ONE CUT AND THESE BROTHERS COULD DIE;
 GENETIC FLAW PUTS THEM IN DANGER;
 FAMILY HEALTH: LITTLE BROTHERS WHO SUFFER FROM CHRONIC GRANULOMATOUS DISEASE

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    YOUNG Joseph and Remi Helbawi look a picture of health and happiness.  Yet
their parents live in constant fear of the slightest accident befalling them.

    For a small cut or a minor infection could put the little boys' lives at
risk.

    Joseph, four, and Remi, two, suffer from a rare and incurable genetic
illness, called Chronic Granulomatous Disease.

    Its symptoms can strike without warning at any time. CGD is caused by the
body's inability to produce a bleach-like substance needed to fight bacterial
and fungal infections.

    These infections can lead to unusual pneumonias, skin complaints which will
not heal, bladder and gut problems and internal abscesses.

    Even germs which cause no danger to the rest of us can be deadly.

    Every day of their lives, the brothers must take two different medicines to
keep it under control.

    Although the boys' bodies are able to fight off virus infections such as
colds like other children's, they have no resistance to other types of germs.

    Cuts and grazes have to be treated immediately with strong antiseptic cream
to make sure that no bacteria get into the bloodstream.

    There is a permanent supply of antibiotics in the family medicine cabinet to
stop any cough or bad chest worsening.

    "The smallest cut can be life-threatening," says their dad, Robie, from
Kingston, Surrey.

    "Hay is a major problem because of the fungal growth.

    "We are just thankful our home is not damp, as that would be extremely
dangerous."

    The only real hope of a cure is gene therapy.

    But although the single gene defect responsible for causing CGD has been
identified, more research is needed before doctors can replace the faulty gene
with a healthy one.

    Robie says: "We are very lucky, as the boys are both quite healthy at the
moment. We try to let them lead as normal a life as possible, but the illness is
always there in the back of our minds.

    "It is very unpredictable, and severe infections can occur at any time which
they can't fight off like other children."

    "Joseph appeared perfectly healthy when he was born," says Robie, 40.

    "There were no problems at all until he was 18 months old.

    "Then he suddenly started getting all sort of infections and bowel and
gastric problems.

    "His weight plummeted, and for a while it was touch-and-go whether he would
pull through."

    After 10 months of investigations and tests he was eventually diagnosed with
CGD.

    Mum Lamisse, 33, had no idea she carried the faulty gene that would threaten
her son's life.

    There was a one in two chance that brother Remi, by that time a toddler, had
inherited it, too.

    Tragically, it turned out that he had.

    Joseph and Remi are among 20,000 children born each year with one of the
4,000 genetic disorders. CGD affects one in 500,000 births.

    "In children with CGD the white cells are unable to kill bacteria and
fungi," explains Joseph and Remi's consultant, Dr David Goldblatt, from London's
Great Ormond Street Hospital.

    "We are all surrounded by bacteria in the outside environment which are
harmless to most of us. But for CGD children there are potential problems from
every contact.

    "They have to take antibiotic and antifungal medicines every day of their
lives to protect them from infections.

    "But even then they can still get infections or develop abscesses or mouth
ulcers.

    "Parents have to be very vigilant and alert to any infection and make sure
it is treated immediately.

    "Although bone marrow transplants are one option of care, they have been
carried out on only a few patients. The real hope is gene therapy.

    "We have corrected the gene in the laboratory, but it has not been tried in
patients yet.

    "With continued research, we should be able to offer a real chance of gene
therapy for these children in the next five or 10 years."

GRAPHIC: HANDLE WITH CARE: A faulty gene makes life risky for Joseph (left) and
Remi Picture: JOHN SHENTON

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1998


                              132 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 3, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Will the athletics cheats alter their own DNA?

BYLINE: David Derbyshire;Richard Shears

BODY:


    CHEATING athletes could be using genetic engineering to improve their
performances within two years, it was claimed yesterday.

    Leading sports scientist Dr Peter Larkins believes that gene manipulation
could be in use by the start of the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.

    And while steroids, drugs and illegal food supplements show up on tests, DNA
'improvements' will be undetectable, he said.

    His warning came in the wake of the Tour De France fiasco, in which some
cyclists were accused of using performance-enhancing drugs.

    The techniques are a spin-off from gene therapy, a controversial and mostly
unsuccessful technique which uses DNA to alter the genes in a living person.

    Dr Larkins, a former president of the professional body Sports Medicine
Australia, believes that versions of genes to improve endurance, for example,
could eventually be transplanted into athletes in the same way that doctors now
transplant organs.

    'Although we do not know yet of anyone who has undergone this process, gene
manipulation is not so far away and could be a major problem in the 2000
Olympics,' he said.

    'Altering genes would make the messy and murky scenario of regular
injections of banned drugs a thing of the past.

    'Athletes who used it would not be caught because it is undetectable.

    'We are looking at an era of super-athletes.' Dr Larkins, who will present a
paper on the subject to doctors in Melbourne this week, believes that it is only
a matter of time before athletes gain access to the medical technology needed to
alter genes.

    Most British experts believe successful gene therapy is several years away.


LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1998


                              133 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 3, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Will the athletics cheats alter their own DNA?

BYLINE: David Derbyshire;Richard Shears

BODY:


    CHEATING athletes could be using genetic engineering to improve their
performances within two years, it was claimed yesterday.

    Leading sports scientist Dr Peter Larkins believes that gene manipulation
could be in use by the start of the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.

    And while steroids, drugs and illegal food supplements show up on tests, DNA
'improvements' will be undetectable, he said.

    His warning came in the wake of the Tour De France fiasco, in which some
cyclists were accused of using performance-enhancing drugs.

    The techniques are a spin-off from gene therapy, a controversial and mostly
unsuccessful technique which uses DNA to alter the genes in a living person.

    Dr Larkins, a former president of the professional body Sports Medicine
Australia, believes that versions of genes to improve endurance, for example,
could eventually be transplanted into athletes in the same way that doctors now
transplant organs.

    'Although we do not know yet of anyone who has undergone this process, gene
manipulation is not so far away and could be a major problem in the 2000
Olympics,' he said.

    'Altering genes would make the messy and murky scenario of regular
injections of banned drugs a thing of the past.

    'Athletes who used it would not be caught because it is undetectable.

    'We are looking at an era of super-athletes.' Dr Larkins, who will present a
paper on the subject to doctors in Melbourne this week, believes that it is only
a matter of time before athletes gain access to the medical technology needed to
alter genes.

    Most British experts believe successful gene therapy is several years away.


LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1998


                              134 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 3, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Genetic threat to fair play at Games

BYLINE: Richard Shears

BODY:


    CHEATING athletes could be using genetic engineering to make themselves
fitter and stronger within two years, it was claimed last night.

    According to leading sports scientist Dr Peter Larkins, genetic engineering
could be a major headache in sports by the start of the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.

    And while most steroids, drugs and illegal food supplements show up on
tests, anyone who has their DNA 'improved' will never be traced, he said.

    The warning comes in the wake of the Tour De France fiasco, where a record
number of cyclists were accused o f using performance enhancing drugs.

    DNA manipulation is a spin-off from gene therapy, the controversial and
mostly unsuccessful attempt to cure diseases by altering genes in a living
patient.

    Dr Larkins, ex-president of the professional body Sports Medicine Australia,
believes the new therapy will eventually work, and that sports stars will be
tempted to improve their genetic makeup.

    Scientists believe that some genes can make people naturally better at
sport.

    Earlier this year they discovered an 'endurance gene' which allowed people
to carry on running, walking or climbing for longer.

    Some geneticists believe it could one day be possible to transplant these
'sporting' genes in the same way doctors transplant organs.

    'Altering genes would make the murky scenario of regular injections of
banned drugs such as steroids a thing of the past for cheats,' said Dr Larkins,
who will present a paper on the subject to doctors in Melbourne this week.

    'Altering genes was basically designed to help people but it could now help
cheats.

    At present athletes are not able to alter genes, he said, but Dr Larkins
believes it will be possible in the future.

    British experts say successful gene therapy is still several years off.


LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1998


                              135 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 August 3, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: Genetic threat to fair play at Games

BYLINE: Richard Shears

BODY:


    CHEATING athletes could be using genetic engineering to make themselves
fitter and stronger within two years, it was claimed last night.

    According to leading sports scientist Dr Peter Larkins, genetic engineering
could be a major headache in sports by the start of the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.

    And while most steroids, drugs and illegal food supplements show up on
tests, anyone who has their DNA 'improved' will never be traced, he said.

    The warning comes in the wake of the Tour De France fiasco, where a record
number of cyclists were accused o f using performance enhancing drugs.

    DNA manipulation is a spin-off from gene therapy, the controversial and
mostly unsuccessful attempt to cure diseases by altering genes in a living
patient.

    Dr Larkins, ex-president of the professional body Sports Medicine Australia,
believes the new therapy will eventually work, and that sports stars will be
tempted to improve their genetic makeup.

    Scientists believe that some genes can make people naturally better at
sport.

    Earlier this year they discovered an 'endurance gene' which allowed people
to carry on running, walking or climbing for longer.

    Some geneticists believe it could one day be possible to transplant these
'sporting' genes in the same way doctors transplant organs.

    'Altering genes would make the murky scenario of regular injections of
banned drugs such as steroids a thing of the past for cheats,' said Dr Larkins,
who will present a paper on the subject to doctors in Melbourne this week.

    'Altering genes was basically designed to help people but it could now help
cheats.

    At present athletes are not able to alter genes, he said, but Dr Larkins
believes it will be possible in the future.

    British experts say successful gene therapy is still several years off.


LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1998


                              136 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                             July 12, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 8, 9

LENGTH: 1902 words

HEADLINE: CANCER: THE HYPE, THE HOPE, THE FACTS;
 CANCER AFFECTS 1 IN 3 OF US AND BY 2025 ONE IN TWO PEOPLE WILL SUFFER FROM SOME
FORM OF THE DISEASE. LEADING CANCER SPECIALIST KAROL SIKORA DISCUSSES THE
ADVANCES MADE IN TREATING, AND BEATING, THE DISEASE.;
 CANCER SPECIALIST KAROL SIKORA DISCUSSES THE ADVANCES IN CANCER TREATMENT

BYLINE: Karol Sikora

BODY:


    Karol Sikora is Chief of the World Health Organisation's Cancer Programme,
Professor of Cancer Medicine at London's Hammersmith Hospital and clinical
consultant to the Imperial Cancer Research Fund. When he was 17, his father died
of lung cancer at the age of 56.

    Cancer is now one of the most feared diseases. As medical advances allow us
to live longer, so the number of people who get cancer has increased.  Now it
affects one in three, but by 2025 this will be a frightening one in two. We are
bombarded with information on the causes of cancer, from the high-risk -
smoking, fatty foods and sunbathing, to the uncertain - cell phones, power lines
and alcohol. Breakthrough "miracle" cures appear almost weekly. Some are based
on scientific discoveries and some are simply wacky. The good news is that
treatment is getting better.  A recent ICRF study showed that by 1990 we could
cure five per cent more patients each year than we could at the beginning of the
decade. This means 12,000 more people each year are alive because of better use
of surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy; the main treatments used. And
treatment is getting much less unpleasant. We can stop the sickness caused by
anti-cancer drugs and prevent the life-threatening infections that so often
resulted during treatment. And there is counselling and other psychosocial
techniques. The NHS is re-organising treatment services to provide a series of
cancer centres at the hub with a series of spokes going out to every hospital
where cancer patients are treated. It will provide faster, better treatment and
proper access to specialists.  When finished, and we've a long way to go yet,
we'll be able to guarantee that wherever someone enters the system they'll get
the best care and access to all the latest advances. All this costs money and
although the NHS does its best, at times it is hopelessly inadequate compared
with the streamlined services offered in some countries. But why the obsession
with miracle cures? Such stories can be upsetting for patients and their
families. We recently saw some preliminary data on mice experiments hailed as a
breakthrough, with reports that a combination of two drugs - angiostatin and
endostatin - could, as the New York Times said, "cure cancer in two years". The
experiments involved the use of the drugs angiostatin and endostatin to prevent
cancers developing a bloodstream of their own - essential if they are going to
grow. The story was given to the Press even though no drug was available for
testing in patients anywhere in the world. There's a long way to go between the
animal experiments and getting a drug that works successfully for a cancer
patient each time.  One of the world's most famous scientists, Dr James Watson,
co-discoverer of DNA's double helix, said of this 'breakthrough': "The history
of cancer research is littered with promises that raised people's hopes, only
for them to be dashed when put to the test in humans." Another so-called
'breakthrough' was said to have been made by Luigi Di Bella, an 85-year-old
Italian doctor.  He claims he can cure most cancer patients with a complex
mixture of hormones, vitamins and chemotherapy. A government-funded, pounds
15million clinical trial is now under way in Italy. But no firm data supporting
his treatment was produced for the international monitoring committee.  Time
will tell if he is a pioneer or not. All major advances in cancer treatment have
been gradual. Chemotherapy for lymphoma - cancer of the lymph glands - and
testicular cancer in young men took 10 years to develop. Procedures to avoid
routine mastectomy in women with breast cancer matured over 25 years. And better
supportive care and techniques to control pain needed almost a generation to be
accepted. We are not going to wake up one day and find we've eradicated cancer.
Research is slowly providing clues as to what makes a cancer grow and spread.
We'll understand the complex factors that interact to cause the disease. This
new knowledge will mean that prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care will all
improve slowly and surely over the next 25 years.

    The "gene chip" is set to revolutionise the treatment of cancer patients in
the next millennium.

    It is a silicon chip on which hundreds and thousands of pieces of DNA are
contained. The gene chip allows for very rapid analysis of DNA - the coded set
of instructions that

    controls the behaviour

    of every cell in the body - in a drop of patient's blood to determine their
genetic background.

    The results from a

    blood test could then be run through a computer where it is scanned against
the gene chip which contains the

    entire human genetic map.

    The computer will spot any change on the patient's DNA which makes it more
likely that they will develop cancer. One day an advanced generation of gene
chips will let you know what diseases, including which type of cancer, you are
at risk from.

    Cancer experts predict that by 2010 the gene

    chip DNA test could be carried out by practice nurses in a GP's surgery.

    Then prevention programmes such as mammograms for breast cancer will be
tailored to the individual.

    At the moment such an analysis of a patient's genetic background

    would take hours in the laboratory.

    But with the gene chip it will take seconds.

    When the Human Genome Project, a worldwide enterprise to map and sequence
the human genetic code, is complete by 2003, the chips will be able to hold the
entire genetic map.

    Professor Sikora says: "Gene therapy is going to be the most successful in
the long term of all the different types of cancer therapies.

    "It will help prevent people from getting cancer by modifying their genetic
background - by replacing defective genes with healthy ones it will target the
actual defect.".

    OUR bodies consist of millions of cells. Cancer develops when something goes
wrong inside one of them. If the faulty cell multiplies uncontrollably, it forms
a tumour. Faulty cells break away and spread via the blood or lymph system to
other regions and start a new growth.

    RADICAL SURGERY SAVED US

    Sharon and Jacqueline Hutton have lived on death row for years, victims of a
killer gene which has been in their family for more than 150 years.

    In a bid to beat the deadly cancer gene - and save their lives - both
Sharon, 24, and Jacqueline, 30, of Armadale, West Lothian, had a double
mastectomy and hysterectomy.

    Tragically, doctors have told Jacqueline they are almost certain the gene
has been passed on to her two daughters, Natasha and Kimberley.

    "Natasha is only 10 years old but very grown up for her age," says
Jacqueline.  "We have talked about the gene and she knows she has it and will
never have children. But I will not allow the doctors to do a blood test until
she is about 18. I want her to have her childhood before we know for certain.

    "I have never regretted my decision to have surgery for one moment.  It has
made me a much stronger person and I have a different outlook on life."

    Dr David Fitzpatrick, one of the UK's leading geneticists, who is based at
the Western General Hospital in Edinburgh, developed the blood test for the
family's specific BRCA1 gene fault.

    He says: "Sharon and Jacqueline were only young when they faced what is by
any standards mutilating surgery.

    "But you have to compare the surgery to the cost of a young woman developing
cancer, coping with the treatment and perhaps dying from the disease."

    The gene is responsible for at least 10 per cent of all breast and ovarian
cancer deaths. Scientists can now detect the gene with a simple blood test but
they have also discovered it can be passed from mother to child.  The only
"cure" is to identify those women at risk because they carry the rogue gene and
offer them drastic surgery. To ensure the cancer does not activate in the women
they have to have both a double mastectomy and a hysterectomy before the woman
is 30.

    "We are a very close family and were devastated when our dad told us 11
years ago our mum had cancer and had only three months to live," says
Jacqueline.

    "Mum was only 44 when she died, I was only 19 and Sharon was just 13, but
there was nothing we could do."

    Shortly after their mother's death both girls, their brother Robert and
father Jim were all asked to have blood tests. Sharon says: "We were told what
the doctors suspected about the cancer gene but I don't think we realised the
consequences."

    Jacqueline married her boyfriend William and had two daughters, Natasha, now
10, and Kimberley now seven. Sharon and her partner, who have now separated,
have a son Jordan, three. Two years ago, after their aunt died of cancer, the
sisters were again asked to come for blood tests.

    Doctors now believed that the killer gene, which they knew so much more
about, had been passed to both sisters and there was a 95 per cent chance of
them dying of cancer in their thirties.

    Research into family records revealed the gene had been passed down the
generations for at least 150 years.

    "The doctors explained that if the test proved positive I would have to have
a double mastectomy and a hysterectomy to save my life.

    "I was only 28 and shattered, but never flinched from making the decision I
had to make. If surgery had to be done it had to be done," says Jacqueline.

    And Sharon, who has astounded doctors with her speedy recovery, has only one
regret: "I would have liked to have two children and now there will only be
Jordan, but at least I have him," she says.

    SCIENTISTS are closer to developing a new way to treat cancer.  They have
identified the 3-D structure of a crucial protein molecule, HAP1, which could
provide the key to killing tumours. In normal cells, the HAP1 molecule is the
first to recognise damage and start the repair process. But scientists at the
Imperial Cancer Research Fund found that when this protein is present in cancer
cells it helps their growth by increasing the oxygen supply. When they remove
the molecule from cancer cells they are starved of oxygen

    and die.

    50 YEARS ON

    Experts predict that in 50 years' time cancer doctors will be able to
control most forms of the disease - though there still won't be a cure.

    The incidence of cancer in the developed world will be half what it is now
because of better prevention.

    "We won't cure people, but they will have a normal life span with cancer.
We will have found ways of controlling most cancers, as we control diabetes
today," says Professor Sikora. "Some of my patients with breast cancer have
disease that has gone to the bone and they live for many years. There is some
mechanism controlling their cancer, and if we can understand that mechanism we
can keep patients alive.

    "Essentially we would 'cure' the disease as far as they were concerned.
They would have no symptoms. They would have to go back into hospital for 're
-tuning' to control their cancer. By 2100 the death rate from cancer will be
something like 5 per cent. The next 25 years will see the biggest change."

    And surgery to treat cancer is on its way out, says Prof Sikora. "Medicine
and genetics will be so interconnected that a computer will read out what's
wrong," he says. "Micro-robots will take biopsies so we can work out molecular
changes, and molecular therapy will be given as an injected chemotherapy."

GRAPHIC: LIFE OR DEATH DECISION: Cancer gene sisters Jacqueline and Sharon;
Hutton with their children; VOICE OF REASON: New "cancer cure" claims are
premature, says; Prof Sikora

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1998


                              137 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                             July 12, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24, 25

LENGTH: 1507 words

HEADLINE: CHECKLIST OF CANCER TREATMENTS

BODY:


    FOR YEARS DOCTORS AND CANCER PATIENTS HAD ONLY THREE OPTIONS - SURGERY,
RADIATION AND CHEMOTHERAPY. BUT THAT'S STARTING TO CHANGE, AS A NEW GENERATION
OF MORE SOPHISTICATED TREATMENTS MOVES OUT OF THE LAB.

    How to kill a cancer cell - The trick is to cut off the tumor's blood supply

    A series of genetic mutations turns a normal cell into a malignant cancer
cell that divides rapidly and grows into a tumour about the size of a pea. The
tumour can't grow any larger unless it recruits its own blood supply.

    After a period that can range from months to years, another mutation
triggers the release of a chemical that tells nearby blood vessels to grow new
capillaries. Such growth is called angiogenesis.

    The capillaries invade the tumour, bringing it nutrients, stimulating its
growth and providing a route for some of the cancer cells to spread to other
parts of the body.

    Scientists have identified more than 300 substances that may inhibit
angiogenesis by destroying newly-formed capillaries, or preventing their
formation. As a result, the tumour may stop growing, shrink, or, in some cases,
disappear altogether.

    STANDARD TREATMENTS

    Treatment: Surgery

    Target: Multiple cancers

    How They Work: Doctors are constantly seeking ways to make this standard
treatment more effective and less traumatic for patients. For example by
removing part rather than all of a breast or preceding surgery with chemotherapy
to reduce the size of a tumour before its removal. Research at Guy's Hospital is
investigating the timing of breast cancer surgery in relation to a woman's
menstrual cycle Status: Surgery still saves more lives than anything else

    Treatment: Radiation Therapies

    Target: Multiple cancers; often prostate and solid tumours in internal
organs; lymphomas - malignant tumours of the lymph nodes.

    How They Work: Destroys cancerous cells but it can also damage healthy ones
as well.  Using 3-D computer images and new delivery techniques like radiation
'seed' implants, doctors can aim doses with microscope precision, sparing
healthy tissue.  Status: Widely available

    Treatment: Chemotherapy

    Target: Multiple cancers

    How They Work: New, more selective formulations and powerful but less toxic
versions of older drugs are being added to the cancer doctor's arsenal. Oral and
wafer formulations of injectable drugs are making the delivery of chemotherapy
more convenient for patients. Enclosing cancer-killing toxins in a protective
lipid 'envelope' can increase their effectiveness while sparing normal tissues

    Status: In use

    DEVELOPING TREATMENTS: Anti-angiogenesis Agents:

    Target: Multiple cancers

    How They Work: A growing tumour needs nutrients. To make sure it gets them
it secretes substances that stimulate the growth of new blood vessels in the
tumour.  A number of agents including the drugs angiostatin and endostatin can
block this process, at least in animals

    Status: First human trials expected within a year

    Anti-Metastatic Agents:

    Target: Multiple cancers

    How They Work: What kills most cancer patients is not the primary tumour but
the metastatic spread. Scientists have identified a class of enzymes that
enables cancer cells to enter the blood stream by dissolving tissue and boring
holes through capillary walls. New drugs could keep cancer cells confined to one
site.

    Status: Human tests have just begun

    Anti-Oncogenic Agents:

    Target: Multiple including breast, colon, pancreatic, lung

    How They Work: Tumours do more than pick up growth factors that circulate in
the bloodstream, they also make them by switching on oncogenes. Many cancers
have been found to contain mutations in the RAS oncogene and companies are
racing to develop drugs that inhibit its growth-promoting activity Gene
Therapies

    Status: Human tests are in early stages

    Gene Therapies:

    Target: Multiple, including breast, ovarian and small-cell lung cancers

    How They work: In tumours, genes that are supposed to halt runaway cell
growth are often so damaged that they stop functioning. Scientists hope to
correct this problem by engineering viruses that can 'infect' cancerous cells
with healthy 'tumour-suppressor' genes. Preliminary evidence suggests that this
approach can sometimes cause tumours to stop growing and even shrink in size

    Status: Testing in humans is under way

    Immuno-therapy:

    Target : Multiple cancers

    How they work: Monoclonal antibodies recognise and attach themselves to
cancer cells, which both activates the body's own defence mechanisms to attack
them and causes the cells themselves to self-destruct. This targeted action
avoids the toxic effects of chemotherapy, which can cause hair loss and nausea

    Status: First monoclonal antibody has been launched in Britain

    Vaccines:

    Target: Melanoma, breast, colon, ovarian, pancreatic and many many others

    How They Work: Malignant growths have a deadly knack for skirting around the
body's immune system. But scientists are finding that by vaccinating patients
with substances derived from tumours they can sometimes goad white blood cells
into attacking cancerous tissues.

    Status: Dozens of vaccines are being tested

    Chemoprevention therapies:

    Target: Breast, head and neck

    How They Work: By trying to prevent cancer from developing. Many breast
cancers depend on the female hormone oestrogen to stimulate their growth.
Tamoxifen, which acts as an anti-oestrogen in the breast, has been shown to
prevent the development of this form of cancer. Preliminary evidence suggests
that a newer compound, raloxifene, may have a similar benefit without serious
side effects. It works by blocking the hormones that build cancer tumours.
Substances known as retinoids, derivatives of vitamin A, can prevent recurrence
of certain head and neck cancers

    Status: A research project to see if Tamoxifen is effective in preventing
breast cancer in high-risk, healthy women has been under way for four years and
more than 2,500 women have been recruited in the UK. US researchers decided to
end the American arm of the trial in April after results showed the drug reduced
the risk of a first breast cancer by 45 per cent. Half the women in the random
trial were not on Tamoxifen, and it was felt that it was unethical to keep them
off the drug

    ANGIOGENESIS is the growth of blood vessels Preventing their growth around
tumours is being hailed as a major step forward in cancer treatment

    Drug: Tamoxifen

    Who's working on it Zeneca will evaluate

    How It Works: Acts as an anti-oestrogen in the breast and may block the
growth of tumour blood vessels

    Source: Synthesised in the lab

    Status: New trials to block blood vessels may begin shortly

    Marimastat:

    Who's Working On It British Biotech

    How It Works: When given in combination blocks the activity of enzymes
needed to build tumour blood vessels

    Source: Synthesised in the lab

    Status: Being tested in cancer patients

    Angiostatin and endostatin:

    Who's Working On It Judah Folkman at Boston Children's Hospital and Entremed

    How It Works: Blocks the growth of tumour blood vessels

    Source: Derived from mouse urine

    Status: Success against tumours in mice. America's National Cancer Institute
is giving it priority for development and US trials are expected within a year

    Combretastatin:

    Who's working on it: Team at the Cancer Research Campaign's Gray
Laboratories at Mount Vernon Hospital in Middlesex expects to begin human
clinical trials this year

    How it works: By selectively damaging blood vessels that supply the cancer
cells with the oxygen they need to survive and grow

    Source: Made from the bark of an African willow

    Status: Fifty patients will be selected later this year at Mount Vernon
hospital, Middlesex, to evaluate the new approach

    Bryostatin I:

    Who's working on it: First isolates by Professor Bob Pettit of Arizona State
University How It works: By blocking the blood supply to the tumour

    Source: A marine organism

    Status: Has shown promise in early clinical trials by the Cancer Research
Campaign

    How to kill a cancer cell - The trick is to cut off the tumor's blood supply

    A series of genetic mutations turns a normal cell into a malignant cancer
cell that divides rapidly and grows into a tumour about the size of a pea. The
tumour can't grow any larger unless it recruits its own blood supply.

    After a period that can range from months to years, another mutation
triggers the release of a chemical that tells nearby blood vessels to grow new
capillaries. Such growth is called angiogenesis.

    The capillaries invade the tumour, bringing it nutrients, stimulating its
growth and providing a route for some of the cancer cells to spread to other
parts of the body.

    Scientists have identified more than 300 substances that may inhibit
angiogenesis by destroying newly-formed capillaries, or preventing their
formation. As a result, the tumour may stop growing, shrink, or, in some cases,
disappear altogether.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1998


                              138 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 16, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for blood disorder

BYLINE: Anastasia Stephens

BODY:


    A SINGLE injection to combat haemophilia- the inherited condition in which
blood fails to clot properly - could revolutionise treatment for an estimated
6,000 sufferers in Britain. The treatment, developed by the American biotech
company Avigen, involves giving patients a single injection of a harmless virus
which has been genetically altered to produce the clotting factors haemophiliacs
need.

    Once in the body, the virus releases genes which 'instruct' the body to
produce key clotting factors. As the genes remain in the body for life,
haemophiliacs would effectively be cured. The therapy, to be tested on the first
patients at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia later this year, could
improve the quality of life for people with the disease.

    For haemophiliacs, even the smallest cut can mean bleeding to death.

    Treatment, therefore, involves injections of blood-clotting factors three
times a week.

    But, even then, clotting factor levels do not remain constant and patients
are prone to long-term complications such as crippling joint deformities and
stroke, because of internal bleeding.

    When trials begin, as a precautionary measure, patients will be given top-up
injections every six months. Theoretically though, the injection should last for
life.

    'Current treatments are short-term - patients need to have injections of
blood-clotting factor three times a week,' says Mark Weaving of the Haemophilia
Society. 'It's not only inconvenient but uncomfortable, especially for children.
An injection that lasts for six months would be a major advance and we will be
following the research with interest.'


LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1998


                              139 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 16, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 275 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for blood disorder

BYLINE: Anastasia Stephens

BODY:


    A SINGLE injection to combat haemophilia- the inherited condition in which
blood fails to clot properly - could revolutionise treatment for an estimated
6,000 sufferers in Britain. The treatment, developed by the American biotech
company Avigen, involves giving patients a single injection of a harmless virus
which has been genetically altered to produce the clotting factors haemophiliacs
need.

    Once in the body, the virus releases genes which 'instruct' the body to
produce key clotting factors. As the genes remain in the body for life,
haemophiliacs would effectively be cured. The therapy, to be tested on the first
patients at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia later this year, could
improve the quality of life for people with the disease.

    For haemophiliacs, even the smallest cut can mean bleeding to death.

    Treatment, therefore, involves injections of blood-clotting factors three
times a week.

    But, even then, clotting factor levels do not remain constant and patients
are prone to long-term complications such as crippling joint deformities and
stroke, because of internal bleeding.

    When trials begin, as a precautionary measure, patients will be given top-up
injections every six months. Theoretically though, the injection should last for
life.

    'Current treatments are short-term - patients need to have injections of
blood-clotting factor three times a week,' says Mark Weaving of the Haemophilia
Society. 'It's not only inconvenient but uncomfortable, especially for children.
An injection that lasts for six months would be a major advance and we will be
following the research with interest.'


LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1998


                              140 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 30, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Mouse's tale of hope;
Gene research breakthrough could help the deaf to hear

BODY:


    A MOUSE named Sebastian may hold the key to helping millions born deaf.

    Scientists who have identified a rogue gene responsible for causing deafness
have been able to make a healthy version in the laboratory.

    Using genetic engineering technology they created hearing in Sebastian, and
the next step is to extend trials of the technique to humans.

    Sebastian's ancestors at the University of Michigan Medical School were
deliberately made deaf 70 years ago. They were given X-rays which caused
deafness mutations and these were passed down the lineage. None of the countless
sub-

    sequent generations of mice was able to hear.

    After the mutated gene responsible was identified, experiments were carried
out on eight fertilised mouse eggs.

    One egg received the laboratory-manufactured healthy gene. It became
Sebastian. He was born with hearing, unlike his parents and the seven others in
the litter.

    An enzyme dubbed Myo15 is at the centre of the new optimism.

    Faults or mutations in its 'coding

    instructions' spell deafness and the scientists now think they can overcome
the mutation.

    The scientists believe Myo15 transports a protein called actin to inner ear
hair cell fibres during their development.

    Sally Camper, associate professor of human genetics at the medical school,
explained that the fibres move in response to changes in sound frequency 'like a
field of wheat moves to changes of wind speed'. The brain translates these
movements into sound. But in the deaf, the fibres are stunted.

    Professor Camper said: 'We think that Myo15 works like a tiny bulldozer.

    It grabs proteins and other cell components and moves them to different
locations.

    'The next step is to get it to transport the actin to deaf people's
inner-ear cell fibres during their development. If we can get the actin to the
right place, these fibres will no longer be stunted and hearing will return. We
need more research to know for sure, but that's our belief.

    She added: 'It is a perfect example of how technology with mice can
contribute with research to help people. The study represents the first
permanent correction of a deafness-related genetic mutation.

    The identification will help in finding a similar gene in humans.

    'We have found in four separate previous instances helpful links between
deafness in mice and humans. It is a first step forward in developing new
treatments for people.' Assistant professor Dr Yehoash Raphael said that gene
therapy for genetic-based deafness was close to becoming a reality.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                              141 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 30, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Mouse's tale of hope;
Gene research breakthrough could help the deaf to hear

BODY:


    A MOUSE named Sebastian may hold the key to helping millions born deaf.

    Scientists who have identified a rogue gene responsible for causing deafness
have been able to make a healthy version in the laboratory.

    Using genetic engineering technology they created hearing in Sebastian, and
the next step is to extend trials of the technique to humans.

    Sebastian's ancestors at the University of Michigan Medical School were
deliberately made deaf 70 years ago. They were given X-rays which caused
deafness mutations and these were passed down the lineage. None of the countless
sub-

    sequent generations of mice was able to hear.

    After the mutated gene responsible was identified, experiments were carried
out on eight fertilised mouse eggs.

    One egg received the laboratory-manufactured healthy gene. It became
Sebastian. He was born with hearing, unlike his parents and the seven others in
the litter.

    An enzyme dubbed Myo15 is at the centre of the new optimism.

    Faults or mutations in its 'coding

    instructions' spell deafness and the scientists now think they can overcome
the mutation.

    The scientists believe Myo15 transports a protein called actin to inner ear
hair cell fibres during their development.

    Sally Camper, associate professor of human genetics at the medical school,
explained that the fibres move in response to changes in sound frequency 'like a
field of wheat moves to changes of wind speed'. The brain translates these
movements into sound. But in the deaf, the fibres are stunted.

    Professor Camper said: 'We think that Myo15 works like a tiny bulldozer.

    It grabs proteins and other cell components and moves them to different
locations.

    'The next step is to get it to transport the actin to deaf people's
inner-ear cell fibres during their development. If we can get the actin to the
right place, these fibres will no longer be stunted and hearing will return. We
need more research to know for sure, but that's our belief.

    She added: 'It is a perfect example of how technology with mice can
contribute with research to help people. The study represents the first
permanent correction of a deafness-related genetic mutation.

    The identification will help in finding a similar gene in humans.

    'We have found in four separate previous instances helpful links between
deafness in mice and humans. It is a first step forward in developing new
treatments for people.' Assistant professor Dr Yehoash Raphael said that gene
therapy for genetic-based deafness was close to becoming a reality.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1998


                              142 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 26, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: Can herpes kill a host of illnesses?

BYLINE: Anastasia Stephens

BODY:


    HERPES, the virus that causes painful sores on the skin, could become one of
our most powerful medicines. It does sound astonishing, but scientists around
the world hope to use injections of the virus to kill cancer, reduce cholesterol
levels and even cure disorders like Parkinson's disease.

    The first clinical trial using a herpes therapy has already begun. Last
month at the University of Alabama in America, three people with untreatable
brain tumours were given injections of G207, a herpes simplex virus which has
been genetically altered to kill cancer cells.

    Researchers hope the virus will divide rapidly and spread through all the
tumour cells, prompting them to 'commit suicide' as they go.

    A harmless form of the herpes has also been used in animals to deliver
genetic medicine that treats the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

    Scientists have been looking for ways of using viruses to help fight other
diseases for decades. Because viruses have spent millions of years finding ways
of infecting our cells, they can get through the protective cell membrane far
more efficiently and effectively than most drugs.

    Researchers reasoned that if they could alter viruses to prevent them
causing harmful symptoms, they could use them to deliver medicine.

    That is precisely what they have done to the herpes virus - they have
altered it genetically so that it doesn't produce sores. Now they hope to use it
in several ways to treat a range of diseases.

    Apart from delivering genetic medicine to cancer cells, scientists are also
studying the propensity of herpes to attack nerve cells, and hope to use it to
deliver genes which will rectify diseases like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's, both
caused by nerve malfunctions.

    VIRUSES need to get inside cells to survive, so providing you make them
harmless, they are an ideal way of delivering medicinal genes,' explains
Professor David Latchman, who specialises in herpes viruses and gene therapy at
University College Medical School in London.

    Herpes, he says, has unique potential because it is large and relatively
harmless. 'Herpes is much larger than many other viruses, so you can put a
cocktail of medicinal genes inside it,' he says.

    'The other advantage is that the virus does not cause serious complications

    and we have found ways of preventing any harmful symptoms.

    'The herpes virus migrates towards nerve cells around the body and in the
brain where it sits without causing any harmful symptoms,' says Prof Latch-man.
'This makes it ideal for delivering genetic medicines for neurological
conditions like Parkinson's disease.' Animals with the equivalent of Parkinson's
disease have already received the therapy. 'The shakes of Parkinson's disease
are caused by abnormally low levels of the brain chemical, dopamine,' says Prof
Latchman.

    'The disease is also associated with abnormally high rates of cell
degeneration. In trials on animals, researchers used the herpes virus to deliver
genes that make dopamine and prevent cell death; it worked.

    Parkinsonian shaking in the animals was markedly reduced.'

    RESEARCH using herpes therapies in America has yielded equally remarkable
results. At the University of Alabama where brain tumour patients have just had
herpes injections to treat their cancer, the therapy has been found to be almost
100 pc effective.

    'We still need to find out how effective the treatment is on patients, but
in laboratory tests the results were very promising,' says Dr Jeffrey Ostrove,
researcher at Neurovir Inc, the developers.

    'Our genetically engineered herpes virus replicates itself by around 100
times in each cell in only a few hours.

    These "baby" viruses then spread rapidly into surrounding tissues and
replicate once again.' They have been programmed in a way that means they infect
and kill only cancer cells, leaving healthy tissue unharmed. Once the virus has
done its job, it goes into the nerve cells where it becomes dormant.

    'So far, in lab tests, we have found that our virus is 100 pc effective at
killing tumour cells. In animals it has reduced and eliminated brain tumours
without producing any herpes symptoms later on,' says Dr Ostrove.

    Ultimately he hopes the technique could also help treat other cancers like
those of the head and neck.

    Neurovir are also looking at ways of using genetically engineered herpes
viruses to treat eye diseases and to lower cholesterol levels in the blood

    'We believe we can use herpes as a "carrier" for genetic medicines to treat
eye diseases like macular degeneration,' says Dr Ostrove. 'In cardiovascular
disease we hope to use herpes to deliver proteins like lipoprotein lipase which
lowers cholesterol levels.' Marian Nicholson of the Herpes Virus Association
finds the research fascinating. 'It's great to think that a disease which has so
much negative stigma attached to it could be used to treat cancer and other
diseases,' she says.

    'If herpes is altered for therapeutic use, people may begin to understand it
better and be more sympathetic to those who suffer from its symptoms.'

    Meanwhile, herpes is not the only disease being suggested as a possible
lifesaver.

    Doctors may soon be giving

    you a whole range of infectious bacteria and viruses instead of conventional
medicine. Here are the latest discoveries:

    BUBONIC PLAGUE

    SCIENTISTS at the University of Bristol hope to use a protein from the
bubonic plague to treat arthritis. They have been testing derivatives of the
substance on mice with arthritis to find if it successfully damps down
inflammation.

    Experiments to evaluate its effects on irritable bowel syndrome are also
under way at St Bartholomew's in London.

    CANARY POX

    A VIRUS which ruffles the feathers of canaries, bringing them out in
unsightly spots, is being used in a vaccine to combat Aids at the University of
Illinois, Chicago.

    COLD VIRUS

    ADENOVIRUS, an infection which commonly causes respiratory infections, is
being used to 'infect' the salivary glands with medicinal genes.

    Researchers at America's National Institute of Dental Research near
Washington hope that by 'infecting' diabetics with genes for insulin or giving
clotting factor genes to haemophiliacs they will no longer need daily
injections.

    Researchers also hope to use adenovirus to 'infect' sufferers with a gene
that corrects cystic fibrosis.


GRAPHIC: TO THE POINT: VIRUSES CAN BE USED TO CURE DISEASE

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1998


                              143 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                  May 26, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 40

LENGTH: 1068 words

HEADLINE: Can herpes kill a host of illnesses?

BYLINE: Anastasia Stephens

BODY:


    HERPES, the virus that causes painful sores on the skin, could become one of
our most powerful medicines. It does sound astonishing, but scientists around
the world hope to use injections of the virus to kill cancer, reduce cholesterol
levels and even cure disorders like Parkinson's disease.

    The first clinical trial using a herpes therapy has already begun. Last
month at the University of Alabama in America, three people with untreatable
brain tumours were given injections of G207, a herpes simplex virus which has
been genetically altered to kill cancer cells.

    Researchers hope the virus will divide rapidly and spread through all the
tumour cells, prompting them to 'commit suicide' as they go.

    A harmless form of the herpes has also been used in animals to deliver
genetic medicine that treats the symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

    Scientists have been looking for ways of using viruses to help fight other
diseases for decades. Because viruses have spent millions of years finding ways
of infecting our cells, they can get through the protective cell membrane far
more efficiently and effectively than most drugs.

    Researchers reasoned that if they could alter viruses to prevent them
causing harmful symptoms, they could use them to deliver medicine.

    That is precisely what they have done to the herpes virus - they have
altered it genetically so that it doesn't produce sores. Now they hope to use it
in several ways to treat a range of diseases.

    Apart from delivering genetic medicine to cancer cells, scientists are also
studying the propensity of herpes to attack nerve cells, and hope to use it to
deliver genes which will rectify diseases like Alzheimer's or Parkinson's, both
caused by nerve malfunctions.

    VIRUSES need to get inside cells to survive, so providing you make them
harmless, they are an ideal way of delivering medicinal genes,' explains
Professor David Latchman, who specialises in herpes viruses and gene therapy at
University College Medical School in London.

    Herpes, he says, has unique potential because it is large and relatively
harmless. 'Herpes is much larger than many other viruses, so you can put a
cocktail of medicinal genes inside it,' he says.

    'The other advantage is that the virus does not cause serious complications

    and we have found ways of preventing any harmful symptoms.

    'The herpes virus migrates towards nerve cells around the body and in the
brain where it sits without causing any harmful symptoms,' says Prof Latch-man.
'This makes it ideal for delivering genetic medicines for neurological
conditions like Parkinson's disease.' Animals with the equivalent of Parkinson's
disease have already received the therapy. 'The shakes of Parkinson's disease
are caused by abnormally low levels of the brain chemical, dopamine,' says Prof
Latchman.

    'The disease is also associated with abnormally high rates of cell
degeneration. In trials on animals, researchers used the herpes virus to deliver
genes that make dopamine and prevent cell death; it worked.

    Parkinsonian shaking in the animals was markedly reduced.'

    RESEARCH using herpes therapies in America has yielded equally remarkable
results. At the University of Alabama where brain tumour patients have just had
herpes injections to treat their cancer, the therapy has been found to be almost
100 pc effective.

    'We still need to find out how effective the treatment is on patients, but
in laboratory tests the results were very promising,' says Dr Jeffrey Ostrove,
researcher at Neurovir Inc, the developers.

    'Our genetically engineered herpes virus replicates itself by around 100
times in each cell in only a few hours.

    These "baby" viruses then spread rapidly into surrounding tissues and
replicate once again.' They have been programmed in a way that means they infect
and kill only cancer cells, leaving healthy tissue unharmed. Once the virus has
done its job, it goes into the nerve cells where it becomes dormant.

    'So far, in lab tests, we have found that our virus is 100 pc effective at
killing tumour cells. In animals it has reduced and eliminated brain tumours
without producing any herpes symptoms later on,' says Dr Ostrove.

    Ultimately he hopes the technique could also help treat other cancers like
those of the head and neck.

    Neurovir are also looking at ways of using genetically engineered herpes
viruses to treat eye diseases and to lower cholesterol levels in the blood

    'We believe we can use herpes as a "carrier" for genetic medicines to treat
eye diseases like macular degeneration,' says Dr Ostrove. 'In cardiovascular
disease we hope to use herpes to deliver proteins like lipoprotein lipase which
lowers cholesterol levels.' Marian Nicholson of the Herpes Virus Association
finds the research fascinating. 'It's great to think that a disease which has so
much negative stigma attached to it could be used to treat cancer and other
diseases,' she says.

    'If herpes is altered for therapeutic use, people may begin to understand it
better and be more sympathetic to those who suffer from its symptoms.'

    Meanwhile, herpes is not the only disease being suggested as a possible
lifesaver.

    Doctors may soon be giving

    you a whole range of infectious bacteria and viruses instead of conventional
medicine. Here are the latest discoveries:

    BUBONIC PLAGUE

    SCIENTISTS at the University of Bristol hope to use a protein from the
bubonic plague to treat arthritis. They have been testing derivatives of the
substance on mice with arthritis to find if it successfully damps down
inflammation.

    Experiments to evaluate its effects on irritable bowel syndrome are also
under way at St Bartholomew's in London.

    CANARY POX

    A VIRUS which ruffles the feathers of canaries, bringing them out in
unsightly spots, is being used in a vaccine to combat Aids at the University of
Illinois, Chicago.

    COLD VIRUS

    ADENOVIRUS, an infection which commonly causes respiratory infections, is
being used to 'infect' the salivary glands with medicinal genes.

    Researchers at America's National Institute of Dental Research near
Washington hope that by 'infecting' diabetics with genes for insulin or giving
clotting factor genes to haemophiliacs they will no longer need daily
injections.

    Researchers also hope to use adenovirus to 'infect' sufferers with a gene
that corrects cystic fibrosis.


GRAPHIC: TO THE POINT: VIRUSES CAN BE USED TO CURE DISEASE

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1998


                              147 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 April 26, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1631 words

HEADLINE: THE CLUES TO A LONGER LIFE MAY LIE IN THE HUMBLE FRUIT FLY. THAT'S IF
BRITISH SCIENTIST MICHAEL ROSE IS RIGHT. TEXAN OIL BARON MILLER QUARLES, 83,
THINKS THAT THE MILLIONS HE'S SUNK INTO GENETICS WILL BUY HIM MORE TIME.
BRITAIN'S OLDEST MAN,DAVID HENDERSON, KNOWS HIS 108 YEARS ARE DOWN TO PORRIDGE.
SO WHAT IS THE ILLUSIVE SECRET OF ETERNAL YOUTH;
N&D

BYLINE: Simon Garfield

BODY:



    The last time anyone looked, Miller Quarles was still alive. At 83, he is
very far from being the oldest man in the world - some 35 years away, in fact -
but he seriously believes he has a chance. His status as a Texan billionaire
stands him in good stead. He has pumped some of his fortune made as an oil
industry geologist into the Geron Corporation, a company he has supported since
it began in 1992. Geron, based near San Francisco, is in the anti-ageing
business, which is potentially the biggest business in the world. When it
launched six years ago, it was largely dismissed as a small gathering of
obsessive cranks, but today its findings feature in leading science journals and
create headlines throughout the world. Remarkably, it seems that Geron may
indeed enable us to live longer, healthier lives.

    The odds are that Miller Quarles will still die some time soon:
statistically, he can expect six-and-a-half more years. 'Time is running out,'
he agrees. 'But I see no reason to die. I don't want to. I'm basically healthy,
but I've been condemned to death by this

    terrible disease that is old age.'

    His has been a lone crusade, he says, because few people have recognised

    getting old as an illness. Now more people are convinced, like him, that a
'cure' cannot be far off: 'I've got the cells to put me back to where I was at
45,' he says, adding, 'if only they can be made to divide in time.'

    At the Geron Corporation, this conviction, together with his money and canny
eye for marketing, have inspired some brilliant scientists: its advisory board
includes James Watson, the Nobel prizewinner who, with Francis Crick, unravelled

    the mysteries of DNA. Earlier this year, researchers arrived at what looked
like a critical milestone in extending the lifespan of normal human cells.

    Cells can divide

    only a finite number of times, and when

    they can no longer do so, our organs cease

    to function.

    The 'clock' that defines how long cells last is to be found at the ends of
the DNA molecule, an area called the telomere. Telomeres are progressively lost
with each cell division. They shorten like a burning fuse, and, at a critical
point, the genetic program of cell ageing is triggered.

    Scientists had known for more than a decade that an enzyme called telomerase
prevented this process and apparently enabled cells to divide an infinite number
of times, thus achieving 'immortality'. But only in January did Geron's work
with the University of Texas show for the first time that the introduction of
telomerase into mortal human cells successfully extended a cell's lifespan, at
least in the laboratory.

    Amid the excitement, some suggested that such genetic exploitation would
actually reverse the ageing process and let us all drink from the fountain of
eternal youth. That's not quite true: cell life is only one factor in ensuring a
long life, and it is unlikely that these discoveries will coalesce quickly
enough to enable most people past middle-age to prolong their life by a weekend.
But the breakthrough does mean that many diseases of old age - skin ailments,
arthritis, eye disorders - as well as the effects of chemotherapy and immune
system breakdowns, might soon be ameliorated, if not eliminated. The telomerase
research also holds crucial information in future gene therapy and for the
possible treatment of unstoppably dividing cancer cells.

    Miller Quarles is significantly part of a trend. The business and science of
ageing is booming, and our knowledge has vastly increased in the past three
years, thanks largely to advances in genetic manipulation. Dolly the sheep
became the most famous

    animal in the world primarily because

    her manufacture raised the possibility of extending one original life by
continuous replication. And recently, worms and fruit flies have also played a
big part in our search for longevity. Biologists at Massachusetts General
Hospital have found that a gene capable of making a worm live longer is closely
related to a human gene involved in regulating metabolism.

    The type of worm they studied makes a choice early in its life whether to
live actively for a few weeks or slothfully for up to eight times longer, a
decision which is triggered by the defectiveness of a particular gene. This
gene's closest human counterpart plays a role in determining how rapidly we burn
up energy, and its malfunction causes a common form of diabetes. As well as
regulating our insulin supplies, this discovery may also enable us to control
how quickly we burn up glucose in the bloodstream, another key element of
ageing.

    At the University of California, British geneticist Dr Michael Rose keeps up
to a million fruit flies,

    the product of his successful attempts to increase their lifespan over many
generations from about 60 to 120 days. His 20-year experiment is painstaking but
theoretically straightforward - he simply keeps breeding those flies that live
the longest, and thus emerges with flies holding the strongest genes for
longevity.

    Rose is convinced that his work, if

    replicated in thousands of mice, may have direct implications on human
ageing. He believes that eventually it will result in companies 'that turn out
many products for a considerable amount of money, so that people are going to
have to spend a very significant fraction of their disposable income every year
on products that will keep them young and robust'.

    Many less sophisticated anti-ageing products are already on the market, some
based on science, most on hokum. The most ambitious claims are made for
treatment with the hormones DHEA, melatonin and testosterone, and the quest for
a longer life through hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has become as popular as
facelifts in wealthier parts of the United States. Most scientists dismiss such
treatments as fads lacking proper research (high doses of melatonin, also used
frequently to combat jet lag, have been found to induce tumours in mice).

    Other researchers hold out more hope for anti-wrinkle skin creams and costly

    unctions, particularly those made organically with vitamins and properties
retaining large concentrates of water and oxygen - you'll still die, but at
least you'll have a great-looking neck. Significantly, some work by cosmetic
companies overlaps with companies researching into treatments for psoriasis and
the development of artificial skin.

    But inevitably with a subject of this

    magnitude, good science has often taken a back seat to anecdote and folk
tales: fish is supposed to boost brain cells; champagne is good for the heart;
regular meals of ox tongue add years to your life; and porridge could enable you
to live as long as Britain's oldest man, Scots farmer David Henderson, who is
108. Science has also shaded into fantasy with the practice of cryonics, the
idea of American physicist Robert Ettinger, where wealthy people ask to be
frozen when they die in the hope of living again in the future. This means being
embalmed at -196C in a vat of liquid nitrogen.

    The general scepticism of biologists, that it's born of a Californian
obsession with youth and health, has not deterred several hundred Americans and
a score of Britons signing up with

    Alcor, the largest of America's half-dozen 'life extension' companies.

    The tantalising prospect of immortality has fuelled the many studies of
centenarians, who are now the fastest-growing segment in the western population.
Interviewing them to discover their secret has become an increasingly popular
sport. It appears that temperament and an ability to accept life's setbacks play
as important a role as any diet.

    After 10 years of research, scientists from the Gerontology Center at the
University of Georgia recently completed the biggest-ever study of people aged
100-plus (157 men and women), and found that the key elements to a long life,
besides genetic disposition and good health care, may be optimism, compassion, a
sense of humour, belief in God, indifference toward death, stubbornness,
aggressiveness, suspiciousness and satisfaction with life.

    Those interviewed appeared not to be ambitious, sarcastic, cynical or prone
to despair. They also found that most of their subjects ate bacon, butter and
milk.

    According to Harriet Strimpel, a British-born scientist who works for a
leading bio-technology law firm in Boston, the most immediately exciting work in
the field of longevity lies with 'spare parts' - artificially engineered organs
and fibres that may mean we will soon think nothing of replacing a damaged
liver. There will probably also be dramatic advances in our genetic treatment of
brain disorders such as Alzheimer's, which will improve quality of life as well
as length.

    Last month, Strimpel attended a conference in Oxford at which medical
researchers met sociologists and philosophy dons to discuss the moral, ethical
and social implications of the recent breakthroughs in ageing science and
genetic engineering. There were many daunting questions: how will our fragile
social welfare systems cope if we all live to 120? Will scientific advances
really bring eternal youth, or will cell replication simply confine us to more
years in retirement homes - should our pension funds last that long? And then
they considered at what stage a reconstituted being becomes alien to the person
they were at birth.

    'Most old people want to die,' Strimpel observes, because their world has
run out of opportunities. But she also notes that in much of western society,
philosophy takes a back seat to market forces. Miller Quarles may believe he has
seen the future, and he has the wallet to fund it. But are the rest of us really
grown up enough to handle the prospect of immortality?


GRAPHIC: Y

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1998


                              148 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                 April 26, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1630 words

HEADLINE: THE CLUES TO A LONGER LIFE MAY LIE IN THE HUMBLE FRUIT FLY. THAT'S IF
BRITISH SCIENTIST MICHAEL ROSE IS RIGHT. TEXAN OIL BARON MILLER QUARLES, 83,
THINKS THAT THE MILLIONS HE'S SUNK INTO GENETICS WILL BUY HIM MORE TIME.
BRITAIN'S OLDEST MAN,DAVID HENDERSON, KNOWS HIS 108 YEARS ARE DOWN TO PORRIDGE.
SO WHAT IS THE ILLUSIVE SECRET OF ETERNAL YOUTH;
N&D

BYLINE: Simon Garfield

BODY:



    The last time anyone looked, Miller Quarles was still alive. At 83, he is
very far from being the oldest man in the world - some 35 years away, in fact -
but he seriously believes he has a chance. His status as a Texan billionaire
stands him in good stead. He has pumped some of his fortune made as an oil
industry geologist into the Geron Corporation, a company he has supported since
it began in 1992. Geron, based near San Francisco, is in the anti-ageing
business, which is potentially the biggest business in the world. When it
launched six years ago, it was largely dismissed as a small gathering of
obsessive cranks, but today its findings feature in leading science journals and
create headlines throughout the world. Remarkably, it seems that Geron may
indeed enable us to live longer, healthier lives.

    The odds are that Miller Quarles will still die some time soon:
statistically, he can expect six-and-a-half more years. 'Time is running out,'
he agrees. 'But I see no reason to die. I don't want to. I'm basically healthy,
but I've been condemned to death by this

    terrible disease that is old age.'

    His has been a lone crusade, he says, because few people have recognised

    getting old as an illness. Now more people are convinced, like him, that a
'cure' cannot be far off: 'I've got the cells to put me back to where I was at
45,' he says, adding, 'if only they can be made to divide in time.'

    At the Geron Corporation, this conviction, together with his money and canny
eye for marketing, have inspired some brilliant scientists: its advisory board
includes James Watson, the Nobel prizewinner who, with Francis Crick, unravelled

    the mysteries of DNA. Earlier this year, researchers arrived at what looked
like a critical milestone in extending the lifespan of normal human cells.

    Cells can divide

    only a finite number of times, and when

    they can no longer do so, our organs cease

    to function.

    The 'clock' that defines how long cells last is to be found at the ends of
the DNA molecule, an area called the telomere. Telomeres are progressively lost
with each cell division. They shorten like a burning fuse, and, at a critical
point, the genetic program of cell ageing is triggered.

    Scientists had known for more than a decade that an enzyme called telomerase
prevented this process and apparently enabled cells to divide an infinite number
of times, thus achieving 'immortality'. But only in January did Geron's work
with the University of Texas show for the first time that the introduction of
telomerase into mortal human cells successfully extended a cell's lifespan, at
least in the laboratory.

    Amid the excitement, some suggested that such genetic exploitation would
actually reverse the ageing process and let us all drink from the fountain of
eternal youth. That's not quite true: cell life is only one factor in ensuring a
long life, and it is unlikely that these discoveries will coalesce quickly
enough to enable most people past middle-age to prolong their life by a weekend.
But the breakthrough does mean that many diseases of old age - skin ailments,
arthritis, eye disorders - as well as the effects of chemotherapy and immune
system breakdowns, might soon be ameliorated, if not eliminated. The telomerase
research also holds crucial information in future gene therapy and for the
possible treatment of unstoppably dividing cancer cells.

    Miller Quarles is significantly part of a trend. The business and science of
ageing is booming, and our knowledge has vastly increased in the past three
years, thanks largely to advances in genetic manipulation. Dolly the sheep
became the most famous

    animal in the world primarily because

    her manufacture raised the possibility of extending one original life by
continuous replication. And recently, worms and fruit flies have also played a
big part in our search for longevity. Biologists at Massachusetts General
Hospital have found that a gene capable of making a worm live longer is closely
related to a human gene involved in regulating metabolism.

    The type of worm they studied makes a choice early in its life whether to
live actively for a few weeks or slothfully for up to eight times longer, a
decision which is triggered by the defectiveness of a particular gene. This
gene's closest human counterpart plays a role in determining how rapidly we burn
up energy, and its malfunction causes a common form of diabetes. As well as
regulating our insulin supplies, this discovery may also enable us to control
how quickly we burn up glucose in the bloodstream, another key element of
ageing.

    At the University of California, British geneticist Dr Michael Rose keeps up
to a million fruit flies,

    the product of his successful attempts to increase their lifespan over many
generations from about 60 to 120 days. His 20-year experiment is painstaking but
theoretically straightforward - he simply keeps breeding those flies that live
the longest, and thus emerges with flies holding the strongest genes for
longevity.

    Rose is convinced that his work, if

    replicated in thousands of mice, may have direct implications on human
ageing. He believes that eventually it will result in companies 'that turn out
many products for a considerable amount of money, so that people are going to
have to spend a very significant fraction of their disposable income every year
on products that will keep them young and robust'.

    Many less sophisticated anti-ageing products are already on the market, some
based on science, most on hokum. The most ambitious claims are made for
treatment with the hormones DHEA, melatonin and testosterone, and the quest for
a longer life through hormone replacement therapy (HRT) has become as popular as
facelifts in wealthier parts of the United States. Most scientists dismiss such
treatments as fads lacking proper research (high doses of melatonin, also used
frequently to combat jet lag, have been found to induce tumours in mice).

    Other researchers hold out more hope for anti-wrinkle skin creams and costly

    unctions, particularly those made organically with vitamins and properties
retaining large concentrates of water and oxygen - you'll still die, but at
least you'll have a great-looking neck. Significantly, some work by cosmetic
companies overlaps with companies researching into treatments for psoriasis and
the development of artificial skin.

    But inevitably with a subject of this

    magnitude, good science has often taken a back seat to anecdote and folk
tales: fish is supposed to boost brain cells; champagne is good for the heart;
regular meals of ox tongue add years to your life; and porridge could enable you
to live as long as Britain's oldest man, Scots farmer David Henderson, who is
108. Science has also shaded into fantasy with the practice of cryonics, the
idea of American physicist Robert Ettinger, where wealthy people ask to be
frozen when they die in the hope of living again in the future. This means being
embalmed at -196C in a vat of liquid nitrogen.

    The general scepticism of biologists, that it's born of a Californian
obsession with youth and health, has not deterred several hundred Americans and
a score of Britons signing up with

    Alcor, the largest of America's half-dozen 'life extension' companies.

    The tantalising prospect of immortality has fuelled the many studies of
centenarians, who are now the fastest-growing segment in the western population.
Interviewing them to discover their secret has become an increasingly popular
sport. It appears that temperament and an ability to accept life's setbacks play
as important a role as any diet.

    After 10 years of research, scientists from the Gerontology Center at the
University of Georgia recently completed the biggest-ever study of people aged
100-plus (157 men and women), and found that the key elements to a long life,
besides genetic disposition and good health care, may be optimism, compassion, a
sense of humour, belief in God, indifference toward death, stubbornness,
aggressiveness, suspiciousness and satisfaction with life.

    Those interviewed appeared not to be ambitious, sarcastic, cynical or prone
to despair. They also found that most of their subjects ate bacon, butter and
milk.

    According to Harriet Strimpel, a British-born scientist who works for a
leading bio-technology law firm in Boston, the most immediately exciting work in
the field of longevity lies with 'spare parts' - artificially engineered organs
and fibres that may mean we will soon think nothing of replacing a damaged
liver. There will probably also be dramatic advances in our genetic treatment of
brain disorders such as Alzheimer's, which will improve quality of life as well
as length.

    Last month, Strimpel attended a conference in Oxford at which medical
researchers met sociologists and philosophy dons to discuss the moral, ethical
and social implications of the recent breakthroughs in ageing science and
genetic engineering. There were many daunting questions: how will our fragile
social welfare systems cope if we all live to 120? Will scientific advances
really bring eternal youth, or will cell replication simply confine us to more
years in retirement homes - should our pension funds last that long? And then
they considered at what stage a reconstituted being becomes alien to the person
they were at birth.

    'Most old people want to die,' Strimpel observes, because their world has
run out of opportunities. But she also notes that in much of western society,
philosophy takes a back seat to market forces. Miller Quarles may believe he has
seen the future, and he has the wallet to fund it. But are the rest of us really
grown up enough to handle the prospect of immortality?


GRAPHIC: Y

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1998


                              150 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 21, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1940 words

HEADLINE: breast cancer;I want to know what causes it;
why do only half survive this awful disease?

BYLINE: Natalie Clarke

BODY:


    Following the shockingly sudden death of Linda McCartney, NATALIE CLARKE
examines the killer that blights one in twelve British women THE sudden death of
Linda McCartney after her apparent recovery from breast cancer has once again
highlighted the insidious nature of the disease and has left many wondering why
the chances of survival are still so poor.

    The UK has one of the highest incidences of breast cancer in the world, with
one in 12 women developing it in their lifetime.

    And what is particularly worrying is the sharp increase in cases in recent
years.

    From 1979 to 1992, the incidence of breast cancer among women in England
rose steadily from 73 per 100,000 to 102 per 100,000 - a rise of some 40 pc.

    Although treatments have become more sophisticated, the mortality rate has
fallen only marginally - from 15,073 in 1985 to 14,114 in 1995.

    Every year sees 34,500 new cases of breast cancer reported, and the deaths
of 14,000 women who fail to survive its terrible grasp.

    Thirty-eight per cent of women die within five years of being diagnosed with
breast cancer. The remaining 62 pc may live for five years or longer.

    There are no figures to indicate exactly how much longer these women
survive, but cancer experts say that around half of women who contract breast
cancer can survive for more than ten years.

    The reality is that if detected at the early stages, breast cancer can be
successfully treated by lumpectomy or mastectomy. So why do so many women die
from the disease?

    The cancer becomes incurable if the cells have spread, via the lymphatic
system and blood stream, to vital organs such as the brain, lungs and - in the
case of Linda McCartney - the liver.

    DR MARGARET Spittle, a consultant clinical oncologist at London's Middlesex
Hospital, says prevention rather than cure is the key to beating cancer.

    'All our efforts are aimed at prevention rather than cure,' she says.

    'Even if the cancer appears to be isolated in the breast, it is common to
give the patient six courses of a fairly well-tolerated chemotherapy just in
case a stray cell has entered another part of the body.' Dr Spittle explained
that the reason so many people who appear to have made a complete recovery
suddenly deteriorate rapidly is that it can be very difficult to detect the
spread of cancer until it is too late.

    'Unfortunately, we are unable to detect cancerous cells in scans unless they
are at least 2mm in size,' she says.

    'Advances are being made in the field of detection, but it remains a
problem.' Dr Spittle said the increase in the incidence of breast cancer is due
largely to the fact that women live longer than they used to.

    Breast cancer strikes women mainly over the age of 60, and the highest
number of deaths are in the 70-84-year-old age

    group. It remains rare in young women.

    Worryingly for career women who delay having children until they are in
their 30, there is also a link between breast cancer and having a first child in
later life.

    'Women who have their first child over the age of 28 have a higher risk of
developing breast cancer,' says Dr Spittle. 'We don't know why that is, but it
is an established fact.' Linda McCartney was treated with an experimental new
treatment called high-dose chemotherapy. This involves giving large doses of
drugs to wipe out all the cancer cells from the patient's body, then replacing
the damaged bone marrow with a bone marrow transplant.

    STEM cells are usually removed before treatment, cultured and then put back
in the body after treatment.

    Professor Gordon McVie, director of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'The
data from the U.S. has shown that some people look to have done terribly well
with this treatment, but clinical trials have not yet shown prolonged survival.'
Recent trials in America have shown that the drug Tamoxifen can prevent the
disease. A six-year study among 13,000 women over 35 at high risk from breast
cancer found that Tamoxifen cut the expected rate of disease from one in 130 to
one in 236 - a reduction of about 45 pc.

    Other treatments under trial include drugs which inhibit the blood supply to
tumours (angio-genesis) with the aim of preventing tumour growth, and gene
therapy for cancer which has spread to the skin.

    CANCER is always fatal once it attacks the liver.

    Cells multiply rapidly and the liver - a vital organ is unable to function.
The liver is able to cope with only the smallest doses of chemotherapy, which
are not sufficient to curb the disease.

    Dr Margaret Spittle explains: 'We need the enzymes of the liver to deal with
the toxic effects of chemotherapy, and so consequently if the liver is not
functioning properly it isn't possible to treat the person with chemotherapy.

    'We need our liver, and if it isn't working the effects are fatal. No one
dies of a lump on the chest wall, but if the cancer passes through the
bloodstream to one of the vital organs it is incurable.' Professor Gordon McVie,
director of the Cancer Research Campaign, says there is not a single case of
anyone being cured once breast cancer has spread to the liver, and that most
patients die within a year.

    I want to know what causes it

    Actress Liza Goddard was diagnosed with breast cancer a year ago and is in
remission after a lumpectomy and a course of radiotherapy.

    Here, Miss Goddard, 48, tells her story.

    I'VE had a number of cysts over the years and I thought this was just
another one.

    I went to the doctor and was told again it was an infected cyst. It couldn't
be drained like the others and would have to be removed.

    It was a cyst, but underneath it was the cancer. I'm a member of BUPA so the
very next day I was able to go into hospital

    and have the breast cancer tissue removed. Then I had to have 25 courses of
radiotherapy.

    Throughout the whole thing tried to maintain a positive attitude. I don't
think it does any good to dwell on these things. went on a special diet and read
up all about breast cancer. That made me feel much better about it.

    At first, I thought about having cancer all the time, but now don't think
about it at all. I did have a scare at the New Year, though.

    I had a mammogram and the doctors thought they saw something, so I had
another mammogram and an ultrasound, and it turned out to be nothing, which was
a great relief.

    Now I am very careful about what I eat. When I was told I had cancer I
contacted the Bristol Cancer Help Centre and was sent a guide about what I
should and shouldn't eat, which I follow rigidly.

    I gave up meat, caffeine, sugar, dairy products, preservatives and
margarines containing hydrogenated fats. I still don't eat any of these things
and take plenty of vitamins.

    There is no conclusive proof that a good diet helps prevent cancer, but I'm
sure all those things are bad for the body.

    I think what people really want to know is what causes cancer.

    When I was having treatment, the doctors were concerned with making me
better and they didn't tell me why I had it.

    All sorts of things go through my mind as to why I contracted it.

    Twenty-five years ago I was working on a play and had particularly bad bash
on my wrist, and I even wonder if that caused it.

    That's why I support the charity Breakthrough. It's doing lots of good work
looking into the causes of cancer.

    FORTUNATE WOMEN WHO HAVE SURVIVED

    SHEILA HANCOCK, 64, was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1987. A malignant
lump was removed and she had six weeks of radiotherapy.

    The actress later went on a week's course at the Bristol Cancer Centre and
became a vegetarian. She has been given a clean bill of health.

    CATHERINE WALKER, the Princess of Wales's favoured designer, discovered a
pain and was diagnosed with cancer in 1995. Following an operation and
radiotherapy, it is in remission.

    GWEN HUMBLE, wife of actor Ian McShane, was diagnosed in 1991. She had
surgery in LA and underwent chemotherapy in London. Three years ago, she was
given the all-clear.

    DUSTY SPRINGFIELD, 58, was given the all-clear by doctors in 1994 after a
lump was removed from her breast. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy followed.

    In February of this year a second lump was found.

    The singer is undergoing more chemotherapy.

    A former model, DIANA MORAN was diagnosed in 1988 and had a double
mastectomy. Her book, A More Difficult Exercise, proved an inspiration to
thousands of women. She is now healthy.

    WENDY RICHARD, 51, was first diagnosed in February 1996.

    She had surgery to remove the lump and six days later was back filming
EastEnders. She had radiotherapy, but then discovered a second lump in her other
breast. A mammogram revealed it was a cyst and it soon disappeared.

    . AND THOSE WHO DIDN'T

    Tragic: Journalist Marjorie Proops died in 1996, writer Jean Rook in 1991
and author Deirdre Redgrave in 1997

    TELEVISION presenter Anna Walker, 33, was studying for her A-levels when her
mother, Elizabeth, a music teacher and violinist with the BBC Orchestra, died of
breast cancer at the age of 43. Anna, who has presented Tomorrow's World, Wish
You Were Here . .?, and now hosts Walker's World on Sky, is married and a
staunch supporter of the breast cancer charity, Breakthrough. Here she tells her
story . . .

    THE day my mother discovered she had a lump in her breast, I was just 13.
The cancer was very advanced and she had to go into hospital to have a
mastectomy, followed by long courses of chemotherapy.

    I was so young at the time I don't think I really understood what was
happening, neither did my brother Bruce or older sister Sarah.

    My mother was a very strong, positive person and she was determined that her
illness would not dominate our lives.

    We thought the cancer had gone into remission but it returned five years
later to her lymphatic system. I was devastated. I was 18 and, being older and
wiser, I understood the implications and realised she was not going to get
better.

    My mother's nickname was Wink because of the twinkle she had in her big,
brown eyes. To watch her decline so rapidly when the cancer returned was
horrible.

    When she became bedridden, I spent as much time with her as I could. I used
to play cards on her bed and tell her what I had been doing at school. I even
helped her with her wig and creams.

    That is how she wanted it - she didn't want the cancer to disrupt our lives
and we just wanted to help her as much as we could.

    It was devastating when she died, on Christmas Eve, aged just 43. The old
British habit of not talking about your feelings made it harder. I coped by
throwing myself into study and, instead of taking a year off after A-levels, I
went straight to Bristol University.

    I thought about studying medicine - there was a vague feeling in my mind
that maybe I could find a cure for cancer.

    But not a day goes by when I don't think about my mother, or miss her. She
is irreplaceable.

    There are so many occasions when I have wanted to talk to her.

    I do worry about breast cancer.

    My main priority is to limit the possibility of getting the illness by
leading as healthy a lifestyle as possible. I go to the gym, eat fruit and
vegetables and don't smoke.

    But I don't take it to extremes.

    I think about having a test to see if I am carrying the cancer gene, but I
would rather not know.

    What good would it do to know I am carrying it? If I do carry the gene it
does not necessarily mean I will develop cancer.

    In some respects, the fear of breast cancer drives me on each day. It makes
me concentrate on making the most of my life.


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1998


                              151 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 21, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1940 words

HEADLINE: breast cancer;I want to know what causes it;
why do only half survive this awful disease?

BYLINE: Natalie Clarke

BODY:


    Following the shockingly sudden death of Linda McCartney, NATALIE CLARKE
examines the killer that blights one in twelve British women THE sudden death of
Linda McCartney after her apparent recovery from breast cancer has once again
highlighted the insidious nature of the disease and has left many wondering why
the chances of survival are still so poor.

    The UK has one of the highest incidences of breast cancer in the world, with
one in 12 women developing it in their lifetime.

    And what is particularly worrying is the sharp increase in cases in recent
years.

    From 1979 to 1992, the incidence of breast cancer among women in England
rose steadily from 73 per 100,000 to 102 per 100,000 - a rise of some 40 pc.

    Although treatments have become more sophisticated, the mortality rate has
fallen only marginally - from 15,073 in 1985 to 14,114 in 1995.

    Every year sees 34,500 new cases of breast cancer reported, and the deaths
of 14,000 women who fail to survive its terrible grasp.

    Thirty-eight per cent of women die within five years of being diagnosed with
breast cancer. The remaining 62 pc may live for five years or longer.

    There are no figures to indicate exactly how much longer these women
survive, but cancer experts say that around half of women who contract breast
cancer can survive for more than ten years.

    The reality is that if detected at the early stages, breast cancer can be
successfully treated by lumpectomy or mastectomy. So why do so many women die
from the disease?

    The cancer becomes incurable if the cells have spread, via the lymphatic
system and blood stream, to vital organs such as the brain, lungs and - in the
case of Linda McCartney - the liver.

    DR MARGARET Spittle, a consultant clinical oncologist at London's Middlesex
Hospital, says prevention rather than cure is the key to beating cancer.

    'All our efforts are aimed at prevention rather than cure,' she says.

    'Even if the cancer appears to be isolated in the breast, it is common to
give the patient six courses of a fairly well-tolerated chemotherapy just in
case a stray cell has entered another part of the body.' Dr Spittle explained
that the reason so many people who appear to have made a complete recovery
suddenly deteriorate rapidly is that it can be very difficult to detect the
spread of cancer until it is too late.

    'Unfortunately, we are unable to detect cancerous cells in scans unless they
are at least 2mm in size,' she says.

    'Advances are being made in the field of detection, but it remains a
problem.' Dr Spittle said the increase in the incidence of breast cancer is due
largely to the fact that women live longer than they used to.

    Breast cancer strikes women mainly over the age of 60, and the highest
number of deaths are in the 70-84-year-old age

    group. It remains rare in young women.

    Worryingly for career women who delay having children until they are in
their 30, there is also a link between breast cancer and having a first child in
later life.

    'Women who have their first child over the age of 28 have a higher risk of
developing breast cancer,' says Dr Spittle. 'We don't know why that is, but it
is an established fact.' Linda McCartney was treated with an experimental new
treatment called high-dose chemotherapy. This involves giving large doses of
drugs to wipe out all the cancer cells from the patient's body, then replacing
the damaged bone marrow with a bone marrow transplant.

    STEM cells are usually removed before treatment, cultured and then put back
in the body after treatment.

    Professor Gordon McVie, director of the Cancer Research Campaign, said: 'The
data from the U.S. has shown that some people look to have done terribly well
with this treatment, but clinical trials have not yet shown prolonged survival.'
Recent trials in America have shown that the drug Tamoxifen can prevent the
disease. A six-year study among 13,000 women over 35 at high risk from breast
cancer found that Tamoxifen cut the expected rate of disease from one in 130 to
one in 236 - a reduction of about 45 pc.

    Other treatments under trial include drugs which inhibit the blood supply to
tumours (angio-genesis) with the aim of preventing tumour growth, and gene
therapy for cancer which has spread to the skin.

    CANCER is always fatal once it attacks the liver.

    Cells multiply rapidly and the liver - a vital organ is unable to function.
The liver is able to cope with only the smallest doses of chemotherapy, which
are not sufficient to curb the disease.

    Dr Margaret Spittle explains: 'We need the enzymes of the liver to deal with
the toxic effects of chemotherapy, and so consequently if the liver is not
functioning properly it isn't possible to treat the person with chemotherapy.

    'We need our liver, and if it isn't working the effects are fatal. No one
dies of a lump on the chest wall, but if the cancer passes through the
bloodstream to one of the vital organs it is incurable.' Professor Gordon McVie,
director of the Cancer Research Campaign, says there is not a single case of
anyone being cured once breast cancer has spread to the liver, and that most
patients die within a year.

    I want to know what causes it

    Actress Liza Goddard was diagnosed with breast cancer a year ago and is in
remission after a lumpectomy and a course of radiotherapy.

    Here, Miss Goddard, 48, tells her story.

    I'VE had a number of cysts over the years and I thought this was just
another one.

    I went to the doctor and was told again it was an infected cyst. It couldn't
be drained like the others and would have to be removed.

    It was a cyst, but underneath it was the cancer. I'm a member of BUPA so the
very next day I was able to go into hospital

    and have the breast cancer tissue removed. Then I had to have 25 courses of
radiotherapy.

    Throughout the whole thing tried to maintain a positive attitude. I don't
think it does any good to dwell on these things. went on a special diet and read
up all about breast cancer. That made me feel much better about it.

    At first, I thought about having cancer all the time, but now don't think
about it at all. I did have a scare at the New Year, though.

    I had a mammogram and the doctors thought they saw something, so I had
another mammogram and an ultrasound, and it turned out to be nothing, which was
a great relief.

    Now I am very careful about what I eat. When I was told I had cancer I
contacted the Bristol Cancer Help Centre and was sent a guide about what I
should and shouldn't eat, which I follow rigidly.

    I gave up meat, caffeine, sugar, dairy products, preservatives and
margarines containing hydrogenated fats. I still don't eat any of these things
and take plenty of vitamins.

    There is no conclusive proof that a good diet helps prevent cancer, but I'm
sure all those things are bad for the body.

    I think what people really want to know is what causes cancer.

    When I was having treatment, the doctors were concerned with making me
better and they didn't tell me why I had it.

    All sorts of things go through my mind as to why I contracted it.

    Twenty-five years ago I was working on a play and had particularly bad bash
on my wrist, and I even wonder if that caused it.

    That's why I support the charity Breakthrough. It's doing lots of good work
looking into the causes of cancer.

    FORTUNATE WOMEN WHO HAVE SURVIVED

    SHEILA HANCOCK, 64, was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1987. A malignant
lump was removed and she had six weeks of radiotherapy.

    The actress later went on a week's course at the Bristol Cancer Centre and
became a vegetarian. She has been given a clean bill of health.

    CATHERINE WALKER, the Princess of Wales's favoured designer, discovered a
pain and was diagnosed with cancer in 1995. Following an operation and
radiotherapy, it is in remission.

    GWEN HUMBLE, wife of actor Ian McShane, was diagnosed in 1991. She had
surgery in LA and underwent chemotherapy in London. Three years ago, she was
given the all-clear.

    DUSTY SPRINGFIELD, 58, was given the all-clear by doctors in 1994 after a
lump was removed from her breast. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy followed.

    In February of this year a second lump was found.

    The singer is undergoing more chemotherapy.

    A former model, DIANA MORAN was diagnosed in 1988 and had a double
mastectomy. Her book, A More Difficult Exercise, proved an inspiration to
thousands of women. She is now healthy.

    WENDY RICHARD, 51, was first diagnosed in February 1996.

    She had surgery to remove the lump and six days later was back filming
EastEnders. She had radiotherapy, but then discovered a second lump in her other
breast. A mammogram revealed it was a cyst and it soon disappeared.

    . AND THOSE WHO DIDN'T

    Tragic: Journalist Marjorie Proops died in 1996, writer Jean Rook in 1991
and author Deirdre Redgrave in 1997

    TELEVISION presenter Anna Walker, 33, was studying for her A-levels when her
mother, Elizabeth, a music teacher and violinist with the BBC Orchestra, died of
breast cancer at the age of 43. Anna, who has presented Tomorrow's World, Wish
You Were Here . .?, and now hosts Walker's World on Sky, is married and a
staunch supporter of the breast cancer charity, Breakthrough. Here she tells her
story . . .

    THE day my mother discovered she had a lump in her breast, I was just 13.
The cancer was very advanced and she had to go into hospital to have a
mastectomy, followed by long courses of chemotherapy.

    I was so young at the time I don't think I really understood what was
happening, neither did my brother Bruce or older sister Sarah.

    My mother was a very strong, positive person and she was determined that her
illness would not dominate our lives.

    We thought the cancer had gone into remission but it returned five years
later to her lymphatic system. I was devastated. I was 18 and, being older and
wiser, I understood the implications and realised she was not going to get
better.

    My mother's nickname was Wink because of the twinkle she had in her big,
brown eyes. To watch her decline so rapidly when the cancer returned was
horrible.

    When she became bedridden, I spent as much time with her as I could. I used
to play cards on her bed and tell her what I had been doing at school. I even
helped her with her wig and creams.

    That is how she wanted it - she didn't want the cancer to disrupt our lives
and we just wanted to help her as much as we could.

    It was devastating when she died, on Christmas Eve, aged just 43. The old
British habit of not talking about your feelings made it harder. I coped by
throwing myself into study and, instead of taking a year off after A-levels, I
went straight to Bristol University.

    I thought about studying medicine - there was a vague feeling in my mind
that maybe I could find a cure for cancer.

    But not a day goes by when I don't think about my mother, or miss her. She
is irreplaceable.

    There are so many occasions when I have wanted to talk to her.

    I do worry about breast cancer.

    My main priority is to limit the possibility of getting the illness by
leading as healthy a lifestyle as possible. I go to the gym, eat fruit and
vegetables and don't smoke.

    But I don't take it to extremes.

    I think about having a test to see if I am carrying the cancer gene, but I
would rather not know.

    What good would it do to know I am carrying it? If I do carry the gene it
does not necessarily mean I will develop cancer.

    In some respects, the fear of breast cancer drives me on each day. It makes
me concentrate on making the most of my life.


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1998


                              152 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 8, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: CANCER Are we really eliminating it?;
AS SCIENTISTS CLAIM AN HISTORIC BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: Gordon Mcvie

BODY:


    YESTERDAY'S headlines heralded news of a 'breakthrough in the fight against
breast cancer' after trials showed a drug could help prevent the disease in up
to 45 pc of high-risk women.

    While a degree of caution is necessary, the American study of the drug
Tamoxifen undoubtedly offers fresh hope to many women alarmed by the prospect
that one in 12 of them will develop the disease during their lifetime.

    And it offers hope to other cancer sufferers, too. At last there are signs
that this great scourge of the 20th century - one in four of us will develop
cancer and one in three of us will die from it - can be conquered.

    We are gradually winning the war against cancer. I predict that cure rates
will soar in the next 20 years, and some cancers will become completely
preventable. One day in the not too distant future we will be able to manage
cancer in the same way that we have learned to manage other serious diseases
such as diabetes.

    Tamoxifen - a British invention - is the latest in a long line of successes
in the field of cancer research that are changing the way in which we perceive
the disease.

    Fighting breast cancer is the success story of

    the Nineties - the death rate from the disease has dropped by more than 15
pc and is still falling. This is because of improvements in detecting and
treating early breast cancer.

    We are expecting even more good news when the full impact of the NHS Breast
Screening Programme, which went nationwide in 1991, kicks in.

    Men are also benefiting from research advances. Twenty years ago every man
with advanced testicular cancer died; today, nine out of ten are cured. This is
chiefly thanks to a family of drugs derived from platinum.

    The first-generation drug, cisplatin, had a dramatic effect on survival but
carried serious side-effects. Our scientists then developed a second-generation
drug, carboplatin, which avoided these side-effects and, I'm proud to say, we
are now working on a third generation of platinum drugs which will be available
in tablet form, instead of by injection, in the near future.

    What a difference that will make for patients who have to cope not only with
cancer but also with exhausting hospital visits and needles.

    The picture is equally hopeful for children. Nowadays we can cure more than
60 pc of young people with the disease. Yet when the Cancer Research Campaign
began 75 years ago, prospects for survival among t his age group were
nonexistent.

    However, there are 200 different types of the disease, so it is too early to
say we are going to wipe them all out. What we can promise is that in the future
doctors will be better able to treat and control the disease and people will no
longer fear cancer in the way many do today.

    Already, increasing numbers of cancer patients have a very different
experience of the disease than previous generations; a greater prospect of cure,
a better quality of life

    while they are ill, minimal rather than major surgery, more effective drugs
to control sickness during treatment and improved pain management.

    I anticipate the same advances will happen again in my sons' generation as
doctors are increasingly able to person-alise treatment to suit individual
patient needs.

    For instance, a genetic 'readout' of a patient's cancer will allow doctors
to predict how quickly or aggressively a particular tumour will grow, and how
well it will respond t o

    chemo therapy and radiotherapy.

    Then there are the completely

    new strategies such as gene therapy which may allow scientists to initiate
treatment at the most fundamental level of cellular control, removing or
moderating 'rogue' cancer genes, perhaps even replacing them with 'good' genes.
But this is just one way in which treatments can improve.

    Research

    My job means I am in constant touch with scientists worldwide. And, from
what they say, I'm convinced there's never been a more exciting time for cancer
research, with more avenues than ever to explore as well as many new
combinations of therapies to investigate.

    Prevention has to be better than cure, and education will play an important
role in the continuing decline of cancer cases and deaths in the future.

    We already know that diet, tobacco and exposure to the sun's harmful rays
are all crucial to our individual risk of developing the disease.

    Tobacco-related cancers alone account for a third of all cases, while 30 pc
of cancers are linked to diet, with skin cancer the fastest-growing cancer in
the UK.

    These are all lifestyle factors

    that we can do something about. We are already making headway. Fewer people
in Britain died of cancer last year than any year in the last decade. Better
treatments, detection and screening and a greater understanding of cancer is the
reason for the success.

    Most days we see news of breakthroughs in medical research - a sign of our
rapid rate of progress. But we must be careful; we have a responsibility to
cancer patients to tell them the full story, so we must remain cautious.

    Doctors have known for some time that Tamoxifen is a drug of enormous
potential in the treatment of breast cancer. It is used widely to prevent a
recurrence in women who have had the disease.

    The Cancer Research Campaign is supporting a trial in Britain to see if
Tamoxifen can prevent the disease in women who have a strong family history of
breast cancer. But at this stage, despite the American announcement, we still do
not know if the drug's preventative effect on breast cancer will be long-term or
which category of women will benefit the most.

    The greatest challenge facing us now is to improve survival of all patients
with the big killer cancers of the lung, bowel, prostate and, of course, the
breast. I believe we can rise to this challenge and make medical history.


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1998


                              153 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 April 8, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: CANCER Are we really eliminating it?;
AS SCIENTISTS CLAIM AN HISTORIC BREAKTHROUGH

BYLINE: Gordon Mcvie

BODY:


    YESTERDAY'S headlines heralded news of a 'breakthrough in the fight against
breast cancer' after trials showed a drug could help prevent the disease in up
to 45 pc of high-risk women.

    While a degree of caution is necessary, the American study of the drug
Tamoxifen undoubtedly offers fresh hope to many women alarmed by the prospect
that one in 12 of them will develop the disease during their lifetime.

    And it offers hope to other cancer sufferers, too. At last there are signs
that this great scourge of the 20th century - one in four of us will develop
cancer and one in three of us will die from it - can be conquered.

    We are gradually winning the war against cancer. I predict that cure rates
will soar in the next 20 years, and some cancers will become completely
preventable. One day in the not too distant future we will be able to manage
cancer in the same way that we have learned to manage other serious diseases
such as diabetes.

    Tamoxifen - a British invention - is the latest in a long line of successes
in the field of cancer research that are changing the way in which we perceive
the disease.

    Fighting breast cancer is the success story of

    the Nineties - the death rate from the disease has dropped by more than 15
pc and is still falling. This is because of improvements in detecting and
treating early breast cancer.

    We are expecting even more good news when the full impact of the NHS Breast
Screening Programme, which went nationwide in 1991, kicks in.

    Men are also benefiting from research advances. Twenty years ago every man
with advanced testicular cancer died; today, nine out of ten are cured. This is
chiefly thanks to a family of drugs derived from platinum.

    The first-generation drug, cisplatin, had a dramatic effect on survival but
carried serious side-effects. Our scientists then developed a second-generation
drug, carboplatin, which avoided these side-effects and, I'm proud to say, we
are now working on a third generation of platinum drugs which will be available
in tablet form, instead of by injection, in the near future.

    What a difference that will make for patients who have to cope not only with
cancer but also with exhausting hospital visits and needles.

    The picture is equally hopeful for children. Nowadays we can cure more than
60 pc of young people with the disease. Yet when the Cancer Research Campaign
began 75 years ago, prospects for survival among t his age group were
nonexistent.

    However, there are 200 different types of the disease, so it is too early to
say we are going to wipe them all out. What we can promise is that in the future
doctors will be better able to treat and control the disease and people will no
longer fear cancer in the way many do today.

    Already, increasing numbers of cancer patients have a very different
experience of the disease than previous generations; a greater prospect of cure,
a better quality of life

    while they are ill, minimal rather than major surgery, more effective drugs
to control sickness during treatment and improved pain management.

    I anticipate the same advances will happen again in my sons' generation as
doctors are increasingly able to person-alise treatment to suit individual
patient needs.

    For instance, a genetic 'readout' of a patient's cancer will allow doctors
to predict how quickly or aggressively a particular tumour will grow, and how
well it will respond t o

    chemo therapy and radiotherapy.

    Then there are the completely

    new strategies such as gene therapy which may allow scientists to initiate
treatment at the most fundamental level of cellular control, removing or
moderating 'rogue' cancer genes, perhaps even replacing them with 'good' genes.
But this is just one way in which treatments can improve.

    Research

    My job means I am in constant touch with scientists worldwide. And, from
what they say, I'm convinced there's never been a more exciting time for cancer
research, with more avenues than ever to explore as well as many new
combinations of therapies to investigate.

    Prevention has to be better than cure, and education will play an important
role in the continuing decline of cancer cases and deaths in the future.

    We already know that diet, tobacco and exposure to the sun's harmful rays
are all crucial to our individual risk of developing the disease.

    Tobacco-related cancers alone account for a third of all cases, while 30 pc
of cancers are linked to diet, with skin cancer the fastest-growing cancer in
the UK.

    These are all lifestyle factors

    that we can do something about. We are already making headway. Fewer people
in Britain died of cancer last year than any year in the last decade. Better
treatments, detection and screening and a greater understanding of cancer is the
reason for the success.

    Most days we see news of breakthroughs in medical research - a sign of our
rapid rate of progress. But we must be careful; we have a responsibility to
cancer patients to tell them the full story, so we must remain cautious.

    Doctors have known for some time that Tamoxifen is a drug of enormous
potential in the treatment of breast cancer. It is used widely to prevent a
recurrence in women who have had the disease.

    The Cancer Research Campaign is supporting a trial in Britain to see if
Tamoxifen can prevent the disease in women who have a strong family history of
breast cancer. But at this stage, despite the American announcement, we still do
not know if the drug's preventative effect on breast cancer will be long-term or
which category of women will benefit the most.

    The greatest challenge facing us now is to improve survival of all patients
with the big killer cancers of the lung, bowel, prostate and, of course, the
breast. I believe we can rise to this challenge and make medical history.


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1998


                              158 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1998 MGN Ltd.
                                 Sunday Mirror

                             March 8, 1998, Sunday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 60

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: IT'S IN THE GENES...NEW CLUE TO HELP BEAT BREAST CANCER;
 NEW DEVELOPMENTS AID FIGHT AGAINST BREAST CANCER

BYLINE: Sharon Collins

BODY:


    NEW scientific developments could lead to less surgery for thousands of
breast cancer patients ...and a more effective way to treat women with the
disease.

    Scientists working for the Imperial Cancer Research Fund have developed a
gene therapy that tricks a breast tumour cell into activating a drug that kills
it.

    A research team at Hammersmith Hospital in West London are analysing an 18
-month trial involving a dozen patients with advanced breast cancer.

    They are assessing the effectiveness and side-effects of the treatment. If
it is successful, then the next trial will be aimed at actively treating breast
cancer and increasing survival. "We have treated 12 patients without any adverse
effects and early analysis of our results is encouraging,"" said Dr Hardev
Pandha.

    ""This is the first time anyone has attempted to use a cancer gene to
destroy a cancer cell. The idea in effect is to order the tumour cell to commit
suicide."

    "We have targeted breast cancer cells and used the genes present in them,
but not in ordinary breast tissue, to trigger the conversion of a harmless anti-
biotic and convert it to a toxic chemotherapy drug.

    "Normal healthy cells are spared. We know that we only have to target a
percentage of the diseased cells and the body's immune system is switched on and
destroys more of the tumour cells.""

    Dr Pandha and his team of 12 scientists will soon publish their findings in
a medical journal.

    Meanwhile a new scanning technique has been developed by another team of
Imperial Cancer Research Fund scientists which could mean fewer operations for
women with breast cancer.

    The method can tell doctors whether breast cancer , which is the main cause
of death in women, aged 34 to 55, has spread into the system of lymph glands
under the arm.

    In around 30 per cent of the 35,000 women diagnosed with breast cancer each
year, the disease has already spread to the lymph system but it is too small to
be felt and does not show up in X-rays or scans.

    If the glands are not surgically removed the disease could become advanced
and spread further so they are removed as a precaution and checked in the
laboratory.

    At present this is the only way to find out if the disease has spread to the
nodes and it means unnecessary surgery for some patients.

    The new scanning method shows whether the nodes are affected. So only women
where the cancer has spread will need to have them removed.

    Tests have found the technique, developed by the breast unit at St
Bartholomew's Hospital in the City of London, to be accurate in detecting even
the smallest cancers.

    Rob Carter, a surgeon at Bart's breast unit, said: ""It's a very promising
technique. The pilot study we have done now needs to be carried out by other
groups to prove that it's not just us getting these results.

    "The technique has been used on more than 50 women at Bart's and we will
shortly begin clearing the lymph nodes from the armpits of those women it shows
to be positive.""

    A pilot study involving 29 women at the hospital showed the technique was 90
per cent correct in predicting cancer spread.

    Patients were injected with a special antibody produced in mice which sticks
to human cancer cells. These antibodies were primed with a small amount of
radioactivity.

    Photographs were taken twice over a 24-hour period and a computer compared
the pictures.

    The radioactivity in the antibody shows up in the second picture if cancer
is detected.

    Mr Carpenter said: ""This means that in the future we will be able to let
patients know what to expect from their breast cancer operation and how
extensive their surgery will be.

    "Not knowing before an operation whether the cancer has spread can be very
disturbing for a patient and something like this that removes that uncertainty
is beneficial.  Any clinical research that potentially enhances patient
treatment to this degree is a cause for optimism.""

    As more breast cancers are being diagnosed earlier a scan to discover if the
disease has spread to the nodes will be vital for women because an increasing
number of women will have unaffected nodes.

    What's good

    ONE in 12 British women will develop breast cancer. The cause is still
unknown, but a number of risk factors can be identified. Here are major factors
that can decrease your risk:

    Eat lots of vegetables, fruits and fibres.

    Especially eat carotenoids - the naturally occurring yellow and red plant
pigments found in some vegetables.

    Take physical exercise.

    What's bad

    FACTORS that can increase the risk of breast cancer:

    A diet high in animal fats.

    Too much alcohol.

    Weight gain in adult life.

    Taking the Pill - the increase in risk starts declining once you stop taking
it.

    Family history of breast cancer.

    Late age at first pregnancy.

    Starting periods early.

    Having a late menopause.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1998


                              160 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 16, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: The magic mouse;
FROM THE ANIMAL KINGDOM, HOPE AND AN INTRIGUING DISCOVERY,How rodent research
opened prospect of regrowing lost limbs treatment to enable people to do the
same.

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:


    HUMANS could one day magically 'regrow' limbs lost in accidents, scientists
believe.

    The prospect emerges from a chance discovery during tests involving mice.

    The animals were able to grow back an amputated tail or heal a large hole in
their ears within weeks. The new tissue was identical to the old and left no
scarring. Even internal organs grew back.

    Researchers hope the results might pave the way to a

    Until now only amphibians - which have a completely different biology to
mammals - could regenerate tissue and limbs.

    The 'supermice' had been bred with a faulty immune system for research into
multiple sclerosis. To tell the rodents apart from their normal cousins in the
laboratory, scientists punched holes in their ears.

    Normally the holes would have stayed open, allowing the mice to be easily
identified for the rest of their lives.

    But after three weeks, researchers at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia
noticed the ears were completely intact. Thinking someone had made a mistake,
the lab technicians pierced the ears again. Within a week they were healing
again.

    'We believe it's essentially the same thing as the regeneration of limbs by
amphibians,' Dr Ellen Heber-Katz told the American Association for the
Advancement of Science conference. 'The holes closed so well. There was no
scarring. You couldn't actually find out where the hole was and where the wounds
had been made.' The mice were able to regenerate tissue all over their bodies.
When the team cut off half an inch of one mouse's tail, it grew back within a
few weeks. When they removed one tenth of its liver, the organ was back to full
size within days. The researchers say the mice's special ability results from
their defective immune system. The animals lack T cells - the part of the body's
defence mechanism that fights tumours.

    They suspect that all mammal bodies may try to regrow limbs and damaged
organs, but that the immune system assumes new tissue is cancerous and stops it
growing.

    'It seems clear that the immune response is involved,' said Dr Heber-Katz.

    'One of the things that's missing from the amphibians is the complex immune
system.

    'And we found that if you eliminate a population of T cells, you get better
regeneration than before. It's possible that the T cell population that has
developed in mammals is basically blocking regeneration.

    'Amphibians can grow back limbs because they don't have the same immune
system.' The researchers have pinpointed seven areas in the mice's chromosomes
where the genes that allow regrowth lie.

    With further investigation, the scientists believe, the knowledge could lead
to new treatments for humans.

    One day the vital genes could be injected into a wound, or spread around the
body using gene therapy.

    If humans could regenerate limbs, the new arms and legs would look perfectly
normal, Dr Heber-Katz argued.

    When amphibians regrow body parts, a mass of bulbous tissue appears at the
site of the injury. It eventually develops into skin, bones and cartilage.

    Science Correspondent in Philadelphia

    The wounds had become invisible

    Route-finding with the jungle Ape to Z

    CHIMPS leave each other complex messages with leaves and twigs about meeting
places, food sources and predators.

    The notes are left where paths fork or cross other tracks, zoologists have
found. In the wilds of the Congo, pygmy chimpanzees, or bonobos, live in large
groups, communicating about food supplies in whimpers and gestures, the American
science conference was told.

    But while noisy conversation is fine when the creatures are sitting safely
in trees, it can be extremely dangerous on the forest floor.

    According to ape expert Dr Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, the bonobos have to split up
into small groups when foraging.

    As they pass through the forest they have to be quiet - and are too far
apart to see each other. She said: 'They appear to have evolved a system of
leaving notes in the vegetation. These notes apparently can encode resting
areas, directions of travel, points of brief tree travel to avoid traps, and
probably many other kinds of information as well.' Dr Savage-Rumbaugh, of
Georgia State University, has trained bonobos to use symbols on a computer to
communicate.

    She believes the apes not only understand the symbols, but can put together
sentences in a simple form of language.

    Another expert, Dr Barbara King, of the College of William and Mary in
Williamsburg, Virginia, said female bonobos used complex body language and
grunting to teach their offspring how to walk.


GRAPHIC: SPECIALLY ADAPTED MICE WERE ABLE TO REGROW DAMAGED TISSUE WITHOUT SCARS

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1998


                              161 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               February 16, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 10

LENGTH: 768 words

HEADLINE: The magic mouse;
FROM THE ANIMAL KINGDOM, HOPE AND AN INTRIGUING DISCOVERY,How rodent research
opened prospect of regrowing lost limbs treatment to enable people to do the
same.

BYLINE: David Derbyshire

BODY:


    HUMANS could one day magically 'regrow' limbs lost in accidents, scientists
believe.

    The prospect emerges from a chance discovery during tests involving mice.

    The animals were able to grow back an amputated tail or heal a large hole in
their ears within weeks. The new tissue was identical to the old and left no
scarring. Even internal organs grew back.

    Researchers hope the results might pave the way to a

    Until now only amphibians - which have a completely different biology to
mammals - could regenerate tissue and limbs.

    The 'supermice' had been bred with a faulty immune system for research into
multiple sclerosis. To tell the rodents apart from their normal cousins in the
laboratory, scientists punched holes in their ears.

    Normally the holes would have stayed open, allowing the mice to be easily
identified for the rest of their lives.

    But after three weeks, researchers at the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia
noticed the ears were completely intact. Thinking someone had made a mistake,
the lab technicians pierced the ears again. Within a week they were healing
again.

    'We believe it's essentially the same thing as the regeneration of limbs by
amphibians,' Dr Ellen Heber-Katz told the American Association for the
Advancement of Science conference. 'The holes closed so well. There was no
scarring. You couldn't actually find out where the hole was and where the wounds
had been made.' The mice were able to regenerate tissue all over their bodies.
When the team cut off half an inch of one mouse's tail, it grew back within a
few weeks. When they removed one tenth of its liver, the organ was back to full
size within days. The researchers say the mice's special ability results from
their defective immune system. The animals lack T cells - the part of the body's
defence mechanism that fights tumours.

    They suspect that all mammal bodies may try to regrow limbs and damaged
organs, but that the immune system assumes new tissue is cancerous and stops it
growing.

    'It seems clear that the immune response is involved,' said Dr Heber-Katz.

    'One of the things that's missing from the amphibians is the complex immune
system.

    'And we found that if you eliminate a population of T cells, you get better
regeneration than before. It's possible that the T cell population that has
developed in mammals is basically blocking regeneration.

    'Amphibians can grow back limbs because they don't have the same immune
system.' The researchers have pinpointed seven areas in the mice's chromosomes
where the genes that allow regrowth lie.

    With further investigation, the scientists believe, the knowledge could lead
to new treatments for humans.

    One day the vital genes could be injected into a wound, or spread around the
body using gene therapy.

    If humans could regenerate limbs, the new arms and legs would look perfectly
normal, Dr Heber-Katz argued.

    When amphibians regrow body parts, a mass of bulbous tissue appears at the
site of the injury. It eventually develops into skin, bones and cartilage.

    Science Correspondent in Philadelphia

    The wounds had become invisible

    Route-finding with the jungle Ape to Z

    CHIMPS leave each other complex messages with leaves and twigs about meeting
places, food sources and predators.

    The notes are left where paths fork or cross other tracks, zoologists have
found. In the wilds of the Congo, pygmy chimpanzees, or bonobos, live in large
groups, communicating about food supplies in whimpers and gestures, the American
science conference was told.

    But while noisy conversation is fine when the creatures are sitting safely
in trees, it can be extremely dangerous on the forest floor.

    According to ape expert Dr Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, the bonobos have to split up
into small groups when foraging.

    As they pass through the forest they have to be quiet - and are too far
apart to see each other. She said: 'They appear to have evolved a system of
leaving notes in the vegetation. These notes apparently can encode resting
areas, directions of travel, points of brief tree travel to avoid traps, and
probably many other kinds of information as well.' Dr Savage-Rumbaugh, of
Georgia State University, has trained bonobos to use symbols on a computer to
communicate.

    She believes the apes not only understand the symbols, but can put together
sentences in a simple form of language.

    Another expert, Dr Barbara King, of the College of William and Mary in
Williamsburg, Virginia, said female bonobos used complex body language and
grunting to teach their offspring how to walk.


GRAPHIC: SPECIALLY ADAPTED MICE WERE ABLE TO REGROW DAMAGED TISSUE WITHOUT SCARS

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1998


                              163 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                February 8, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 52

LENGTH: 1495 words

HEADLINE: A SMALL STEP FOR MAN BUT A GIANT STEP FOR SUPERMAN;
HOW CHRISTOPHER REEVE SHOWED HIS FIGHT TO WALK AGAIN IS MORE THAN JUST A DREAM

BYLINE: Sharon Churcher;Peter Sheridan

BODY:


    IF CHRISTOPHER Reeve was intensely nervous it was understandable. He was
about to try to take his first steps since the near-fatal riding accident which
left him paralysed more than two years ago.

    Before him was an amazing device of steel, straps and belts.

    A team of scientists at the Los Angeles medical research centre carefully
manoeuvred him into a harness and attached the straps to a cable dangling from a
hydraulic crane.

    One of the scientists pressed a button and the machinery lifted the
45-year-old Superman star out of his wheelchair.

    It was the moment Reeve had been waiting for: in a matter of seconds he
would learn if he could stand on his own feet, albeit with this remarkable
construction to support him, or whether his cherished dream of walking again by
his 50th birthday would remain just a dream.

    The seven researchers swung the harness through the air until Reeve was
positioned above a treadmill machine and then lowered him until he was in a
standing position. His almost lifeless feet rested evenly on the equipment's
rubber track while slowly, almost imperceptibly, the treadmill began to roll.

    Crouching alongside it, two doctors grasped his ankles and lifted first his
left foot, then the right. Then the left again, and then the right . . .

    It was an extraordinary moment.

    Reeve, clearly delighted by the sensation of standing upright with his legs
moving beneath him, realised this was a tortuous but significant stage in his
driving ambition to overcome the terrible injuries that left him paralysed from
the neck down.

    Since the accident, he has gradually regained some feeling in his arms, back
and left leg. Now he is able to shrug his shoulders and breathe on his own for
up to two hours at a time. Some rehabilitation experts counselled him to be
content with such incremental progress.

    But in his determination to walk again he agreed to submit himself to the
new treatment which might help to cure his shattered spine.

    A member of the University College of Los Angeles Medical Centre team,
physiotherapist Sue Ono, said about the experiment, at the end of last month:
'He was so happy. He

    F loved being upright, walking again.

    He had such a big smile.' Reeve's wife, Dana, added: 'It was a very dramatic
moment.' For now, Mrs Reeve and the scientists caution, it must be counted as
just that. An emotionally-cataclysmic but fleeting moment of relief from the
humiliating dependency in which this once athletic man is trapped. They were
small steps. Awkward steps. Steps supported for his entire 20 minutes on the
treadmill by the parachute-style Velcro straps of the harness and the doctors'
expert hands.

    But much as they may appear to the layman as nothing more than a mechanical
trick, they are the first steps on what Reeve and his doctors hope will be the
road to recovery.

    OR THE actor's catastrophic injury has coincided with remarkable
breakthroughs by researchers in several countries, including Britain.

    In laboratory experiments, they have begun to test techniques which appear
to restore the function of crucial nerve connections lost when the spinal cord
was crushed. Some of the techniques are biological.

    Gene therapy, for instance; new drugs; even nerve transplants.

    In the Los Angeles treadmill trials, scientists believe it is constant
physical stimulation which jumpstarts damaged spinal nerves into working again.
The technique was first tested on cats, whose lower spinal cords were severed.
Their paralysed hindlimbs began to support their weight again, and gradually
they began to walk after exercise on a miniature version of the treadmill in the
LA lab.

    There is even evidence that damaged nerves can begin to grow new threadlike
branches to carry the instructions from the brain for walking.

    Patients with more minor spinal injuries than Reeve have already begun to
stand upright and start to walk after as little as three weeks. In his case, no
one thinks a treadmill alone will mend his ravaged body.

    But if he is able to combine this kind of stimulation technique with the
biological therapies under development, one of his doctors has advised him he
might be able to walk again by the year 2002, just in time for his 50th
birthday.

    Reeve says he is determined to volunteer for any trial which will accept
him. Los Angeles is just the start. 'As soon as the top scientists say they're
ready, I'm willing,' he says.

    'The cure will be a combination of gene therapy, cell transplants and
regeneration. It's not going to be like turning on the lights of a Christmas
tree. It will be incremental, with increasing recovery of functions. In my case,
it will start with breathing, then use of arms, then bladder, bowel and sexual
function, then legs. It's now proved all of this is possible.'

    H Possible, but just how probable? In London, neurobiologist Geoff Rais-man,
of the National Institute for Medical Research, is one of a number of
researchers who have grown nerve cells across a gap in snapped spinal cords in
rats. It is one of the experiments which Reeve hopes will help him, but the
spinal repair didn't work in all the rats and, as Raisman has warned, it is
difficult to predict from animals how much function a person might recover.

    'We're talking about rats taking pieces of food,' he elaborates starkly.

    'We didn't ask them to play the violin.' 'Oh, to be a rat!' Reeve jokes,
refusing to be discouraged. 'When John Kennedy promised that by the end of the
1960s we would put a man on the moon, everybody, including the scientists, shook
their heads in disbelief. But we did it. We can cure spinal cord injuries too,
if there's the will.' E KNOWS all the risks, he says. That it may be painful and
even dangerous. Soon after his accident, he agreed to be injected with a drug
being studied for use in spinal injuries. He nearly died from an allergic
reaction.

    And, when the treadmill speed was increased to what was once his normal
pace, the exertion became too much.

    'He started to get faint,' says Professor Bruce Dobkin, who is in charge of
the experiment. 'Feeling faint is common if you haven't been upright for a long
while. But Mr Reeve was a trooper. We let him sit down for a minute and then he
got up and did it again.' In the two years since Reeve broke his neck, he has
defied the wisdom of doctors who predicted he would wither away, tethered to a
respirator, devoid of sensation in his body or limbs. 'When they told me what my
condition was, I felt I was no longer a human being,' he recalls.

    Adamant that he would prove the pessimists wrong, Reeve embarked on a
vigorous physiotherapy routine at the house in Bedford, New York which he shares
with Dana and their son, Will. He was preparing, he told them, for the day when
some

    -

    scientist offered him the chance of a cure.

    Marooned in his wheelchair, with his 6ft 4in frame squeezed between an array
of tubes, dials and wires, Reeve sharply reminds visitors that his is hardly an
ideal life.

    He has been hospitalised twice for blood clots and each week brings a new
gamble. Yesterday for instance, he was making arrangements to ride in the
family's van to a nearby airport for a flight to the Midwest for a charity
appearance. A nurse must accompany him in the van because, if it hits a bump on
the country lanes, his body may go into such uncontrollable spasms that his
ventilator tube disconnects.

    A new wing has been built on the house, with an airy bedroom where the
couple can sleep together in a king-size bed. It's the sort of arrangement which
had led celebrity magazines to rave about Reeve's 'miracle' recovery, but the
reality is grimmer. A nurse must place plastic supports on his wrists, fingers
and feet every night.

    'I have to be turned every three or four hours during the night to prevent
the skin from breaking down.

    The thought that keeps going through your mind is, "This can't be my life.

    There's been a mistake."

    'It's all well and good to speak of having a positive attitude with
something like this. But the more I learn about what is necessary to put me back
together, the less I feel that strength and determination are deciding factors.
This is a medical problem. You're talking about nerves that have been pulled
apart.' The Los Angeles treadmill is currently being tested on only three
patients a year and scientists stress there is no way of knowing yet whether
other factors may have been at work in their recovery.

    Reeve, furthermore, is well aware that even if a technique does cure some
people, that doesn't guarantee it will cure him.

    There are some days when he still is petrified by fear, regret and
resentment. But most of the time, he only allows himself one emotion, which is
hope.

    That, he knows, will not be enough to heal him. But it is hope that has
given him the courage to take the small but crucial steps which could one day
bring him a cure.


GRAPHIC: COURAGE: REEVE AND WIFE DANASUPERHERO: INJURED REEVE, AS SUPERMAN,
DEFIED PARALYSIS TO TAKE PIONEERING STEPS WITH THE HELP OF SCIENTISTS

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1998


                              164 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                                 MAIL ON SUNDAY

                                February 8, 1998

SECTION: Pg. 52

LENGTH: 1495 words

HEADLINE: A SMALL STEP FOR MAN BUT A GIANT STEP FOR SUPERMAN;
HOW CHRISTOPHER REEVE SHOWED HIS FIGHT TO WALK AGAIN IS MORE THAN JUST A DREAM

BYLINE: Sharon Churcher;Peter Sheridan

BODY:


    IF CHRISTOPHER Reeve was intensely nervous it was understandable. He was
about to try to take his first steps since the near-fatal riding accident which
left him paralysed more than two years ago.

    Before him was an amazing device of steel, straps and belts.

    A team of scientists at the Los Angeles medical research centre carefully
manoeuvred him into a harness and attached the straps to a cable dangling from a
hydraulic crane.

    One of the scientists pressed a button and the machinery lifted the
45-year-old Superman star out of his wheelchair.

    It was the moment Reeve had been waiting for: in a matter of seconds he
would learn if he could stand on his own feet, albeit with this remarkable
construction to support him, or whether his cherished dream of walking again by
his 50th birthday would remain just a dream.

    The seven researchers swung the harness through the air until Reeve was
positioned above a treadmill machine and then lowered him until he was in a
standing position. His almost lifeless feet rested evenly on the equipment's
rubber track while slowly, almost imperceptibly, the treadmill began to roll.

    Crouching alongside it, two doctors grasped his ankles and lifted first his
left foot, then the right. Then the left again, and then the right . . .

    It was an extraordinary moment.

    Reeve, clearly delighted by the sensation of standing upright with his legs
moving beneath him, realised this was a tortuous but significant stage in his
driving ambition to overcome the terrible injuries that left him paralysed from
the neck down.

    Since the accident, he has gradually regained some feeling in his arms, back
and left leg. Now he is able to shrug his shoulders and breathe on his own for
up to two hours at a time. Some rehabilitation experts counselled him to be
content with such incremental progress.

    But in his determination to walk again he agreed to submit himself to the
new treatment which might help to cure his shattered spine.

    A member of the University College of Los Angeles Medical Centre team,
physiotherapist Sue Ono, said about the experiment, at the end of last month:
'He was so happy. He

    F loved being upright, walking again.

    He had such a big smile.' Reeve's wife, Dana, added: 'It was a very dramatic
moment.' For now, Mrs Reeve and the scientists caution, it must be counted as
just that. An emotionally-cataclysmic but fleeting moment of relief from the
humiliating dependency in which this once athletic man is trapped. They were
small steps. Awkward steps. Steps supported for his entire 20 minutes on the
treadmill by the parachute-style Velcro straps of the harness and the doctors'
expert hands.

    But much as they may appear to the layman as nothing more than a mechanical
trick, they are the first steps on what Reeve and his doctors hope will be the
road to recovery.

    OR THE actor's catastrophic injury has coincided with remarkable
breakthroughs by researchers in several countries, including Britain.

    In laboratory experiments, they have begun to test techniques which appear
to restore the function of crucial nerve connections lost when the spinal cord
was crushed. Some of the techniques are biological.

    Gene therapy, for instance; new drugs; even nerve transplants.

    In the Los Angeles treadmill trials, scientists believe it is constant
physical stimulation which jumpstarts damaged spinal nerves into working again.
The technique was first tested on cats, whose lower spinal cords were severed.
Their paralysed hindlimbs began to support their weight again, and gradually
they began to walk after exercise on a miniature version of the treadmill in the
LA lab.

    There is even evidence that damaged nerves can begin to grow new threadlike
branches to carry the instructions from the brain for walking.

    Patients with more minor spinal injuries than Reeve have already begun to
stand upright and start to walk after as little as three weeks. In his case, no
one thinks a treadmill alone will mend his ravaged body.

    But if he is able to combine this kind of stimulation technique with the
biological therapies under development, one of his doctors has advised him he
might be able to walk again by the year 2002, just in time for his 50th
birthday.

    Reeve says he is determined to volunteer for any trial which will accept
him. Los Angeles is just the start. 'As soon as the top scientists say they're
ready, I'm willing,' he says.

    'The cure will be a combination of gene therapy, cell transplants and
regeneration. It's not going to be like turning on the lights of a Christmas
tree. It will be incremental, with increasing recovery of functions. In my case,
it will start with breathing, then use of arms, then bladder, bowel and sexual
function, then legs. It's now proved all of this is possible.'

    H Possible, but just how probable? In London, neurobiologist Geoff Rais-man,
of the National Institute for Medical Research, is one of a number of
researchers who have grown nerve cells across a gap in snapped spinal cords in
rats. It is one of the experiments which Reeve hopes will help him, but the
spinal repair didn't work in all the rats and, as Raisman has warned, it is
difficult to predict from animals how much function a person might recover.

    'We're talking about rats taking pieces of food,' he elaborates starkly.

    'We didn't ask them to play the violin.' 'Oh, to be a rat!' Reeve jokes,
refusing to be discouraged. 'When John Kennedy promised that by the end of the
1960s we would put a man on the moon, everybody, including the scientists, shook
their heads in disbelief. But we did it. We can cure spinal cord injuries too,
if there's the will.' E KNOWS all the risks, he says. That it may be painful and
even dangerous. Soon after his accident, he agreed to be injected with a drug
being studied for use in spinal injuries. He nearly died from an allergic
reaction.

    And, when the treadmill speed was increased to what was once his normal
pace, the exertion became too much.

    'He started to get faint,' says Professor Bruce Dobkin, who is in charge of
the experiment. 'Feeling faint is common if you haven't been upright for a long
while. But Mr Reeve was a trooper. We let him sit down for a minute and then he
got up and did it again.' In the two years since Reeve broke his neck, he has
defied the wisdom of doctors who predicted he would wither away, tethered to a
respirator, devoid of sensation in his body or limbs. 'When they told me what my
condition was, I felt I was no longer a human being,' he recalls.

    Adamant that he would prove the pessimists wrong, Reeve embarked on a
vigorous physiotherapy routine at the house in Bedford, New York which he shares
with Dana and their son, Will. He was preparing, he told them, for the day when
some

    -

    scientist offered him the chance of a cure.

    Marooned in his wheelchair, with his 6ft 4in frame squeezed between an array
of tubes, dials and wires, Reeve sharply reminds visitors that his is hardly an
ideal life.

    He has been hospitalised twice for blood clots and each week brings a new
gamble. Yesterday for instance, he was making arrangements to ride in the
family's van to a nearby airport for a flight to the Midwest for a charity
appearance. A nurse must accompany him in the van because, if it hits a bump on
the country lanes, his body may go into such uncontrollable spasms that his
ventilator tube disconnects.

    A new wing has been built on the house, with an airy bedroom where the
couple can sleep together in a king-size bed. It's the sort of arrangement which
had led celebrity magazines to rave about Reeve's 'miracle' recovery, but the
reality is grimmer. A nurse must place plastic supports on his wrists, fingers
and feet every night.

    'I have to be turned every three or four hours during the night to prevent
the skin from breaking down.

    The thought that keeps going through your mind is, "This can't be my life.

    There's been a mistake."

    'It's all well and good to speak of having a positive attitude with
something like this. But the more I learn about what is necessary to put me back
together, the less I feel that strength and determination are deciding factors.
This is a medical problem. You're talking about nerves that have been pulled
apart.' The Los Angeles treadmill is currently being tested on only three
patients a year and scientists stress there is no way of knowing yet whether
other factors may have been at work in their recovery.

    Reeve, furthermore, is well aware that even if a technique does cure some
people, that doesn't guarantee it will cure him.

    There are some days when he still is petrified by fear, regret and
resentment. But most of the time, he only allows himself one emotion, which is
hope.

    That, he knows, will not be enough to heal him. But it is hope that has
given him the courage to take the small but crucial steps which could one day
bring him a cure.


GRAPHIC: COURAGE: REEVE AND WIFE DANASUPERHERO: INJURED REEVE, AS SUPERMAN,
DEFIED PARALYSIS TO TAKE PIONEERING STEPS WITH THE HELP OF SCIENTISTS

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1998


                              169 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            December 5, 1997, Friday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12, 13

LENGTH: 1066 words

HEADLINE: 20 FANTASTIC FUTURE INVENTIONS;
20 PREDICTED INVENTIONS FOR THE NEW MILLENIUM

BYLINE: Justin Dunn

BODY:


    The Year is 2050. Your pet robot is sleeping peacefully at your feet and the
kids will have just rung from Mars.

    And if you step outside into an unexpected cold spell, your clothes will
turn up their own in-built heating.

    These are some of the fantastic things top scientists predict will become
the norm as we enter the new Millennium. The Internet will be old hat, TVs will
be as flat as posters and test tube babies can be born without ever being inside
a womb.

    In 50 years we'll know more about the oceans where a predicted 100 million
undiscovered species lurk. Men will be on the pill, buildings will 'know' when
they are going to collapse and cars will not rust.

    Thanks to advanced telephone technology 3D people will appear in your living
room as you speak to them hundreds of miles away.

    The genetic make-up of most diseases will be known and planes will carry up
to 1,000 people at a time at 900km an hour.

    This is not science fiction, but science fact, says the world-respected Time
magazine.

    In its special Discovery edition the mag looks at the things around us
already we have yet to properly discover or understand.

    It's estimated that 90 per cent of the world's animals and plants have yet
to be described or named.

    The oceans are thought to be home to the greatest undiscovered secrets of
nature.

    The magazine says: "Scientists are looking at the anti-cancer, anti-viral,
heart-stimulating properties of everything from deep-sea sponges to starfish."

    It also reports how the planet's remaining rain forests will provide the
petrol of the future.

    Time looks at great discoveries of the 20th Century and the way they have
affected our lives.

    Dr William Haseltine describes DNA, our genetic 'fingerprint' discovered in
1953, as essential for research into disease.

    He says: "We are entering an era when illness will be predicted before it
occurs.

    "We'll be able to do a genetic fingerprint showing your potential future
health."

    The magazine also highlights studies being made of the brain and how it
works.

    And it suggests that one day we will have drugs that could wipe out problems
such as mental illnesses.

    But the most fascinating theories concern computers.

    Researchers are already working on machines to make them talk like humans
and help the blind see.

    And they predict an age where computer chips will be embedded in almost
everything - including food - to make them "smart".

    Writer Rod Usher says: "Computerised tags concealed in meat could set the
correct temperature when placed in the oven.

    "The same chips would turn off the heat when the meat is cooked."

    But developments in sensors and detectors could lead to a sinister real-
life Big Brother state, Usher warns.

    He says: "The day may come when computers listen to our brains to discover
what we are up to at any moment."

    Neil Gershenfeld of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology says:
"Powerful computers will melt into furniture and paper."

    Each member of his research group wears a watch which carries a chip to open
doors and cabinets.

    If a student removes a tool from a cabinet, it "remembers" who has the item.

    The lab is also responsible for electronic paper, capable of printing a
paper like The Mirror over and over on the same sheet of recycled paper.

    1999

    Male birth control pill or contraceptive injection becomes commonly
available

    2000

    Advances in genetics enable doctors to combine gene therapy with
immunotherapy to create more effective cancer treatments

    2001

    Wall-mounted, 1m-long flat screens show television programs or videos, and
when not in use display works of art

    2003

    Mobile phones with video cameras and screens enable people to watch films or
play

    computer games from home or office

    2005

    Video vacation postcards, postcard sized film screens that display 10
seconds of holiday sights and sounds, go on the market

    2005

    Active contact lens, linked to Internet, allows wearer to read E-mail and
surf the World Wide Web without opening her eyes

    2006

    Smart construction materials, with electronic sensors built into their
molecular structures, detect excessive stress and warn of potential collapse.
Clothes made from smart fabrics automatically warm up wearer in cold and cool
him or her down in hot

    2007

    New cars equipped with anti-collision radar, thermal imaging systems to
improve

    visibility, on-board computers that detect and warn drivers about imminent
faults, and satellite based global positioning system

    2010

    Robotic pets, programmed to recognise their master's voice and face, operate
and control all computerised functions of home

    2015

    Genetic roots of all diseases identified

    2016

    Holographic telephone projects a life-size holographic image of person being
called

    2017

    Humans land on Mars. Permanent colony established on the planet around 2044

    2020

    Flying wing aircraft are able to carry 1,000 passengers up to a distance of
900 km/h

    2022

    Foetuses conceived in vitro, mature to term in extra-uterine incubators and
are born without having been inside human womb

    2025

    Computers connected directly to brain are able to recognise and respond to
thoughts, obviating the need for the manual input of data and commands

    2030

    Following on the development of artificial lungs, kidneys and livers,
doctors can now

    create artificial legs and fully functional artificial eyes

    2030

    Human hibernation is used for the first time in long-distance space travel

    2040

    Nuclear fusion is harnessed to generate electricity

    2044

    Microscopic robots capable of reproducing themselves devised using
nanotechnology

    2500

    From an average of 78 years, human life-spans are extended to 140 years

    .. and 10 from this century ..

    1925: John Logie Baird invents the television.

    1940: DuPont invents nylon.

    1948: Swiss mountaineer Georges de Mestral develops a "sticky" new material
- resulting in Velcro.

    1948: First supersonic flight.

    1960: Submarine reaches very bottom of the sea - 11.52kms, deeper than Mount
Everest rises.

    1967: First heart transplant.

    1968: Child-proof caps for medicine bottles.

    1969: Man on the Moon.

    1978: The microchip is born.

    1996: Life on Mars: NASA reveals microscopic fossils found in meteorite from
the red planet.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1997


                              175 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            October 6, 1997, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: A WELCOME BREAK;
DR MIRRIAM STOPPARD'S ADVICE COLUMN

BYLINE: Dr Mirriam Stoppard

BODY:


    MIRIAM'S PHOTO CASEBOOK: THE VERDICT

    Bill's the first decent man Anita has met in years. Now he's invited the
family on holiday, all expenses paid.

    Anita wants to throw caution to the wind but she feels hustled - and she's
hardly got over the break-up of her marriage.

    Bill must be the answer to every single mum's prayers. Well-heeled, likes
the kids and wants to whisk the whole family off to his villa in Spain. It
sounds like a dream come true.

    When a marriage of 11 years breaks up, however, it's like a bereavement.
It's natural to grieve. And the loneliness can be very depressing.

    Also, people treat you differently. The invitations dry up. You stop meeting
friends. You shrink into your shell and soon your evenings consist of watching
the telly with a cup of cocoa before bed.

    Even so, I understand why Anita is hesitant to share intimacy with a new man
- particularly as her children, Josh and Sophie, might not take too kindly to a
stranger muscling in on their family.

    On the other hand, an attentive and caring new beau could do wonders for
Anita's morale, as well as giving her and the children a much-needed treat, even
security.

    It seems hard that they should forego a super holiday and I don't see why
Anita shouldn't have her cake and eat it.

    If Bill is so keen to have her company, and include Josh and Sophie in the
package, why can't she lay down a few ground rules?

    She doesn't have to compromise herself. She can be completely honest and
explain that, as it's so soon after her divorce, she doesn't want to rush into
another relationship.

    Going on holiday together with the kids is a good way of getting to know the
type of man Bill really is.

    She can be very explicit about separate bedrooms and no expectations of sex.

    In the relaxed atmosphere of sand, sea and sunshine, who knows what could
happen?

    But she's wise to keep her options open and not feel she has to pay for
Bill's generosity.

    TOMORROW: One partner wants kinky sex

    I feel very sexy during my period and at those times my boyfriend and I
occasionally like to have sex.

    But I'm worried, can I get pregnant when I have sex at this time and is it
dangerous?

    Despite what the bible says, having sex during your period is not harmful
and it's not dangerous.

    In many religions women are considered "unclean" while they're menstruating
and sex is forbidden. But there are no medical or health reasons for forbidding
it.

    On the other hand, women have become pregnant by having sex during
menstruation.

    Ovulation normally takes place 14 days after the first day of your period
but there's no 100 per cent guarantee that this will always happen.

    So you have to take the usual precautions whenever you have sex, including
during menstruation.

    I'm 15 and I've had asthma since I was little. I'm really fed up with having
to use my inhaler all the time. Is there any cure?

    Unfortunately not. However, a lot of vital asthma research is being carried
out at the moment. It's examining areas such as indoor and outdoor pollution,
allergies, gene therapy, cell biology and chemical structures.

    It is extremely important to continue to use your medication correctly to
reduce asthma symptoms.

    This is National Asthma Week and you can get a factsheet, Coping With
Asthma, from The National Asthma Campaign, Providence House, Providence Place,
London N1 0NT or you can ring their helpline, 0345 010203.

    BOUQUET OF THE WEEK

    My father never thinks about himself. Since my mother broke her hip he's
done everything for her. He also finds time to care for a 90- year-old
neighbour, even visiting her husband in care. And he's a regular hospital
visitor. He really deserves some reward.

    I do, too, and it's on its way to this very special man from York with my
best wishes.

GRAPHIC: DECISION TIME: Anita is tempted to take up Bill's offer to go on
holiday

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1997


                              178 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                          September 23, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 966 words

HEADLINE: BE A JEANS GENIE AND HELP JAMIE;
STEP INTO A PAIR AND RAISE POUNDS 2M;
JEANS FOR GENES APPEAL HOPES TO RAISE POUNDS 2 MILLION

BODY:


    Britons everywhere will be asked to swap their usual skirts and trousers for
a pair of jeans on Friday, October 10 and give pounds 1 to help children with
genetic disorders.

    The Jeans for Genes Appeal - to be launched tomorrow - hopes to raise pounds
2 million to fund vital research to identify all the genes involved and discover
how they work. This will lead to better ways of treating and eventually curing
the 4,000 genetic diseases that children inherit from their parents.

    Here we tell the story of one little boy's suffering which could well be
avoided in future thanks to genetic research.

    Jamie Sincock is only seven but he has come close to death four times in his
short life.

    Jamie has Wiscott-Aldrich Syndrome (WAS), a rare and incurable genetic
disease.

    Symptoms include an immune deficiency, making sufferers unable to fight
infection; a low and abnormal blood condition which leads to a tendency to bleed
and bruise without injury and a skin condition similar to eczema.

    Jamie is one of the most severe cases - he suffers from all three.

    But although he spends months at a time in hospital and is pumped with ten
different drugs every day - including steroids which bloat his body - he never
complains and rarely cries.

    "He is so cheerful all the time despite everything he has to put up with,"
says mum Beverly, 33, of Basildon, Essex.

    "Unfortunately, he has been very ill this last year and has spent most of
the time in hospital.

    "But when we get home, he is determined to go back to school and try to lead
as normal a life as possible."

    That courage was never more apparent than when a beaming Jamie, Beverly and
grandfather Albert Long met Princess Diana during her visit to Great Ormond
Street in February.

    Jamie was six weeks old when doctors first suspected he had WAS. He was
critically ill and close to death. He was rushed to Great Ormond Street Hospital
where after months of intensive treatment and tests, the diagnosis was
confirmed.

    Beverly had no idea she carried the faulty gene that would threaten her
son's life.Although only in her late twenties, she insisted on being sterilised
to prevent further pregnancies.

    "There was a 50-50 chance that any boy would be affected and that any girl
would be a carrier," she says. "I could not bring a child into the world knowing
there was a chance it would suffer as Jamie has."

    For the next few years, Jamie suffered prolonged periods of ill health,
dogged with ear and throat infections and painful, blistered skin.

    His platelet count - minute particles of blood - often fell dangerously low
and he had to be rushed back to hospital for transfusions.

    Shortly before his sixth birthday in January last year, his condition
deteriorated dramatically.

    He developed vasculitis - inflammation of the blood vessels - which damages
the body tissues - and autoimmune disease where the immune system attacks the
body.

    He needs high-dose steroids to keep him alive and weekly transfusions of
immunoglobulin to help fight the infections and build up his immune system.

    There is the possibility of a stem cell transplant, using matching cells
from his mother's bone marrow, but Jamie is not strong enough.

    "WAS has taken over our lives for the past seven years," says Beverly.  "The
outlook for patients has improved considerably.

    "There is a better understanding of the condition and much better
treatments.

    "But in the end, the real hope of a cure lies with gene therapy." Jamie is
one of 20,000 children born each year with one of the 4,000 genetic disorders.
Wiscott-Aldrich Syndrome affects one in every 100,000 births.

    "WAS is a very variable condition which affects only boys," says Jamie's
consultant Dr Alison Jones.

    "Some, like Jamie, are severely affected while others may only suffer one of
the symptoms.

    Hope

    "One of the biggest worries is that, as boys get older, there is a risk of
cancer of the lymph glands and of auto-immune disease where the body reacts
against itself.

    "Since the gene responsible was identified three years ago, it has been
possible to have an antenatal test to see if the baby is affected. But we still
need to know a lot more about how it works.

    "The hope for the future is gene therapy which would replace the defective
gene.

    "But a great deal more research is needed before we reach that stage and are
able to offer the real chance of a cure to the thousands of children suffering
these conditions."

    THERE'S STILL PLENTY OF TIME TO JOIN IN

    The Jeans for Genes Appeal is being organised by the Great Ormond Street
Hospital Children's Charity and three other charities for different genetic
conditions.

    Hundreds of schools and companies have already agreed to take part, inviting
children and staff to wear their jeans for a day and donate pounds 1 to the
appeal. Boots and Tesco are selling specially-designed Jeans for Genes badges.

    It is not too late to join in. For further information telephone the Jeans
for Genes Hotline on freefone 0800 980 4800.

    Mastermind that controls our nature

    Genes are hereditary material contained in all the cells in the body.

    They are inherited from parents, half from the mother and half from the
father, and are responsible for our appearance, growth and health.

    Thousands of genes are positioned along strips of DNA found in each of the
23 pairs of chromosomes in every cell.

    Twenty two of the pairs are the same in males and females but the 23rd pair
is different and determines sex. Cells of the different tissues of the body have
their own special job to do and this is masterminded by the genes.

    They provide the instructions for the manufacture of proteins by the cell,
which are needed to carry out the cell's work.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 1997


                              182 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               September 2, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 805 words

HEADLINE: Can gene therapy end the agony for Michael?

BYLINE: Barbara Rowlands

BODY:



    JUST imagine not being able to give someone a hug or not being able to
travel in a crowded train because someone might bump into you. Imagine being in
constant pain when you walk, use the phone or eat. Michael Egleton takes all
this for granted and yet counts himself lucky.

    The 42-year-old civil servant has his own home and has the loving support of
his family, colleagues and friends. Many others with the crippling genetic skin
condition, Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB), are far worse off.

    'I'm as independent as I can be. I take painkillers every day, but working
takes my mind off it and makes it easier to cope with. The best thing is to keep
active,' he says.

    The pain comes from blisters sometimes dozens of them - which cover the body
and can take weeks, or even months, to heal.

    Hands and feet are particularly susceptible, so much so that EB sufferers
swathe their feet with bandages before wearing shoes.

    Even so, walking can be excruciating.

    The skin consists of two layers the tough outer epidermis, strengthened by
strands of the protein keratin, and the underlying dermis which is kept plumped
up and healthy by the protein collagen.

    The two layers are hooked together by tiny anchors, just like Velcro. In EB,
a mutation means that some of the hooks are missing or the protein strands are
weak, so the skin blisters.

    Now, however, the possibility of a cure is on the horizon. Scientists
believe that gene therapy could end the misery, which sometimes even leads to
death.

    There are three types of EB: simplex, where there is a genetic abnormality
in the epidermis; dystrophic, where the malfunction is in the dermis; and
junctional, which affects the cells at the junction between the top and lower
layers.

    EB simplex, which affects only the hands and feet, is the mildest form and
sufferers can live a relatively normal life. Junctional EB is the worst kind and
many babies born with it die within days.

    THOSE with dystrophic EB, including Michael, live into adulthood, though
they often develop skin cancer. Michael had his fifth cancer removed two months
ago.

    In the more severe forms, the skin blisters at the slightest knock.

    Blisters erupt day and night and have to be treated and dressed immediately.

    The mouth and oesophagus can blister, too, so EB sufferers have to be
careful what they eat.

    Many are severely underweight Michael weighs just 5st 5lb simply because
they find eating unpleasant.

    They are often anaemic because they lose blood and nutrients through their
blisters. To keep his blood count healthy, Michael has a transfusion every four
months.

    There are around 5,000 people with the condition in Britain, but there are
only three specialist nurses.

    For most people, such severe disability would be mentally as well as
physically crippling, but Michael meets each day calmly, thanks to the support
of his parents.

    'My mother dresses my blisters every day and night. My employers are very
good. If I need to have any dressing done, I nip home and then go straight back
to work,' he says.

    'I was awarded the MBE in 1990 my local office manager nominated me.

    SOME days are worse than others, but on the whole it's a case of getting on
with life. Neither my parents nor my colleagues allow me to get depressed.'
Michael is the only one of his family with EB, but each of his parents carries a
defective gene.

    Scientists and doctors at the St John's Institute of Dermatology, the
leading centre for research into EB, are looking at what causes blistering and
how to treat it.

    Couples who have a child with EB can get prenatal testing for subsequent
pregnancies at ten weeks.

    'Most families with one affected child choose not to have a second one,'
says consultant dermatologist Dr John McGrath.

    By next year, the unit will be able to offer testing when the embryo is just
eight cells, so couples with one EB child will be able to have in-vitro
fertilisation.

    Scientists are confident that gene therapy will eventually cure EB.

    Skin is easily cultured in the laboratory - a few cells can grow 10,000-fold
in six weeks. Doctors will be able to identify the damaged gene, make normal
'copies' of it and graft the new skin back on to the patient.

    Other researchers are looking into ways of creating a gene cream that can
target the mutated genes and correct them.

    The difficulty comes in devising a therapy that works its way into the
skin's 'stem' cells, which are responsible for creating new cells.

    Trials will begin within two to three years and treatment could be available
within five years.

    * FOR more information, contact DEBRA (Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa
Research Association), DEBRA House, Wellington Business Park Dukes Ride,
Crowthorne, Ber-shire RG45 61LS. Tel: 01344 771961.


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1997


                              187 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            August 5, 1997, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 2, 21

LENGTH: 2120 words

HEADLINE: LIVER TRANSPLANT REVOLUTION THAT HAS SAVED THESE CHILDREN'S LIVES;
ADVANCES IN LIVER TRANSPLANTATION: FAMILY HEALTH

BYLINE: Jill Palmer

BODY:


    Amazing advances in liver transplantation are saving the lives of hundreds
of young children.

    Only 10 years ago, liver swaps were virtually unheard-of in tiny children
because of a desperate shortage of suitable small organs. Babies were not
considered for the operation or died on the waiting list.

    Now, thanks to intricate techniques pioneered at Birmingham Children's
Hospital and King's College Hospital in London, surgeons are able to cut down
and split livers to fit tiny patients.

    And because the liver is the only organ able to regenerate itself, they are
proving incredibly successful.

    British surgeons are now carrying out around 650 liver transplants a year,
with an 80 per cent chance of the patient being alive and well in five years.

    A single donor liver can now be divided and shared between two patients -
the smaller half going to a child and the larger to an adult.

    Another breakthrough is the "piggy-back" transplant, in which only part of
the liver is removed and replaced with a piece of donor liver.

    Doctors are now able to take a segment of liver from a live donor, usually a
parent, and give it to a child.

    Since 1987, British surgeons have carried out 237 "piggy-back" liver swaps,
and transplants in children now account for nearly 100 cases a year.

    Mottled and yellow "sun-tanned" skin colouring, dark urine and pale stools
are signs that something may be wrong with the liver - one of the largest organs
in the body. If the symptoms persist for more than 14 days, contact your doctor
immediately.

    Here we tell the heart-warming stories of two little children, both doomed
to die from liver disease, who owe their lives to the latest medical miracles.

    For further information and advice, ring the Family Support Healthline on
0121 643 7282.

    CASE STUDY 1

    OUR LITTLE WORLD-BEATER

    Little Courteney Pearson owes her life to a pioneering "piggy- back" liver
transplant.

    The smiling four-year-old is the only person in the world to be cured of a
rare inherited illness that was slowly poisoning her body.

    Courteney's complex 10-hour operation at King's College Hospital, London,
involved removing 70 per cent of her own liver and replacing it with a healthy
donor liver.

    The procedure was hailed as a breakthrough in the treatment of children born
with incurable metabolic disorders. And it signalled a potential cure for
hundreds of others.

    Since her world-beating op, two years ago this month, seven other children
with similar liver disorders have been saved by the same technique.

    "Courteney would have been dead by now if it wasn't for the transplant,"
says her overjoyed mum Mandy, 31, from Dover, Kent. "It is fantastic to see her
so well."

    Courteney was born with propionic acidaemia, a rare disorder in which vital
enzymes are missing. This leads to a build-up of toxic chemicals which poison
the brain, causing brain damage or death.

    For the first two years of her life, Mandy and husband Darren worried about
the future as Courteney was given 15 drugs a day, avoided eating protein and had
to be tube-fed.

    "She was continually sick and in hospital and her condition was rapidly
deteriorating," says Mandy. "Since her transplant she hasn't been in hospital
once and she can eat anything she likes. Her favourites are crisps, peanut
butter sandwiches and chicken nuggets, which were all banned before."

    The piggy-back operation is more difficult than a whole transplant because
of the problem of joining veins and arteries to two different livers.

    Consultant transplant surgeon Nigel Heaton is the only person in England
performing the intricate operation on children with metabolic diseases.

    He explains: "The benefit of this procedure is that if the donor liver is
rejected, it can be removed and the patient still has part of their own liver.

    "The other advantage is that you can usually stop drugs to prevent organ
rejection earlier.

    "But the hope for the future is that gene therapy could cure the enzyme
deficiency in the patient's own liver, which would then regenerate healthily."

    One child in 1,000 suffers from a metabolic disease. Many lives could be
saved by transplants.

    CASE STUDY 2

    Brave Mitchell's last-minute op

    T Iime was running out for Mitchell Dunn - he had only days to live.

    Critically-ill, the 11-month-old needed a new liver but the chances of a
suitably-sized donor organ were remote.

    In a desperate attempt to save his life surgeons decided to use the cut-
down liver of a 10-year-old boy who had died in an accident.

    It was a complex procedure that had only been tried on a handful of cases.

    One surgeon carefully cut the organ to size while another removed Mitchell's
damaged liver ready for the replacement.

    The technique, developed by surgeon John Buckels proved a great success.

    Mitchell, one of the first patients treated this way in Britain, was home
from hospital within a month. Now seven, he is fit and healthy.

    Mitchell was eight weeks old when doctors first diagnosed biliary atresia, a
rare disorder in which the liver's bile ducts fail to develop.

    An operation when Mitchell was 14-weeks was unsuccessful.

    Doctors hoped Mitchell's liver would cope until he was older and bigger.

    Yet his condition deteriorated and by 11-months old the only hope was a new
liver.

    "Mitchell had been really sick in hospital for a couple of weeks when we
heard a liver was available," says mum Karen, 33, from Dudley, West Midlands.

    "We were elated. We never gave a second thought to it being a new type of
operation. It was Mitchell's only hope.

    "Looking at him now it is hard to believe he nearly died. He loves drawing
and playing sports.

    "He is a typical little boy but still has to take drugs to stop his body
rejecting the organ - but it is only one dose a day.

    "It's a small price to pay for his life."

    Consultant Dr Deirdre Kelly says: "Most organ donors are adults but because
of the liver's unique ability to regenerate itself it can be cut down and given
to children and babies.

    "The procedure has dramatically increased the number of livers we can use
for children.

    "It works extremely well and has the same success rate as a conventional
transplant."

    FOR more information contact: Children's Liver Disease Foundation, 138
Digbeth, Birmingham, B5 6DR. Tel 0121 643 7282.

    ORGAN donor register line 0800 555 777.

GRAPHIC: LIVING MIRACLE: Courteney is fit - and hooked on chicken nuggets;;
GROUND -BREAKER: At 11 months (inset) Mitchell had days to live, now he is a
normal healthy seven-year-old;; FIGHTER: Happy Courteney with parents Mandy and
Darren;; ELATED: Mitchell and his mum Karen

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1997


                              190 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 31, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 30

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Doctors try to rewrite baby's genetic destiny

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:



    DOCTORS hope to rewrite a baby's deadly genetic destiny in a pioneering
operation today.

    The 16-month-old girl will have the world's first gene therapy transplant in
a bid to stave off the effects of Hurler Syndrome, a rare enzyme deficiency.

    Children most severely affected by the disease rarely reach the age of ten.

    In a pioneering experiment at Manchester Children's Hospitals NHS Trust,
doctors will transfer a normal copy of the faulty gene into the child, using a
sample of her own bone marrow.

    The marrow has been 'infected' by a virus containing the good gene. It is
hoped that this will override the defective gene and become established in the
child's body.

    Doctors hope to give transplants to three children who must be treated
before the irreversible disease takes hold. It will take at least a fortnight
before it is known whether the therapy has succeeded.

    Linda Roberts of the Trust said: 'We emphasise that this is an experiment.

    We have shown that it is possible to do this in the laboratory using bone
marrow cultures from Hurler patients.

    'This is the first attempt to do this in a patient. It is likely that we
will get more questions than answers from this initial attempt.' The gene
transfer is the first to be attempted using a bone marrow transplant. Others
have involved trying to replace a defective gene via the lungs.

    In Hurler Syndrome, chemicals that would normally be broken down start
accumulating in cells.

    Eventually the build-up stops the cells from working.

    The disorder affects growth, joints, heart and some internal organs and can
result in progressive neurological deterioration. Genetic testing can now
predict how severely individual patients will be affected.

    About 100 children in Britain have the condition.

    The baby's bone marrow was harvested last week and she has had chemotherapy
to prepare for the operation.

    Linda Roberts said: 'We are taking the first steps down what we are sure
will be a long road towards finding an effective treatment for this disease and
others like it.'


GRAPHIC: JUST ONE GENE: HOW IT COULD CURE A BABYTESTING PINPOINTS FAULTY GENE AS
CAUSE OF ILLNESS IN BABY. BONE MARROW IS TAKEN FOR GENETIC MANIPULATION.  MARROW
IS 'INFECTED' WITH VIRUS CONTAINING NORMAL GENE. IT IS THEN PUT BACK IN BABY TO
OVERRIDE DEFECTIVE GENES.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1997


                              192 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            July 31, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: BABY SET FOR GENE FIRST;
BABY'S GENE THERAPY OPERATION SET TO GO AHEAD

BODY:


    The world's first gene therapy operation due to take place at the Royal
Manchester Children's Hospital may go ahead today.

    The baby will make medical history when her bone marrow, genetically altered
in a laboratory, is transplanted back into her.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1997


                              193 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                            July 31, 1997, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 43 words

HEADLINE: BABY SET FOR GENE FIRST;
BABY'S GENE THERAPY OPERATION SET TO GO AHEAD

BODY:


    The world's first gene therapy operation due to take place at the Royal
Manchester Children's Hospital may go ahead today.

    The baby will make medical history when her bone marrow, genetically altered
in a laboratory, is transplanted back into her.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1997


                              196 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 July 29, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 179 words

HEADLINE: The cold virus that can kill cancer

BYLINE: Simone Cave

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have created a mutant strain of the common cold virus which can
kill prostate cancer, the second biggest cancer killer among Western men after
lung cancer.

    Human clinical trials for this gene therapy treatment are starting and it
could be available in a few years.

    New Scientist magazine reports that scientists at the Johns Hopkins
University in Baltimore and a Californian biotech company called Calydon have
adapted a common cold virus that will attack only prostate cells.

    The virus does not attack other cells because it is activated by a chemical
found in the prostate gland called prostate specific antigen (PSA).

    Studies of mice have shown that an injection of the virus shrank tumours
within six weeks.

    The virus multiplies in the gland, destroying the cancer, say scientists.

    When the virus gets into a non-PSA producing cell, it just sits there.

    The virus does destroy normal prostate tissue as well, but the prostate
gland isn't essential for fertility or potency and would be destroyed anyway by
chemotherapy.


LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1997


                              197 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             July 28, 1997, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 18, 19

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: WINNING THE WAR AGAINST THE KILLER DISEASE EVERY WOMAN FEARS MOST;
ANALYSIS OF CANCER-CAUSING GENES

BODY:


    Scientists are claiming amazing successes in the battle against cancer. They
are fast finding out how cancer cells work - and how they can be stopped.

    The codes of each of the 100,000 genes in every cell of the human body can
now be fitted on to a silicon chip the size of your fingernail.

    One of these genes, when damaged, causes 160,000 cancers a year. But doctors
have found a way to kill tumour cells containing it.

    Now scientists believe that cancer prevention and early treatment using gene
therapy will be a reality within 20 years.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1997


                              203 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                 June 25, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: Britain's 20-year cancer timebomb;
FIND NEW LOVE WITH HERB FROM THE PAST

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:



    CANCER cases are expected to rise dramatically over the next 20 years, a
study said yesterday.

    About one in three Britons are currently at risk of developing the disease,
but by 2018 this will increase to half the population, according to research
commissioned by Macmillan Cancer Relief.

    However, a second cancer charity, the Cancer Research Campaign, believes the
study paints too gloomy a picture.

    Director-general Professor Gordon McVie said: 'We see Macmillan's prediction
as a worst-case scenario. We would consider it a failure if it were to come to
pass.

    'Although people are living longer, and cancer is predominantly a disease of
old age, if Cancer Research Campaign strategies pay off, we expect one in two of
us to be cured of cancer by that date.

    'Macmillan's report takes no account of successes we expect to have in the
tobacco lobby, or changes in our eating habits. It takes no account of progress
in research into prevention strategies such as vaccines and gene therapy.'

    At present, 640 people a day are diagnosed as having cancer. The Macmillan
study, by researchers at the East Anglian Cancer Intelligence Unit at Cambridge
University, said this will grow to well over 1,000,

    It shows the number of new cases reported annually increasing by 56 per cent
by 2018.

    But the total number living with cancers will be almost 70 per cent greater,
partly because of improved treatments.

    Numbers will also increase because people will be living longer and because
of rises in certain types of cancer, including non-melanoma skin cancers.

    The number of men developing prostate cancer will triple, so that by 2018
one in four will contract it at some point during their lives.

    Lung cancer will fall sharply among men over the next two decades but double
among women. This may be because women took up smoking on a large scale some 20
to 30 years after men, who are qiving up at a faster rate.

    Nicholas Young, chief executive of Macmillan Cancer Relief, said: 'The
predictions are alarming, but we can do so much more for people living with
cancers today than 20 years ago, and Macmillan is in the forefront in this
field.

    'The research highlights that it is absolutely vital to recognise that
cancer is not a single disease, but more than 100 quite different illnesses.

    FIND NEW LOVE WITH HERB FROM THE PAST

    A HERBAL medicine used in the Middle Ages could help revive women's love
lives after the menopause, according to new research.

    Extracts of the plant St John's wort - hypericum perforatum - were given to
women who complained that they no longer felt attractive and had lost interest
in sex.

    After taking hypericum tablets for three months, more than two thirds of 111
women who saw their doctors with menopausal problems felt desirable again, while
only 15 per cent still put sex low on their list of priorities.

    The supplement, already a proven anti-depressant with fewer side effects
than man-made drugs, helped boost the women's self-esteem and confidence.

    'The new self-confidence appeared to lead to a recovery of the natural
desire for a fulfilled sex life,' said Dr Barbara Grube, who led the German
study. 'For the mature woman, this can be better than ever'.

    Hypericum tablets are sold in Britain through health food shops and are not
licensed as prescription drugs.


LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1997


                              204 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1997 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            MAIL ON SUNDAY (London)

                                 June 01, 1997

SECTION: Pg. 11

LENGTH: 167 words

HEADLINE: Wizard for Cyclacel

BYLINE: Richard Grant

BODY:



    THE Merlin Fund, the City's innovative $33 million vehicle for backing
biotech entrepreneur Chris Evans, is poised to make its first substantial
investment this week.

    It plans to put millions of pounds into Cyclacel, a Scottish company formed
by Evans to back investigations into the selective destruction of cancer cells
using gene therapy.

    The Merlin Fund was set up to nurture infant biotech companies before they
floated.

    Since 1993, early-stage investors in UK biotech stocks have enjoyed an
average 77% compound return.

    Two companies started by Evans - Celsis and

    Chiroscience - averaged 3,000% return for early-stage investors, compared
with 20% since flotation.

    A new investment trust, Reabourne Merlin Life Sciences, which will hold up
to 20% of the Merlin Fund, is thought likely to raise $50 million after
well-received presentations last week.

    Major investors in the trust will include Equitable Life, which already owns
a large part of Merlin.


GRAPHIC: ENTREPRENEUR CHRIS EVANS

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1997


                              221 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1997 MGN Ltd.
                                   The Mirror

                             March 3, 1997, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1907 words

HEADLINE: FIRST IT WAS DOLLY THE SHEEP, NOW MONKEYS .. SHOULD CLONING HUMANS BE
ALLOWED?;
THE MONDAY DEBATE;
DEBATE ON CLONING HUMANS

BODY:


    We thought it was just science fiction but cloning became science fact last
week when Scottish scientists announced they had cloned a sheep called Dolly.

    And yesterday it was reported that monkeys have been cloned in America.
Will humans be next?

    Would you allow yourself to be cloned? Read our two contrasting views and
vote now.

    YES

    Steve Jones, Professor of Genetics, University College, London.

    In the early days of heart transplants people called for the operations to
be outlawed, fearing scientists could build people using transplant bits.

    It wasn't an unreasonable worry at the time.

    But now, with the benefit of 30 years hindsight, we know it's an
impossibility.

    Imagine the hundreds of thousands of people who would have died if
transplant surgery was banned.

    I can't help thinking that in 50 years time we will be looking back at the
idea of a blanket ban on cloning in the same way.

    To some extent, human cloning is already happening.

    Scientists across the world use HeLa cells, human cells from a woman who
lived in Chicago in the Thirties, which have been endlessly cloned for use in
experiments. Billions of her cells are washed down sinks all the time.

    I can understand that people are worried, but to outlaw this technology
completely would be a disaster for science.

    There is no guarantee it will work. It may not even be possible to clone a
human being - but if there is a ban we will never know.

    It's silly to take the ethical high ground with technology which is in its
early days, because we might do more harm than good.

    I think it's important to separate possibility from probability.

    THE idea of someone cloning somebody like Saddam Hussein is like that.

    Who would want to -and even if there was some lunatic who did, would it
matter? It would be a complete one-off.

    It is remotely conceivable that in 20 years technology will be so good that
people could clone replacement hearts and kidneys and live for 150 years. But
it's not likely.

    Who would perform that sort of operation and, to be honest, who would want
be around when they are 150?

    To ban cloning on the basis of these remote possibilities is throwing the
baby out with the bath water when you look at things in terms of the medical
benefits.

    Personally, I would happily have my cells cloned if I or one of my family
became ill - although I wouldn't want a younger, identical version of myself
cloned.

    To be honest, I like to think that when God made me he broke the mould!

    Professor Jones's new book on genetics, In The Blood, is out today priced
pounds 12.99 from Harper Collins.

    NO

    David Alton, Lib Dem MP, who is calling for the suspension of any further
cloning.

    The Nobel Peace Prize winner, Joseph Rotblat, said that if science is
uncontrolled we risk genetics developing as an area of mass destruction.

    I agree. Science is in danger of running ahead of our ability to handle its
implications.

    Before racing to create genetically engineered "beautiful people", we must
think about the implications.

    I would like to see the outlawing of all cloning and closer controls of
genetic developments.

    If technology allowed, human cloning would happen. It could lead to the
creation of robotic humans who have been dehumanised.

    Could we develop nightmare kingdoms with people answerable to strict quality
controls? We already reject babies if they have disabilities.  Will cloning mean
we reject adults as well?

    We risk developing a genetic underclass - people who are not wanted for
cloning because they have inferior DNA. People will view genes with envy or
contempt. Birthright will become right birth.

    We have no idea of the risks or the consequences cloning might bring.

    ALTHOUGH we may introduce legislation, what about other countries?
Technology crosses borders.

    This is all happening in the name of money and an insatiable urge to dabble
in the grotesque.

    We should be much more cautious with scientific developments, particularly
in the light of BSE. If we were to ban cloning, there could still be limited
gene therapy which would allow research into curing diseases, but it must be
controlled.

    For 30 years scientists have been trying to justify things by saying they
might lead to cures for terrible diseases. These are arguments used to convince
the public and legitimise what they are doing.

    We can't put the whole basis of humanity at risk and take the chance of
letting other cancers and diseases out of the genie's bottle.

    We must challenge the idea that all science is good.

    I don't think I would ever want to be cloned. You may duplicate the body,
but what about the soul?

    Cloning is part of our constant desire to cheat death but the idea that we
can or should continue forever is bogus, tantalising nonsense.

    Anyway, I'm sure my enemies would be horrified to find a double of me
running around.

    What's YOUR view?

    YES

    0891 525 551

    NO

    0891 525 552

    Calls should cost no more than 10p Lines close at 6pm today

    Write to: The Mirror, 1 Canada Square, Canary Wharf, London E14 5AP FAX:
0171 293 3834

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1997


                              229 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 14, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 10;11;12

LENGTH: 3374 words

HEADLINE: The man who dared to speak out about Britain's silent killer;
WEEKEND

BYLINE: Frances Hardy

BODY:



    Michael Korda led a charmed life - top publisher, best-selling author, a man
who grew up surrounded by glamour. Then, shortly before his 60th birthday, he
was told he had prostate cancer. After painful, emotionally traumatic treatment,
he decided to speak out about a disease most men choose to fight alone..

    Men in general are not given to intimate discussion of their ailments; still
less do they care to admit to the crushing humiliation of lost sexual potency or
the awful indignity of incontinence. But Michael Korda is an unabashed
exception.

    Consider the mettle of the man: until 1994, life had blessed him
inordinately. Only the resolutely austere would not have envied his dazzling
lifestyle, his country ranch, his thoroughbred horses, Margaret, his elegant,
ex-model wife. The dashing editor-in-chief of New York-based publisher Simon &
Schuster had published a string of best sellers then turned his hand with equal
panache to writing. His hobbies were flamboyant: rodeo-riding, racing Porsches,
Ferraris and flashy motorcycles.

    Michael Korda was born in London; his childhood was spent jetting from
exclusive schools to holidays on his uncle's yacht with Graham Greene. His uncle
was Alexander Korda, the film tycoon who produced some of the biggest box office
hits of the Thirties and Forties, including Anna Karenina and The Scarlet
Pimpernel, and it was Uncle Alex who sent him to Oxford.

    Michael Korda's family memoir, Charmed Lives, celebrates a life of
spectacular privilege which, it seemed, nothing had blighted.

    Until two years ago, that is, when he developed prostate cancer. Korda was
given the diagnosis shortly before his 60th birthday and, crushingly, after an
initial biopsy had falsely assured him he had no need to worry. 'It was the most
shocking and surprising thing,' he recalled. 'I'd always enjoyed exceptionally
good health up until then, so I was perhaps less prepared for it than I might
have been. But it was like entering a new world.

    'Men do not talk to each other about their bodies and their ailments.

    They are particularly reluctant to talk about prostate cancer because they
fear the potential side effects of surgery - impotence and incontinence - at
least as much as they fear death itself. To these fears is therefore added a
dreadful loneliness, for unlike women, who tend to bond together in distress,
men - certainly in the face of this disease - retreat into silence. For many of
them, prostate cancer is a private battle, and because of that, it is all too
often lost.

    'It's difficult for them to talk, even to women who are very close to them,
because of the possible sexual ramifications of the operation. They're on their
own. Now compare that to women and breast cancer. Women read about it in s
magazines. They involve themselves in their own health. They're conscious of it.
Yet the number of deaths from prostate cancer is almost exactly the same as that
from breast cancer.'

    Korda had two choices: retreat into the isolating silence of his own fears,
or break the taboo and talk. Boldy, he chose the latter. Naturally voluble, he
used to favour stories about his own glittering life; anecdotes featuring a
veritable Who's Who of celebrities, from his uncle's friends Winston Churchill,
Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh, to his own associates, the Kissingers, Ronald
Reagan, the big shots of the publishing world.

    Now he talks with undiminished fervour about illness, indignity and pain.

    He proselytizes about the need for early detection and unflinchingly exposes
the mortifying personal side effects of surgery. Vitally, he also sends out a
message of hope. Today, two years after the removal of his prostate, the cancer
has gone; his continence is almost restored and his virility is returning.

    'Of course,' he concedes, 'whatever way you go, sex will be different.

    Not necessarily worse. Just different. In any case, sex at 63 is not the
same as it was at 33; at 33 it isn't the same as it was at 17.

    'In a lot of cases, verbal communication about sex has been lacking in
people's lives, and with this disease it's going to be unavoidable. And there's
a fixation in the male mind that sexuality consists entirely of erection and
penetration - something that for centuries every woman has been trying to
explain is not necessarily so. As for incontinence, I'm over that now. I have 95
per cent continence, which is actually better than for most women who've had
children.'

    Now Michael Korda has written a book, Man To Man, which charts with
startling frankness exactly what happened to him; from the first warning signs
to diagnosis, operation and recovery. In the weeks after surgery he recalls: 'I
found myself shut in and brooding about what happened. I thought: 'This really
is a story that ought to be told.''

    Now, in the US at least, the glamorous Michael Korda has become the
high-profile public face of an insidious and fast-growing disease. In Britain,
deaths from prostate cancer are set to double to about 18,000 over the next 15
years; more will die from it than any other cancer. Yet here, as in America, it
is lamentably under-resourced: cancer charities give $15 million to breast
cancer research as against $400,000 to studying the prostate.

    Korda is alarmed by the low level of awareness, the almost wilful blindness
of potential victims. 'Men do not share with each other the information they
have or talk openly. That's why I set out to write a book.

    I wanted to sound the trumpet and say: 'How many of you have had tests for
prostate cancer? How many of you know exactly what your PSA level is ?'' (The
level in the blood of a substance called prostate specific antigen is higher in
men with prostate cancer.) 'I've written the book to help people.

    It's terrific to be able to turn my illness into help for others. The
after-effects of my operation were not pleasant, but they're a lot better than
death, which is the alternative.'

    Korda learned he had cancer in October 1994. Immediately, he went to his
country home to tell Margaret. 'I can't believe we're having this conversation,'
his wife says in the book. 'Yesterday we were talking about going to Santa Fe
for Thanksgiving and Christmas.'

    There seemed no justice in the diagnosis: Korda had always been fit; he no
longer smoked, ate sensibly and drank only in moderation. His first reaction -
one typical of an editor - was to read obsessively about the disease. One study
revealed that men who'd had vasectomies, as he had done soon after he and
Margaret married 16 years earlier, were found to be nearly twice as prone to the
cancer as those who had not.

    He writes in his book: 'In moments of crisis between us, the subject of my
vasectomy occasionally arose, usually as in: 'Remember what I did for you', to
which Margaret would respond that I had agreed to it of my own free will. The
truth, for what it is worth, lying as usual somewhere in between.'

    Korda knew he must act quickly. Although the disease has a reputation for
being slow to develop, he had seen four friends die of it, two quite recently:
'It's by far and away the most dreadful way to die of all the cancers - your
bones are eaten away by tumours. A urologist referred to it as a spectacularly
awful death, and when a doctor says that you ought to be listening,' he said.

    Korda chose Dr Patrick Walsh, a superstar surgeon at Baltimore, to operate.
He had pioneered a method of removing the prostate without severing the nerve
bundles that help control erections. The operation, although traumatic, was a
success. During the next three months Korda walked daily, supported on one side
by Margaret and on the other by a male nurse. By March he had begun to go into
the office, despite his irrational fears that he might fall on the crowded city
streeets, opening his incision. He confined himself to an hour's work, then a
rest and lunch, before returning for another hour in the afternoon. At night he
would stay at his Manhattan flat rather than face an arduous two-hour drive to
be with Margaret at their country home.

    In his narrative, Korda makes his wife an equal partner in the story,
charting her emotions as meticulously as he does his own. The side effects of
surgery create an exceptional strain on even the most robust partnership.

    Margaret, an accomplished equestrian, comments: 'It was a very harrowing
time. My emotions weren't the same from one 30-minute period to the next. I went
through cycles: anger that it was happening because it would change everything,
relief that it wasn't me, fear that Michael might die. And sometimes - we were
going to the hospital a lot in New York - I would just remove myself, just get
in the car and come up here (to their farm in Poughkeepsie). Just take time out
and ride.

    'Fortunately, the people I'm with every day, the people that work in my barn
and my part-time housekeeper, were all made aware of it straightaway.

    That way it was no big deal. I'd talk about it every day with them and
they'd talk about it with me. When there were tears, there'd be tears about it
together.'

    Most people who brush closely with death make extravagant resolutions about
how their lives will change; Michael Korda was no exception. 'While I was
recovering from surgery I told Margaret that if I survived we ought to spend the
rest of our lives doing just what we wanted to. I would give up working and
commuting, we would spend more time together, I would learn how to make Chinese
food, we would go down the Nile together.

    'Needless to say, once back on my feet again I resumed work and commuting, I
have yet to buy my cooking knives, but we did go down the Nile.'

    And there are often unexpected benefits, subtle bonuses derived from serious
illness that help to ennoble and enrich even the most blessed lives.

    'Prostate cancer is not without its silver lining. It teaches you not to be
afraid. I've always been frightened of being helpless. But I had cancer and I
came back from it. The worst they can throw at you is not unbearable.

    'I think if cancer doesn't change you, you have to be a real putz. I'm not
saying you have to emerge as St Francis of Assisi, but you should come out with
a more profound view of mortality, and more tolerance, than you had before. I
find I simply don't let myself get upset any more.'

    Michael Korda's optimism is tempered by realism; through his book runs a
vein of stern reproach to those who assume a stance of invincible bravado in the
face of cancer. John Wayne remarked that he had 'licked the Big C'.

    'Of course he hadn't,' Korda writes. 'It came back and licked him, in the
end.' Of his own cancer he comments with cautious confidence: 'There are no
signs that it has returned. But you never win totally. Cancer is a lot more
powerful than me or you. You survive it, but that's the most you can say, and
you hope that the survival will last for a long period of time.'

    Man To Man: Surviving Prostate Cancer by Michael Korda is published by
Little Brown $18.99.

    Prostate cancer: The facts and the future

    At 10,000 deaths a year, Britain has Europe's second-highest mortality rate
from prostate cancer. The figure has doubled in the past 20 years and some
experts predict that it will reach 'epidemic proportions' over the next few
decades. An estimated 2 million men in Britain over 50 probably have the
disease, though only a small percentage will die from it.

    One theory is that pollution and a diet high in fat and low in fibre are
behind the rise. Men are also living longer, and the disease grows more common
with age. Despite its high incidence, surveys show that men remain ill-informed
and most do not even know where their prostate (a walnut-shaped gland below the
bladder) is.

    Symptons of prostate cancer include passing urine more frequently, blood in
the urine or semen and pains in the pelvic region. However, there are often no
signs until the disease is advanced, making early detection difficult.

    In the U.S., health organisations recommend routine screening for men over
45. This involves a blood test to assess levels of PSA (prostate specific
antigen) in the blood as well as a rectal examination. However, neither is 100
per cent accurate and PSA screening remains controversial. Even if early cancer
cells are detected, there is no way of telling whether a tumour is likely to
spread rapidly or remain latent.

    The most common forms of treatment are surgery to remove the prostate,
radiation therapy and use of chemicals to suppress prostrate activitity. All
involve a high risk of impotence and incontinence. Without surgery, however, a
fast-growing tumour could swiftly spread to the lymph nodes or bones, becoming
incurable.

    Research is ongoing, but even the newer treatments are not problem-free.

    'Seed' radiation, in which miniscule radioactive pellets are embedded into
the tumour to destroy it, still has side-effects. And Cryoablation, which
freezes the prostate tissue to kill tumours, is still at an experimental stage.

    Scientists are now working on gene therapy, which involves altering the
nature of the tumour so that it becomes more responsive to treatment. 'I believe
this will make an impact over the next three to five years,' said Dr Jonathan
Waxman, director of the the Prostate Cancer Charity and consultant oncologist at
the Hammersmith Hospital, west London.  'I am very optimistic that prospects
will improve for sufferers. But this will only happen if research continues, and
people keep up the pressure for more funding.'


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996


                              230 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               December 14, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 10;11;12

LENGTH: 2274 words

HEADLINE: The man who dared to speak out about Britain's silent killer;
WEEKEND

BYLINE: Frances Hardy

BODY:



    Michael Korda led a charmed life - top publisher, best-selling author, a man
who grew up surrounded by glamour. Then, shortly before his 60th birthday, he
was told he had prostate cancer. After painful, emotionally traumatic treatment,
he decided to speak out about a disease most men choose to fight alone..

    Men in general are not given to intimate discussion of their ailments; still
less do they care to admit to the crushing humiliation of lost sexual potency or
the awful indignity of incontinence. But Michael Korda is an unabashed
exception.

    Consider the mettle of the man: until 1994, life had blessed him
inordinately. Only the resolutely austere would not have envied his dazzling
lifestyle, his country ranch, his thoroughbred horses, Margaret, his elegant,
ex-model wife. The dashing editor-in-chief of New York-based publisher Simon &
Schuster had published a string of best sellers then turned his hand with equal
panache to writing. His hobbies were flamboyant: rodeo-riding, racing Porsches,
Ferraris and flashy motorcycles.

    Michael Korda was born in London; his childhood was spent jetting from
exclusive schools to holidays on his uncle's yacht with Graham Greene. His uncle
was Alexander Korda, the film tycoon who produced some of the biggest box office
hits of the Thirties and Forties, including Anna Karenina and The Scarlet
Pimpernel, and it was Uncle Alex who sent him to Oxford.

    Michael Korda's family memoir, Charmed Lives, celebrates a life of
spectacular privilege which, it seemed, nothing had blighted.

    Until two years ago, that is, when he developed prostate cancer. Korda was
given the diagnosis shortly before his 60th birthday and, crushingly, after an
initial biopsy had falsely assured him he had no need to worry. 'It was the most
shocking and surprising thing,' he recalled. 'I'd always enjoyed exceptionally
good health up until then, so I was perhaps less prepared for it than I might
have been. But it was like entering a new world.

    'Men do not talk to each other about their bodies and their ailments.

    They are particularly reluctant to talk about prostate cancer because they
fear the potential side effects of surgery - impotence and incontinence - at
least as much as they fear death itself. To these fears is therefore added a
dreadful loneliness, for unlike women, who tend to bond together in distress,
men - certainly in the face of this disease - retreat into silence. For many of
them, prostate cancer is a private battle, and because of that, it is all too
often lost.

    'It's difficult for them to talk, even to women who are very close to them,
because of the possible sexual ramifications of the operation. They're on their
own. Now compare that to women and breast cancer. Women read about it in s
magazines. They involve themselves in their own health. They're conscious of it.
Yet the number of deaths from prostate cancer is almost exactly the same as that
from breast cancer.'

    Korda had two choices: retreat into the isolating silence of his own fears,
or break the taboo and talk. Boldy, he chose the latter. Naturally voluble, he
used to favour stories about his own glittering life; anecdotes featuring a
veritable Who's Who of celebrities, from his uncle's friends Winston Churchill,
Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh, to his own associates, the Kissingers, Ronald
Reagan, the big shots of the publishing world.

    Now he talks with undiminished fervour about illness, indignity and pain.

    He proselytizes about the need for early detection and unflinchingly exposes
the mortifying personal side effects of surgery. Vitally, he also sends out a
message of hope. Today, two years after the removal of his prostate, the cancer
has gone; his continence is almost restored and his virility is returning.

    'Of course,' he concedes, 'whatever way you go, sex will be different.

    Not necessarily worse. Just different. In any case, sex at 63 is not the
same as it was at 33; at 33 it isn't the same as it was at 17.

    'In a lot of cases, verbal communication about sex has been lacking in
people's lives, and with this disease it's going to be unavoidable. And there's
a fixation in the male mind that sexuality consists entirely of erection and
penetration - something that for centuries every woman has been trying to
explain is not necessarily so. As for incontinence, I'm over that now. I have 95
per cent continence, which is actually better than for most women who've had
children.'

    Now Michael Korda has written a book, Man To Man, which charts with
startling frankness exactly what happened to him; from the first warning signs
to diagnosis, operation and recovery. In the weeks after surgery he recalls: 'I
found myself shut in and brooding about what happened. I thought: 'This really
is a story that ought to be told.''

    Now, in the US at least, the glamorous Michael Korda has become the
high-profile public face of an insidious and fast-growing disease. In Britain,
deaths from prostate cancer are set to double to about 18,000 over the next 15
years; more will die from it than any other cancer. Yet here, as in America, it
is lamentably under-resourced: cancer charities give $15 million to breast
cancer research as against $400,000 to studying the prostate.

    Korda is alarmed by the low level of awareness, the almost wilful blindness
of potential victims. 'Men do not share with each other the information they
have or talk openly. That's why I set out to write a book.

    I wanted to sound the trumpet and say: 'How many of you have had tests for
prostate cancer? How many of you know exactly what your PSA level is ?'' (The
level in the blood of a substance called prostate specific antigen is higher in
men with prostate cancer.) 'I've written the book to help people.

    It's terrific to be able to turn my illness into help for others. The
after-effects of my operation were not pleasant, but they're a lot better than
death, which is the alternative.'

    Korda learned he had cancer in October 1994. Immediately, he went to his
country home to tell Margaret. 'I can't believe we're having this conversation,'
his wife says in the book. 'Yesterday we were talking about going to Santa Fe
for Thanksgiving and Christmas.'

    There seemed no justice in the diagnosis: Korda had always been fit; he no
longer smoked, ate sensibly and drank only in moderation. His first reaction -
one typical of an editor - was to read obsessively about the disease. One study
revealed that men who'd had vasectomies, as he had done soon after he and
Margaret married 16 years earlier, were found to be nearly twice as prone to the
cancer as those who had not.

    He writes in his book: 'In moments of crisis between us, the subject of my
vasectomy occasionally arose, usually as in: 'Remember what I did for you', to
which Margaret would respond that I had agreed to it of my own free will. The
truth, for what it is worth, lying as usual somewhere in between.'

    Korda knew he must act quickly. Although the disease has a reputation for
being slow to develop, he had seen four friends die of it, two quite recently:
'It's by far and away the most dreadful way to die of all the cancers - your
bones are eaten away by tumours. A urologist referred to it as a spectacularly
awful death, and when a doctor says that you ought to be listening,' he said.

    Korda chose Dr Patrick Walsh, a superstar surgeon at Baltimore, to operate.
He had pioneered a method of removing the prostate without severing the nerve
bundles that help control erections. The operation, although traumatic, was a
success. During the next three months Korda walked daily, supported on one side
by Margaret and on the other by a male nurse. By March he had begun to go into
the office, despite his irrational fears that he might fall on the crowded city
streeets, opening his incision. He confined himself to an hour's work, then a
rest and lunch, before returning for another hour in the afternoon. At night he
would stay at his Manhattan flat rather than face an arduous two-hour drive to
be with Margaret at their country home.

    In his narrative, Korda makes his wife an equal partner in the story,
charting her emotions as meticulously as he does his own. The side effects of
surgery create an exceptional strain on even the most robust partnership.

    Margaret, an accomplished equestrian, comments: 'It was a very harrowing
time. My emotions weren't the same from one 30-minute period to the next. I went
through cycles: anger that it was happening because it would change everything,
relief that it wasn't me, fear that Michael might die. And sometimes - we were
going to the hospital a lot in New York - I would just remove myself, just get
in the car and come up here (to their farm in Poughkeepsie). Just take time out
and ride.

    'Fortunately, the people I'm with every day, the people that work in my barn
and my part-time housekeeper, were all made aware of it straightaway.

    That way it was no big deal. I'd talk about it every day with them and
they'd talk about it with me. When there were tears, there'd be tears about it
together.'

    Most people who brush closely with death make extravagant resolutions about
how their lives will change; Michael Korda was no exception. 'While I was
recovering from surgery I told Margaret that if I survived we ought to spend the
rest of our lives doing just what we wanted to. I would give up working and
commuting, we would spend more time together, I would learn how to make Chinese
food, we would go down the Nile together.

    'Needless to say, once back on my feet again I resumed work and commuting, I
have yet to buy my cooking knives, but we did go down the Nile.'

    And there are often unexpected benefits, subtle bonuses derived from serious
illness that help to ennoble and enrich even the most blessed lives.

    'Prostate cancer is not without its silver lining. It teaches you not to be
afraid. I've always been frightened of being helpless. But I had cancer and I
came back from it. The worst they can throw at you is not unbearable.

    'I think if cancer doesn't change you, you have to be a real putz. I'm not
saying you have to emerge as St Francis of Assisi, but you should come out with
a more profound view of mortality, and more tolerance, than you had before. I
find I simply don't let myself get upset any more.'

    Michael Korda's optimism is tempered by realism; through his book runs a
vein of stern reproach to those who assume a stance of invincible bravado in the
face of cancer. John Wayne remarked that he had 'licked the Big C'.

    'Of course he hadn't,' Korda writes. 'It came back and licked him, in the
end.' Of his own cancer he comments with cautious confidence: 'There are no
signs that it has returned. But you never win totally. Cancer is a lot more
powerful than me or you. You survive it, but that's the most you can say, and
you hope that the survival will last for a long period of time.'

    Man To Man: Surviving Prostate Cancer by Michael Korda is published by
Little Brown $18.99.

    Prostate cancer: The facts and the future

    At 10,000 deaths a year, Britain has Europe's second-highest mortality rate
from prostate cancer. The figure has doubled in the past 20 years and some
experts predict that it will reach 'epidemic proportions' over the next few
decades. An estimated 2 million men in Britain over 50 probably have the
disease, though only a small percentage will die from it.

    One theory is that pollution and a diet high in fat and low in fibre are
behind the rise. Men are also living longer, and the disease grows more common
with age. Despite its high incidence, surveys show that men remain ill-informed
and most do not even know where their prostate (a walnut-shaped gland below the
bladder) is.

    Symptons of prostate cancer include passing urine more frequently, blood in
the urine or semen and pains in the pelvic region. However, there are often no
signs until the disease is advanced, making early detection difficult.

    In the U.S., health organisations recommend routine screening for men over
45. This involves a blood test to assess levels of PSA (prostate specific
antigen) in the blood as well as a rectal examination. However, neither is 100
per cent accurate and PSA screening remains controversial. Even if early cancer
cells are detected, there is no way of telling whether a tumour is likely to
spread rapidly or remain latent.

    The most common forms of treatment are surgery to remove the prostate,
radiation therapy and use of chemicals to suppress prostrate activitity. All
involve a high risk of impotence and incontinence. Without surgery, however, a
fast-growing tumour could swiftly spread to the lymph nodes or bones, becoming
incurable.

    Research is ongoing, but even the newer treatments are not problem-free.

    'Seed' radiation, in which miniscule radioactive pellets are embedded into
the tumour to destroy it, still has side-effects. And Cryoablation, which
freezes the prostate tissue to kill tumours, is still at an experimental stage.

    Scientists are now working on gene therapy, which involves altering the
nature of the tumour so that it becomes more responsive to treatment. 'I believe
this will make an impact over the next three to five years,' said Dr Jonathan
Waxman, director of the the Prostate Cancer Charity and consultant oncologist at
the Hammersmith Hospital, west London.  'I am very optimistic that prospects
will improve for sufferers. But this will only happen if research continues, and
people keep up the pressure for more funding.'


LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1996


                              239 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 27, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 1360 words

HEADLINE: ONE DAY THIS GUN COULD CURE CANCER,CYSTIC FIBROSIS,BURNS,WOUNDS AND
EVEN BALDNESS;
GOOD HEALTH,DEVELOPMENTS

BYLINE: Lucy Shakeshaft

BODY:



    ALTHOUGH it looks like something out of a James Bond movie, it may help one
day in the treatment of everything from cancer and cystic fibrosis to baldness
and skin grafts.

    It also has big implications for research in immunology, wound healing, gene
therapy and tumour treatment.

    The Helios Gene Gun System, due to be launched in America later this month,
is designed to help the body combat inborn genetic disorders and to treat
cancerous or infectious diseases by shooting minute doses of DNA - the genetic
blueprint - into infected areas.

    At the moment the pistol-like device is being used in laboratories on
animals, but it could be ready for human use within a few years.

    Every cell in the human body, apart from red blood cells, contains DNA; and
any cell can therefore be used for DNA analysis.

    Over the past couple of years, DNA testing has emerged as a vital tool in a
range of applications, using samples obtained from saliva, hair-root, semen,
blood, bones or any other part of the body.

    Police use it to screen large numbers of people in the hunt for perpetrators
of serious crimes, mothers use it to determine identities of reluctant fathers
in maintenance cases, and courts use it to determine ownership of animals.

    Scientists are now working on a way of using it to discover rogue genes
responsible for various hereditary diseases, such as cystic fibrosis.

    Every week in Britain five babies are born with this incurable disease, one
of our most common life-threatening conditions.

    The disease can be inherited if both parents carry a genetic fault, and one
in 25 of the population is thought to carry this faulty gene unknowingly.

    The Helios could help by supplementing defective genes, which may be inborn,
cancerous or infectious, with normal ones, thus transforming their genetic
make-up. It would mean that genetic disorders could be reversed.

    It could also have tremendous possibilities for immunology. Animals could be
vaccinated with DNA containing codes for a specific antibody. Inserted genes
could also produce potentially therapeutic proteins in tumours.

    Cancerous cells, wounds, burns and infected tissue could also make their own
cures after being shot with this gun.

    It could even help to fight hair-loss, which affects about 50 per cent of
adult men.

    The hand-held device has been developed by DuPont over the past five years
and is being marketed by Bio-Rad, an American laboratory equipment company with
a British base in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire.

    The device works by coating microscopic non-toxic gold particles with the
required DNA and loading them into a cartridge.

    They are fired into living tissue by a short powerful pulse of helium.

    The genetic material on the gold 'bullets' is then incorporated into the
target cells directly.

    As the gold is an inert material, the method has few of the adverse effects
of viral or chemical methods, allowing it to be used on living organisms.

    Bio-Rad product manager Mary Schramke said: 'It's a very simple but
effective method and it's breaking new barriers in science.

    'The gun could be used to replace defective genes, insert new ones as
'helpers' to the existing set-up, or put in special 'turn-off' genes which could
override cancer cells.

    'The potential is there for very natural treatments and it's tremendously
exciting. Just a small piece of corrective DNA can make the whole body react in
a different way.'

    Any type of cell that can be made accessible to the nozzle of the Helios -
which holds 12 bullet-like capsules in a cartridge and can be fired at
five-second intervals - is capable of being bombarded and transformed.

    Each 'bullet' is so minute that it can enter the body without causing any
damage to the skin.

    Biologist Peter Sandbach, who is helping to market the gun in Britain, says:
'The potential for this technology is tremendous. It's different and it will
make people think about what is actually possible.

    'There's a lot of work still to be done but I would like to think that it
could be a treatment for diseases like cancer. We're now at the stage in biology
which Dalton was at, when he thought there might be such a thing as an atom.
It's very exciting.'

    The gun, which has not yet been approved by the Government for clinical use,
will soon be available to researchers in universities, medical schools and
biotechnology centres.


GRAPHIC: FIRING OPTIMISM:THE HELIOS GENE GUN SYSTEM MAY LEAD TO BREAKTHROUGH
CURES

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                              240 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                August 27, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: ONE DAY THIS GUN COULD CURE CANCER,CYSTIC FIBROSIS,BURNS,WOUNDS AND
EVEN BALDNESS;
GOOD HEALTH,DEVELOPMENTS

BYLINE: Lucy Shakeshaft

BODY:



    ALTHOUGH it looks like something out of a James Bond movie, it may help one
day in the treatment of everything from cancer and cystic fibrosis to baldness
and skin grafts.

    It also has big implications for research in immunology, wound healing, gene
therapy and tumour treatment.

    The Helios Gene Gun System, due to be launched in America later this month,
is designed to help the body combat inborn genetic disorders and to treat
cancerous or infectious diseases by shooting minute doses of DNA - the genetic
blueprint - into infected areas.

    At the moment the pistol-like device is being used in laboratories on
animals, but it could be ready for human use within a few years.

    Every cell in the human body, apart from red blood cells, contains DNA; and
any cell can therefore be used for DNA analysis.

    Over the past couple of years, DNA testing has emerged as a vital tool in a
range of applications, using samples obtained from saliva, hair-root, semen,
blood, bones or any other part of the body.

    Police use it to screen large numbers of people in the hunt for perpetrators
of serious crimes, mothers use it to determine identities of reluctant fathers
in maintenance cases, and courts use it to determine ownership of animals.

    Scientists are now working on a way of using it to discover rogue genes
responsible for various hereditary diseases, such as cystic fibrosis.

    Every week in Britain five babies are born with this incurable disease, one
of our most common life-threatening conditions.

    The disease can be inherited if both parents carry a genetic fault, and one
in 25 of the population is thought to carry this faulty gene unknowingly.

    The Helios could help by supplementing defective genes, which may be inborn,
cancerous or infectious, with normal ones, thus transforming their genetic
make-up. It would mean that genetic disorders could be reversed.

    It could also have tremendous possibilities for immunology. Animals could be
vaccinated with DNA containing codes for a specific antibody. Inserted genes
could also produce potentially therapeutic proteins in tumours.

    Cancerous cells, wounds, burns and infected tissue could also make their own
cures after being shot with this gun.

    It could even help to fight hair-loss, which affects about 50 per cent of
adult men.

    The hand-held device has been developed by DuPont over the past five years
and is being marketed by Bio-Rad, an American laboratory equipment company with
a British base in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire.

    The device works by coating microscopic non-toxic gold particles with the
required DNA and loading them into a cartridge.

    They are fired into living tissue by a short powerful pulse of helium.

    The genetic material on the gold 'bullets' is then incorporated into the
target cells directly.

    As the gold is an inert material, the method has few of the adverse effects
of viral or chemical methods, allowing it to be used on living organisms.

    Bio-Rad product manager Mary Schramke said: 'It's a very simple but
effective method and it's breaking new barriers in science.

    'The gun could be used to replace defective genes, insert new ones as
'helpers' to the existing set-up, or put in special 'turn-off' genes which could
override cancer cells.

    'The potential is there for very natural treatments and it's tremendously
exciting. Just a small piece of corrective DNA can make the whole body react in
a different way.'

    Any type of cell that can be made accessible to the nozzle of the Helios -
which holds 12 bullet-like capsules in a cartridge and can be fired at
five-second intervals - is capable of being bombarded and transformed.

    Each 'bullet' is so minute that it can enter the body without causing any
damage to the skin.

    Biologist Peter Sandbach, who is helping to market the gun in Britain, says:
'The potential for this technology is tremendous. It's different and it will
make people think about what is actually possible.

    'There's a lot of work still to be done but I would like to think that it
could be a treatment for diseases like cancer. We're now at the stage in biology
which Dalton was at, when he thought there might be such a thing as an atom.
It's very exciting.'

    The gun, which has not yet been approved by the Government for clinical use,
will soon be available to researchers in universities, medical schools and
biotechnology centres.


GRAPHIC: FIRING OPTIMISM:THE HELIOS GENE GUN SYSTEM MAY LEAD TO BREAKTHROUGH
CURES

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1996


                              242 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                             July 2, 1996, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: TAKE A PICTURE AND SAVE A LIFE;
IMPROVE YOUR PHOTOS AND HELP A FAMOUS HOSPITAL'S VITAL HEART RESEARCH;
HEART OF BRITAIN CAMPAIGN LAUNCHED BY PRINCESS DIANA

BYLINE: Mike Maloney

BODY:


    SAVE A LIFE

    Heart of Britain is the charity campaign, launched yesterday by Princess
Diana, that aims to raise pounds 1.5 million for heart and lung research at
London's world-famous Royal Brompton Hospital.

    And the focus of that campaign is a photo competition that every Daily
Mirror reader can enter. From today till July 7, we want everyone with a camera
to take a picture that sums up the Heart Of Britain.

    You can then enter the Heart Of Britain photo contest using the form printed
on the back of this special supplement or available through bookshops, Dixons
stores and BP garages nationwide. A small donation should accompany every entry.

    The judges - top photographers and celebrities - will select the most
appealing, amusing, clever or moving images from those sent in.

    And the 300 winning entries will be featured in a special Heart Of Britain
book to be published in the autumn, with all profits going to the Appeal Fund.

    There are also prizes of cameras to be won by top entrants.

    So what do YOU think sums up the Heart Of Britain. What REALLY makes Britain
tick?

    There are nine categories you can enter: Caring Britain; Young Britain;
Animal Britain; Sporting Britain; Beautiful Britain; Britain On The Move; Good
Time Britain; Working Britain and Tomorrow's Britain.

    Whatever you choose to shoot, most modern cameras produce excellent
photographs without you needing to be a technical whizz.

    But a little professional help never goes amiss, so in this supplement Terry
O'Neill, top photographer of the rich and famous, gives his expert views on what
makes a perfect picture.

    So follow Terry's advice, put your heart in it and you'll come up with a
stunning snap that can help save a life.

    The Heart Of Britain campaign is a fund-raising project run by London's
Royal Brompton Hospital and supported by the Daily Mirror.

    The money raised will: l GET Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub's artificial heart
programme going.

    l SET up a dedicated paediatric catheter unit to save more children's and
babies' lives.

    l FUND research into stents - small metal "cages" which keep blocked
arteries open.

    l FUND more gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis, a killer lung disease
that hits under-30s.

    l AID a research project with the Royal Glasgow Infirmary into sudden death
in young adults.

    So pick up your cameras, snap away and enter the contest.

    You'll have loads of fun and you might win a great prize.

    But one thing is certain - every entry will sustain the vital work of the
Royal Brompton Hospital and keep a true Heart Of Britain beating.

GRAPHIC: DI-LIGHT;; Princess Diana's warmth and compassion for young Brompton
patients shows that she is Queen of Hearts Picture: KENT GAVIN, Royal
Photographer of the Year

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1996


                              243 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                             July 2, 1996, Tuesday

SECTION: FEATURES

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: TAKE A PICTURE AND SAVE A LIFE;
IMPROVE YOUR PHOTOS AND HELP A FAMOUS HOSPITAL'S VITAL HEART RESEARCH;
HEART OF BRITAIN CAMPAIGN LAUNCHED BY PRINCESS DIANA

BYLINE: Mike Maloney

BODY:


    SAVE A LIFE

    Heart of Britain is the charity campaign, launched yesterday by Princess
Diana, that aims to raise pounds 1.5 million for heart and lung research at
London's world-famous Royal Brompton Hospital.

    And the focus of that campaign is a photo competition that every Daily
Mirror reader can enter. From today till July 7, we want everyone with a camera
to take a picture that sums up the Heart Of Britain.

    You can then enter the Heart Of Britain photo contest using the form printed
on the back of this special supplement or available through bookshops, Dixons
stores and BP garages nationwide. A small donation should accompany every entry.

    The judges - top photographers and celebrities - will select the most
appealing, amusing, clever or moving images from those sent in.

    And the 300 winning entries will be featured in a special Heart Of Britain
book to be published in the autumn, with all profits going to the Appeal Fund.

    There are also prizes of cameras to be won by top entrants.

    So what do YOU think sums up the Heart Of Britain. What REALLY makes Britain
tick?

    There are nine categories you can enter: Caring Britain; Young Britain;
Animal Britain; Sporting Britain; Beautiful Britain; Britain On The Move; Good
Time Britain; Working Britain and Tomorrow's Britain.

    Whatever you choose to shoot, most modern cameras produce excellent
photographs without you needing to be a technical whizz.

    But a little professional help never goes amiss, so in this supplement Terry
O'Neill, top photographer of the rich and famous, gives his expert views on what
makes a perfect picture.

    So follow Terry's advice, put your heart in it and you'll come up with a
stunning snap that can help save a life.

    The Heart Of Britain campaign is a fund-raising project run by London's
Royal Brompton Hospital and supported by the Daily Mirror.

    The money raised will: l GET Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub's artificial heart
programme going.

    l SET up a dedicated paediatric catheter unit to save more children's and
babies' lives.

    l FUND research into stents - small metal "cages" which keep blocked
arteries open.

    l FUND more gene therapy to treat cystic fibrosis, a killer lung disease
that hits under-30s.

    l AID a research project with the Royal Glasgow Infirmary into sudden death
in young adults.

    So pick up your cameras, snap away and enter the contest.

    You'll have loads of fun and you might win a great prize.

    But one thing is certain - every entry will sustain the vital work of the
Royal Brompton Hospital and keep a true Heart Of Britain beating.

GRAPHIC: DI-LIGHT;; Princess Diana's warmth and compassion for young Brompton
patients shows that she is Queen of Hearts Picture: KENT GAVIN, Royal
Photographer of the Year

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1996


                              244 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                              July 1, 1996, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4, 5

LENGTH: 4934 words

HEADLINE: DI'S SEEN ME 5 TIMES;
NO CROWN, NO CURTSY, SAID LITTLE DANIELLE;
CHILDREN COMMENT ON MEETING PRINCESS DIANA IN ROYAL BROMPTON HOSPITAL AT START
OF HEART OF BRITAIN APPEAL

BYLINE: Jill Palmer And James Whitaker

BODY:


    DANIELLE STEPHENSON, seven, had revolutionary treatment to "burn away"
irregularities in her heart

    It was a royal request. But when you are seven years old and have recently
undergone heart surgery, there are more interesting things to do than chat to a
princess.

    So when Diana took Danielle Stephenson by the hand and asked her to walk
round the hospital ward with her, Danielle was adamant.

    "I can't. I'm going to McDonald's," she smiled politely. And skipped off
with her six-year-old sister Natasha.

    Danielle is one of 16 young patients at London's Royal Brompton Hospital who
were photographed with Princess Diana for the launch of the Heart of Britain
charity campaign.

    Each child she met has a personal story of triumph and trauma.

    Each has been close to death but thanks to the expertise of the Brompton's
caring doctors and nurses, most will eventually leave the hospital fit, healthy
and ready to face the future.

    Here, the Mirror tells all 16 tales of courage, with cheeky Danielle the
centrepiece of the youngsters' stories.

    Danielle, from Southend on Sea, Essex, had a dangerously irregular heart
rhythm which could have killed her at any moment.

    Yet she appeared perfectly healthy until she collapsed at Brownies in March.
Drugs and a pacemaker failed to cure the problem.

    And moments of crisis when her heart raced and she needed intensive care to
stabilise her were increasing.

    She became critically ill and was even put on the heart transplant list.

    But on May 24, she became one of the first children in Britain to undergo an
amazing new treatment to burn away the abnormal electrical pathways inside her
heart which were causing its irregular beat.

    The intricate six-hour procedure involved putting special wires into her
heart via an artery in her groin.

    It has been carried out only a handful of times worldwide.

    But thankfully for Danielle, it was a complete success.

    She spent a total of three months in hospital during which Princess Diana
visited her five times.

    Her mum Denise, 37, said: "The princess seems to have taken quite a shine to
Danielle.

    "She came back after the official pictures were over and told the nurses she
was looking for her.

    "She gave her a cuddle and asked how she was. She and Danielle became good
friends during the three months she was in hospital.

    "The first time she came on the ward she had been visiting a friend in the
private wing, who was waiting for a heart and lung transplant.

    "Danielle and her sister Natasha just grabbed her by the hand and dragged
her round the ward. They refused to call her princess because she wasn't wearing
a crown.

    "And they said they wouldn't curtsy because she looked ordinary, not a
little girl's idea of how a princess should look.

    "But they really thought she was terrific.

    "Diana promised she would come back to visit Danielle and she kept her word.

    "Another time she arrived about 9pm on Tuesday evening. She came in quite
unexpectedly and stayed for about 10 minutes. I don't know where she had been.

    "She said she would have to keep quiet because it was so late.

    "She chatted to Danielle like my friends do, asking if she was bored, what
it was like in hospital.

    "The next time she came in she brought videos for Danielle. She said they
were mostly boys' videos, but that Danielle should let the boys in the ward see
them.

    "The only girls' video she had was Annie. Danielle loved watching that.

    "The last time she came was the May Bank Holiday. Danielle had gone to the
hospital cafe with a schoolfriend and her mum, who were visiting.

    "Diana went looking for them and had a cup of tea with them.

    "My friend was overwhelmed. She couldn't believe it and hasn't stopped
talking about it.

    "Diana made a terrific effort for Danielle. It really cheered her up.  Now
she is quite blase about her friend Diana.

    "But I think, secretly, she is thrilled."

    CANDICE MAHONEY, 14, is having tests for suspected cystic fibrosis

    Candice was excited to meet the princess.

    "Not what you normally expect to do when you come to hospital," she said.

    "She seems very nice and natural."

    Candice, from Ramsgate, Kent, has suffered breathing problems all her life.

    As a child she was unable to run around and play like friends her own age.

    She was sent for tests after her condition deteriorated last year - she has
been too ill to go to school since September.

    ABUBAKAR ISA OTHMAN, 14, is having tests for heart problems

    The teenager, who comes from Nigeria, and his family said they were amazed
to come face to face with Princess Diana in such an informal setting.

    Abubakar suffers from heart problems.

    The private hospital which has been dealing with his case had sent him along
to the Brompton just for the day to have some tests. And it just happened to be
the day that Princess Diana arrived for her visit.

    "It was a great honour to meet her," said Abubakar.

    SCOTT RHODES, 12, was born with one of his heart chambers missing

    When Scott was a baby, doctors said he could not survive infancy.

    When he was eight he had an 11-hour op to rebuild his heart.

    Afterwards it stopped beating 16 times, he slipped into a coma and doctors
feared brain damage.

    Miraculously Scott, of Warrington, Cheshire, is now fit to meet a princess.
"She put her hand on my head and it made me feel so special," he said.

    "It was a perfect day. Meeting her made me feel a million dollars."

    ROSS ELLIS, 14, suffers from incurable lung disease cystic fibrosis

    Ross, from Hatfield, Herts, needs daily drugs and strenuous physiotherapy to
stay alive.

    His brother Paddy, six, is also a victim but his other brother Ryan, 11, is
unaffected.

    Ross, in hospital with a chest infection, said: "It was good to see the
Princess again.

    "About a month ago she came and I was off to the canteen. She said I could
escort her there and bought me a coke.

    "It is a shame Paddy isn't in at the moment.

    "He always has a joke with her."

    ANGELA PRIDHAM,

    12, suffers from a hole in the heart

    Angela, from Ruislip, Middlesex, was just a year old when she had major open
heart surgery.

    The operation was a success and enabled her to lead a normal life.

    The hole has developed again but Angela's surgery will be routine this time
thanks to advances in treatment.

    She said: "I am worried about the operation but meeting the princess helped
take my mind off it. She is very lovely.

    "Her hair is perfect and she has wonderful eyes. And she is so friendly."

    ALASTAIR BEAMENT, four, is another cystic fibrosis sufferer

    When Alastair saw Diana he whispered: "Is she really a princess?  She hasn't
got a crown."

    Like all cystic fibrosis sufferers Alastair, from Woodford Green, Essex,
needs daily drugs and physiotherapy to stay alive.

    Alastair was first sent to the Brompton hospital when he was only nine
months old.

    He is in hospital now for a course of intravenous antibiotics to clear up a
severe chest infection.

    The Brompton is at the forefront of treatment for the inherited disease and
is on the verge of a research breakthrough involving gene therapy.

    JAMES PERRY, 18 months. A rare condition makes his heart stop

    Diana's visit was a "welcome change" from the terrible strain of looking
after little James 24 hours a day, said his mother Sue.

    "It certainly brightened up our visit, which is a very worrying time," added
the mum of four, from Braintree, Essex.

    James was born with an extremely rare life threatening heart condition which
causes up to three sudden seizures a day. He goes unconscious, stops breathing
and his heart stops and his parents have to revive him with heart massage and
kiss of life.

    He is in hospital for 10 days of tests.

    JESSICA WAUGH, six, has cystic fibrosis and suffers chest infections

    Daily drugs and strenuous physiotherapy have kept Jessica well for most of
her young life.

    But she is plagued by recurrent problems with her chest.

    Now doctors want Jessica, from Newport Pagnell, Bucks, to have an operation
under general anaesthetic to put a tube into one of her veins.

    They would then be able to pump antibiotics straight into her system,
clearing up any infection quickly.

    Little Jessica took to Diana. She said: "I liked the Princess's hair and
clothes.

    "She was very nice. We didn't have to curtsy."

    EMILY COLGAN, seven,

    has complex heart defect _- tricuspid artresia

    Emily was a blue baby and needed surgery to save her life when she was just
36 hours old.

    Her faulty heart couldn't pump enough blood to her lungs.

    She has had two other major operations and four hi-tech procedures under
general anaesthetic.

    Diana first met Emily when she was unconscious in intensive care recovering
from one of those operations. She sent the youngster a Christmas card.

    "I treasure my card and I was excited at meeting her," said Emily, of
Reigate, Surrey. "Her clothes are lovely."

    JEREMIE DALLSINGH,

    five, has a hole in his heart

    Brave Jeremie got out of bed to meet Diana just two days after surgery to
repair his heart.

    A gap between two chambers meant it had been pumping too much blood into his
lungs making him always tired and out of breath.

    Jeremie, of Putney, south west London, knows he's in good hands at the
Brompton - his aunt Victoria Jones used to be a theatre sister there and worked
with surgeon Magdi Yacoub.

    She said: "Diana is gorgeous. We are all very impressed with her.

    "Jeremie is thrilled at meeting a real, live princess."

    DARIUS WYKE-LITTLE 20 months. Chromosome disorder and heart defects

    Darius, from Leatherhead, Surrey, was just a week old when he had his first
operation.

    After more surgery in January he developed complications and infections and
spent four months in hospital, including 10 weeks in intensive care.

    He deteriorated so severely at Easter that doctors feared he would die.

    Mum Rebecca went into labour as Darius had more surgery and was rushed to
another hospital to have second son Kingsley.

    "Diana has visited Darius three times and he was always very sick," she
said.

    "She commented on how well he is looking and was concerned that we were
still here. But we told her we had just come for a checkup and that Darius was
now progressing well at home.

    "She is very caring and seems really interested in the children."

    JAMIE POORE, six, born with narrowed aorta, restricting blood supply

    Jamie, from Sudbury, Suffolk, was 11 months old when he first had open heart
surgery.

    He stayed healthy until a few months ago. Then doctors found a blocked valve
and he was due in the operating theatre the day after Diana's visit.

    He was in bed - parents Tony and Wendy, gran Jacqueline and great-gran Nora
at his side - when Diana came in.

    "She just walked in on her own," said Tony. "We were all taken aback and a
bit tongue-tied but she was so relaxed and natural, she put us at our ease.

    "She joked about all boys being the same because he was playing with his
Nintendo computer game."

    But Jamie took it all in his stride. "She is very pretty," he said.

    "Better in real life than in her pictures."

    CAITLIN HINES, three, asthmatic and growth problems

    Caitlin, from Fulham, west London, suffers from asthma and a defective
oesophagus, the tube which carries food from the throat to the stomach.

    She rarely ate, which marred her growth and development.

    The youngster was in hospital having tests. Mum Dorothy said: "Caitlin
thought the princess was like Snow White. She is usually very shy but she sat on
Diana's lap."

    Caitlin and her family have been in Britain for four years but return home
to New York in July.

    EMMA CRAMPTON, five, suffers from cystic fibrosis

    Emma, from Twickenham, Middlesex, is continually struck down with chest
infections from her lung disease.

    She is in hospital for a course of injected antibiotics.

    Emma said: "I asked the Princess if she came in her coach and she told me
she had come in a car. She said it was green. That is very boring for a
princess."

    Emma met Diana two weeks ago on the ward. Emma's gran Ann Rowcroft said:
"She talked to all the children and waited for Emma to come out of the loo to
say goodbye. It was wonderful."

    FRANCES OSAKUE, four, hole in heart and lung illness

    Frances, four, is waiting for surgery to correct Fallot's tetralogy.

    Her illness means she suffers from a combination of a hole in the heart and
a blocked valve.

    The condition stops blood flowing to the lungs.

    To most doctors this is a rare illness but for the surgeons at the Royal
Brompton Hospital, it is a routine, everyday occurrence.

    "She is very beautiful. Is she really a princess?" asked Frances.

    WHERE THE MONEY WILL GO

    The Heart of Britain campaign aims to raise at least pounds 1.5million for
research into heart and lung disease at London's Royal Brompton Hospital.

    The money will be used for:

    The development of Prof Sir Magdi Yacoub's artificial heart programme.

    Providing a dedicated paediatric catheter lab where children undergo hi-tech
procedures that avoid major open-heart surgery.

    More research and development of stents - small cages - which keep blocked
arteries open.

    Fund gene therapy to treat Cystic Fibrosis - a breakthrough that could save
thousands of young lives.

    A research project into sudden death in young adults with the Glasgow Royal
Infirmary.

GRAPHIC: PALS: But Danielle didn't want to call Diana "princess" Pictures:; KENT
GAVIN

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1996


                              245 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                              July 1, 1996, Monday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4, 5

LENGTH: 4934 words

HEADLINE: DI'S SEEN ME 5 TIMES;
NO CROWN, NO CURTSY, SAID LITTLE DANIELLE;
CHILDREN COMMENT ON MEETING PRINCESS DIANA IN ROYAL BROMPTON HOSPITAL AT START
OF HEART OF BRITAIN APPEAL

BYLINE: Jill Palmer And James Whitaker

BODY:


    DANIELLE STEPHENSON, seven, had revolutionary treatment to "burn away"
irregularities in her heart

    It was a royal request. But when you are seven years old and have recently
undergone heart surgery, there are more interesting things to do than chat to a
princess.

    So when Diana took Danielle Stephenson by the hand and asked her to walk
round the hospital ward with her, Danielle was adamant.

    "I can't. I'm going to McDonald's," she smiled politely. And skipped off
with her six-year-old sister Natasha.

    Danielle is one of 16 young patients at London's Royal Brompton Hospital who
were photographed with Princess Diana for the launch of the Heart of Britain
charity campaign.

    Each child she met has a personal story of triumph and trauma.

    Each has been close to death but thanks to the expertise of the Brompton's
caring doctors and nurses, most will eventually leave the hospital fit, healthy
and ready to face the future.

    Here, the Mirror tells all 16 tales of courage, with cheeky Danielle the
centrepiece of the youngsters' stories.

    Danielle, from Southend on Sea, Essex, had a dangerously irregular heart
rhythm which could have killed her at any moment.

    Yet she appeared perfectly healthy until she collapsed at Brownies in March.
Drugs and a pacemaker failed to cure the problem.

    And moments of crisis when her heart raced and she needed intensive care to
stabilise her were increasing.

    She became critically ill and was even put on the heart transplant list.

    But on May 24, she became one of the first children in Britain to undergo an
amazing new treatment to burn away the abnormal electrical pathways inside her
heart which were causing its irregular beat.

    The intricate six-hour procedure involved putting special wires into her
heart via an artery in her groin.

    It has been carried out only a handful of times worldwide.

    But thankfully for Danielle, it was a complete success.

    She spent a total of three months in hospital during which Princess Diana
visited her five times.

    Her mum Denise, 37, said: "The princess seems to have taken quite a shine to
Danielle.

    "She came back after the official pictures were over and told the nurses she
was looking for her.

    "She gave her a cuddle and asked how she was. She and Danielle became good
friends during the three months she was in hospital.

    "The first time she came on the ward she had been visiting a friend in the
private wing, who was waiting for a heart and lung transplant.

    "Danielle and her sister Natasha just grabbed her by the hand and dragged
her round the ward. They refused to call her princess because she wasn't wearing
a crown.

    "And they said they wouldn't curtsy because she looked ordinary, not a
little girl's idea of how a princess should look.

    "But they really thought she was terrific.

    "Diana promised she would come back to visit Danielle and she kept her word.

    "Another time she arrived about 9pm on Tuesday evening. She came in quite
unexpectedly and stayed for about 10 minutes. I don't know where she had been.

    "She said she would have to keep quiet because it was so late.

    "She chatted to Danielle like my friends do, asking if she was bored, what
it was like in hospital.

    "The next time she came in she brought videos for Danielle. She said they
were mostly boys' videos, but that Danielle should let the boys in the ward see
them.

    "The only girls' video she had was Annie. Danielle loved watching that.

    "The last time she came was the May Bank Holiday. Danielle had gone to the
hospital cafe with a schoolfriend and her mum, who were visiting.

    "Diana went looking for them and had a cup of tea with them.

    "My friend was overwhelmed. She couldn't believe it and hasn't stopped
talking about it.

    "Diana made a terrific effort for Danielle. It really cheered her up.  Now
she is quite blase about her friend Diana.

    "But I think, secretly, she is thrilled."

    CANDICE MAHONEY, 14, is having tests for suspected cystic fibrosis

    Candice was excited to meet the princess.

    "Not what you normally expect to do when you come to hospital," she said.

    "She seems very nice and natural."

    Candice, from Ramsgate, Kent, has suffered breathing problems all her life.

    As a child she was unable to run around and play like friends her own age.

    She was sent for tests after her condition deteriorated last year - she has
been too ill to go to school since September.

    ABUBAKAR ISA OTHMAN, 14, is having tests for heart problems

    The teenager, who comes from Nigeria, and his family said they were amazed
to come face to face with Princess Diana in such an informal setting.

    Abubakar suffers from heart problems.

    The private hospital which has been dealing with his case had sent him along
to the Brompton just for the day to have some tests. And it just happened to be
the day that Princess Diana arrived for her visit.

    "It was a great honour to meet her," said Abubakar.

    SCOTT RHODES, 12, was born with one of his heart chambers missing

    When Scott was a baby, doctors said he could not survive infancy.

    When he was eight he had an 11-hour op to rebuild his heart.

    Afterwards it stopped beating 16 times, he slipped into a coma and doctors
feared brain damage.

    Miraculously Scott, of Warrington, Cheshire, is now fit to meet a princess.
"She put her hand on my head and it made me feel so special," he said.

    "It was a perfect day. Meeting her made me feel a million dollars."

    ROSS ELLIS, 14, suffers from incurable lung disease cystic fibrosis

    Ross, from Hatfield, Herts, needs daily drugs and strenuous physiotherapy to
stay alive.

    His brother Paddy, six, is also a victim but his other brother Ryan, 11, is
unaffected.

    Ross, in hospital with a chest infection, said: "It was good to see the
Princess again.

    "About a month ago she came and I was off to the canteen. She said I could
escort her there and bought me a coke.

    "It is a shame Paddy isn't in at the moment.

    "He always has a joke with her."

    ANGELA PRIDHAM,

    12, suffers from a hole in the heart

    Angela, from Ruislip, Middlesex, was just a year old when she had major open
heart surgery.

    The operation was a success and enabled her to lead a normal life.

    The hole has developed again but Angela's surgery will be routine this time
thanks to advances in treatment.

    She said: "I am worried about the operation but meeting the princess helped
take my mind off it. She is very lovely.

    "Her hair is perfect and she has wonderful eyes. And she is so friendly."

    ALASTAIR BEAMENT, four, is another cystic fibrosis sufferer

    When Alastair saw Diana he whispered: "Is she really a princess?  She hasn't
got a crown."

    Like all cystic fibrosis sufferers Alastair, from Woodford Green, Essex,
needs daily drugs and physiotherapy to stay alive.

    Alastair was first sent to the Brompton hospital when he was only nine
months old.

    He is in hospital now for a course of intravenous antibiotics to clear up a
severe chest infection.

    The Brompton is at the forefront of treatment for the inherited disease and
is on the verge of a research breakthrough involving gene therapy.

    JAMES PERRY, 18 months. A rare condition makes his heart stop

    Diana's visit was a "welcome change" from the terrible strain of looking
after little James 24 hours a day, said his mother Sue.

    "It certainly brightened up our visit, which is a very worrying time," added
the mum of four, from Braintree, Essex.

    James was born with an extremely rare life threatening heart condition which
causes up to three sudden seizures a day. He goes unconscious, stops breathing
and his heart stops and his parents have to revive him with heart massage and
kiss of life.

    He is in hospital for 10 days of tests.

    JESSICA WAUGH, six, has cystic fibrosis and suffers chest infections

    Daily drugs and strenuous physiotherapy have kept Jessica well for most of
her young life.

    But she is plagued by recurrent problems with her chest.

    Now doctors want Jessica, from Newport Pagnell, Bucks, to have an operation
under general anaesthetic to put a tube into one of her veins.

    They would then be able to pump antibiotics straight into her system,
clearing up any infection quickly.

    Little Jessica took to Diana. She said: "I liked the Princess's hair and
clothes.

    "She was very nice. We didn't have to curtsy."

    EMILY COLGAN, seven,

    has complex heart defect _- tricuspid artresia

    Emily was a blue baby and needed surgery to save her life when she was just
36 hours old.

    Her faulty heart couldn't pump enough blood to her lungs.

    She has had two other major operations and four hi-tech procedures under
general anaesthetic.

    Diana first met Emily when she was unconscious in intensive care recovering
from one of those operations. She sent the youngster a Christmas card.

    "I treasure my card and I was excited at meeting her," said Emily, of
Reigate, Surrey. "Her clothes are lovely."

    JEREMIE DALLSINGH,

    five, has a hole in his heart

    Brave Jeremie got out of bed to meet Diana just two days after surgery to
repair his heart.

    A gap between two chambers meant it had been pumping too much blood into his
lungs making him always tired and out of breath.

    Jeremie, of Putney, south west London, knows he's in good hands at the
Brompton - his aunt Victoria Jones used to be a theatre sister there and worked
with surgeon Magdi Yacoub.

    She said: "Diana is gorgeous. We are all very impressed with her.

    "Jeremie is thrilled at meeting a real, live princess."

    DARIUS WYKE-LITTLE 20 months. Chromosome disorder and heart defects

    Darius, from Leatherhead, Surrey, was just a week old when he had his first
operation.

    After more surgery in January he developed complications and infections and
spent four months in hospital, including 10 weeks in intensive care.

    He deteriorated so severely at Easter that doctors feared he would die.

    Mum Rebecca went into labour as Darius had more surgery and was rushed to
another hospital to have second son Kingsley.

    "Diana has visited Darius three times and he was always very sick," she
said.

    "She commented on how well he is looking and was concerned that we were
still here. But we told her we had just come for a checkup and that Darius was
now progressing well at home.

    "She is very caring and seems really interested in the children."

    JAMIE POORE, six, born with narrowed aorta, restricting blood supply

    Jamie, from Sudbury, Suffolk, was 11 months old when he first had open heart
surgery.

    He stayed healthy until a few months ago. Then doctors found a blocked valve
and he was due in the operating theatre the day after Diana's visit.

    He was in bed - parents Tony and Wendy, gran Jacqueline and great-gran Nora
at his side - when Diana came in.

    "She just walked in on her own," said Tony. "We were all taken aback and a
bit tongue-tied but she was so relaxed and natural, she put us at our ease.

    "She joked about all boys being the same because he was playing with his
Nintendo computer game."

    But Jamie took it all in his stride. "She is very pretty," he said.

    "Better in real life than in her pictures."

    CAITLIN HINES, three, asthmatic and growth problems

    Caitlin, from Fulham, west London, suffers from asthma and a defective
oesophagus, the tube which carries food from the throat to the stomach.

    She rarely ate, which marred her growth and development.

    The youngster was in hospital having tests. Mum Dorothy said: "Caitlin
thought the princess was like Snow White. She is usually very shy but she sat on
Diana's lap."

    Caitlin and her family have been in Britain for four years but return home
to New York in July.

    EMMA CRAMPTON, five, suffers from cystic fibrosis

    Emma, from Twickenham, Middlesex, is continually struck down with chest
infections from her lung disease.

    She is in hospital for a course of injected antibiotics.

    Emma said: "I asked the Princess if she came in her coach and she told me
she had come in a car. She said it was green. That is very boring for a
princess."

    Emma met Diana two weeks ago on the ward. Emma's gran Ann Rowcroft said:
"She talked to all the children and waited for Emma to come out of the loo to
say goodbye. It was wonderful."

    FRANCES OSAKUE, four, hole in heart and lung illness

    Frances, four, is waiting for surgery to correct Fallot's tetralogy.

    Her illness means she suffers from a combination of a hole in the heart and
a blocked valve.

    The condition stops blood flowing to the lungs.

    To most doctors this is a rare illness but for the surgeons at the Royal
Brompton Hospital, it is a routine, everyday occurrence.

    "She is very beautiful. Is she really a princess?" asked Frances.

    WHERE THE MONEY WILL GO

    The Heart of Britain campaign aims to raise at least pounds 1.5million for
research into heart and lung disease at London's Royal Brompton Hospital.

    The money will be used for:

    The development of Prof Sir Magdi Yacoub's artificial heart programme.

    Providing a dedicated paediatric catheter lab where children undergo hi-tech
procedures that avoid major open-heart surgery.

    More research and development of stents - small cages - which keep blocked
arteries open.

    Fund gene therapy to treat Cystic Fibrosis - a breakthrough that could save
thousands of young lives.

    A research project into sudden death in young adults with the Glasgow Royal
Infirmary.

GRAPHIC: PALS: But Danielle didn't want to call Diana "princess" Pictures:; KENT
GAVIN

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1996


                              246 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                              June 3, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1134 words

HEADLINE: DOCS PUTTING A KILLER AWAY FOR LIFE;
MIRROR HEALTH ON PIONEERING CURE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS;
CYSTIC FIBROSIS SUFFERER BENJAMIN ANGEL

BYLINE: Jill Palmer Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    For the first three years of his young life, Benjamin Angel never played
with another child - because his parents were afraid he might pick up an
infection that would kill him.

    But soon the boy who wasn't allowed playmates may be helping other children
suffering from cystic fibrosis - the devastating disease that has blighted his
life.

    Benjamin, now a bright and active 17-year-old, is considering taking part in
a pioneering trial which could offer hope to thousands of other young victims.
Only 30 years ago, this disease - which attacks the lungs and digestive system -
killed all its victims in childhood.

    Nowadays, thanks to improved treatment, sufferers can live until their early
30s. And a technique called gene therapy holds out the first real hope of a
cure.

    Benjamin's parents were shocked when he was diagnosed with CF at 11 days
old.  They had no idea that, like one in 20 people, they were carriers of the CF
gene and that any child they had was at risk.

    His mum Ruth says: "We were lucky Benjamin began treatment immediately,
before his lungs had become damaged.

    "The early prognosis was that he would live for one or two years, a little
longer if he didn't get any infections.

    "For the first three years of his life he never played with another child. I
was determined to keep him well and alive as long as I could.""

    Amazingly, Benjamin has rarely had a serious infection and outwardly leads a
normal life.

    He swims, cycles, runs, and plays tennis and badminton. At school, studying
for his A-levels, he is a prefect and is chairman of his local youth group in
Stanmore, Middlesex.

    But his life is still ruled by a daily routine which includes vigorous
physiotherapy to prevent the build-up of mucus in his lungs. He must inhale
drugs and antibiotics and swallow up to 30 enzyme tablets and vitamins. It takes
at least an hour every morning and evening, and he can't go out without pockets
full of pills.

    But gene therapy would replace all this with a simple 15-minute gene
inhalation session once a week.

    The trial begins this summer at Royal Brompton Hospital in London. Already
gene therapy has been hailed as the biggest breakthrough in the battle against
CF, which claims three young lives every day. The aim is to replace the faulty
gene which causes the condition with a healthy copy by spraying the correct gene
into the lungs.

    But the trial will be tough on Benjamin and the 16 other young sufferers who
are thinking of taking part.

    He'd have to make repeated hospital visits for tests and X-rays and endure
two investigations of his lungs under general anaesthetic. And he's a little
worried at the prospect. "I realise this trial is vital and that gene therapy is
the great hope of the future," he says. "But it is a very big commitment.""

    The Brompton's cystic fibrosis unit is the largest in Europe, treating 650
youngsters. Its head, Dr Duncan Geddes, says: "There is huge optimism about the
new trial.

    "Our dream is that gene therapy will prevent lung infection if given early
enough and allow patients to lead a normal and longer life.""

    But the research is expensive, even though in the long term it would save
the pounds 50,000 a year it costs to treat a patient.

    That is why the Daily Mirror is supporting heart and lung research at the
Brompton Hospital through the Heart of Britain Campaign. During the first week
of July, people will be asked to take photographs which capture the Heart of
Britain and send them with a donation to the hospital. The best 300 will be
published in a book.

    FOR more details of the campaign and competition, phone 0171 351 8571.  You
can make a donation on 0891 525107 (39p cheap rate, 49p all other times - all
profits to the appeal), or by sending a cheque or postal order to: Heart of
Britain Appeal, Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP.

GRAPHIC: OPTIMIST: Gene therapist Dr Duncan Geddes;; NEW HOPE : Benjamin Angel
Pictures: EMMA CATTELL

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1996


                              247 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                              June 3, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1134 words

HEADLINE: DOCS PUTTING A KILLER AWAY FOR LIFE;
MIRROR HEALTH ON PIONEERING CURE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS;
CYSTIC FIBROSIS SUFFERER BENJAMIN ANGEL

BYLINE: Jill Palmer Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    For the first three years of his young life, Benjamin Angel never played
with another child - because his parents were afraid he might pick up an
infection that would kill him.

    But soon the boy who wasn't allowed playmates may be helping other children
suffering from cystic fibrosis - the devastating disease that has blighted his
life.

    Benjamin, now a bright and active 17-year-old, is considering taking part in
a pioneering trial which could offer hope to thousands of other young victims.
Only 30 years ago, this disease - which attacks the lungs and digestive system -
killed all its victims in childhood.

    Nowadays, thanks to improved treatment, sufferers can live until their early
30s. And a technique called gene therapy holds out the first real hope of a
cure.

    Benjamin's parents were shocked when he was diagnosed with CF at 11 days
old.  They had no idea that, like one in 20 people, they were carriers of the CF
gene and that any child they had was at risk.

    His mum Ruth says: "We were lucky Benjamin began treatment immediately,
before his lungs had become damaged.

    "The early prognosis was that he would live for one or two years, a little
longer if he didn't get any infections.

    "For the first three years of his life he never played with another child. I
was determined to keep him well and alive as long as I could.""

    Amazingly, Benjamin has rarely had a serious infection and outwardly leads a
normal life.

    He swims, cycles, runs, and plays tennis and badminton. At school, studying
for his A-levels, he is a prefect and is chairman of his local youth group in
Stanmore, Middlesex.

    But his life is still ruled by a daily routine which includes vigorous
physiotherapy to prevent the build-up of mucus in his lungs. He must inhale
drugs and antibiotics and swallow up to 30 enzyme tablets and vitamins. It takes
at least an hour every morning and evening, and he can't go out without pockets
full of pills.

    But gene therapy would replace all this with a simple 15-minute gene
inhalation session once a week.

    The trial begins this summer at Royal Brompton Hospital in London. Already
gene therapy has been hailed as the biggest breakthrough in the battle against
CF, which claims three young lives every day. The aim is to replace the faulty
gene which causes the condition with a healthy copy by spraying the correct gene
into the lungs.

    But the trial will be tough on Benjamin and the 16 other young sufferers who
are thinking of taking part.

    He'd have to make repeated hospital visits for tests and X-rays and endure
two investigations of his lungs under general anaesthetic. And he's a little
worried at the prospect. "I realise this trial is vital and that gene therapy is
the great hope of the future," he says. "But it is a very big commitment.""

    The Brompton's cystic fibrosis unit is the largest in Europe, treating 650
youngsters. Its head, Dr Duncan Geddes, says: "There is huge optimism about the
new trial.

    "Our dream is that gene therapy will prevent lung infection if given early
enough and allow patients to lead a normal and longer life.""

    But the research is expensive, even though in the long term it would save
the pounds 50,000 a year it costs to treat a patient.

    That is why the Daily Mirror is supporting heart and lung research at the
Brompton Hospital through the Heart of Britain Campaign. During the first week
of July, people will be asked to take photographs which capture the Heart of
Britain and send them with a donation to the hospital. The best 300 will be
published in a book.

    FOR more details of the campaign and competition, phone 0171 351 8571.  You
can make a donation on 0891 525107 (39p cheap rate, 49p all other times - all
profits to the appeal), or by sending a cheque or postal order to: Heart of
Britain Appeal, Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP.

GRAPHIC: OPTIMIST: Gene therapist Dr Duncan Geddes;; NEW HOPE : Benjamin Angel
Pictures: EMMA CATTELL

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1996


                              263 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 19, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: JOIN IN ON JEANS DAY;
HEALTH: JEANS FOR GENES DAY INFORMATION

BODY:


    JEANS For Genes Day - launched on this page last week - aims to raise
thousands of pounds to help children born with inherited genetic diseases.

    Schoolchildren, office and factory workers are being asked to wear their
jeans to work or school on March 1 and pay pounds 1 towards vital research.

    Gene therapy offers the only hope of a cure for many of the 5,000 disabling
and often fatal diseases.

    For more information, ring the Jeans For Genes Hotline on 01245 706543.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1996


                              264 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 19, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: JOIN IN ON JEANS DAY;
HEALTH: JEANS FOR GENES DAY INFORMATION

BODY:


    JEANS For Genes Day - launched on this page last week - aims to raise
thousands of pounds to help children born with inherited genetic diseases.

    Schoolchildren, office and factory workers are being asked to wear their
jeans to work or school on March 1 and pay pounds 1 towards vital research.

    Gene therapy offers the only hope of a cure for many of the 5,000 disabling
and often fatal diseases.

    For more information, ring the Jeans For Genes Hotline on 01245 706543.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1996


                              265 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 12, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING FATAL FLAW;
GENE THERAPY IMMUNE DEFICIENCY BOY CASE STUDY: MIRROR HEALTH

BODY:


    OWEN Vincent was born with an immune deficiency which left him unable to
fight infection. The 18-month-old toddler has SCID - severe combined immune
deficiency - the disease known as Baby In The Bubble Syndrome because its
sufferers have to live in a sterile environment.

    It is the most severe of all genetic diseases - and usually fatal. Because
Owen was born with no immunity against disease, even the slightest cold could
kill him.

    Mum Ann, 32, a chartered accountant from Penge in South London, had no idea
she carried the faulty gene which would threaten her young son's life.

    She recalls: "Owen got a cold and within a couple of days it had developed
into double pneumonia.

    "He was taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital where I was told Owen's only
hope was a bone marrow transplant." But neither Ann nor husband Mark, a
surveyor, were suitable donors.

    Thankfully, a matching donor was found and last year Owen had a successful
operation.

    He still needs daily drugs to fight infection, but his own immune system is
now starting to work.

    Says Ann: "Once gene therapy is perfected all that would have been needed is
a simple injection."

GRAPHIC: BUBBLE TROUBLE: But after his bone marrow op Owen is recovering well

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1996


                              266 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 12, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: DESIGNS ON GENES;
WEAR YOUR JEANS AND HELP THERAPY FUND POCKET CASH;
THE DEVELOPMENT OF GENE THERAPY: MIRROR HEALTH

BYLINE: Jill Palmer Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    NO MATTER how smart the dress code at your office, on March 1 everyone who
works there ought to be wearing denim - and that includes your normally pin
-striped boss.

    That's because this will be National Jeans For Genes Day. And everyone in
the country, from schoolkids to scientists, from doctors to dockers, is being
asked to wear a pair of jeans for the day and make a donation of pounds 1
towards gene therapy research.

    Every year, thousands of children are unfortunate enough to be born with
crippling and even deadly diseases which they have inherited from their parents'
genes.

    Jeans For Genes aims to raise pounds 2 million and establish a new gene
therapy research centre to help these children.

    Chronic

    The charity has been set up by Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund,
and three genetic and metabolic disease groups, the Primary Immunodeficiency
Association, the Chronic Granulomatous Disorder Research Trust, and The Society
for Mucopolysaccaride Diseases.

    So what is gene therapy? Our bodies are made up of millions of cells, each
one containing a total of 46 chromosomes which incorporate our genes.

    If one of these genes is faulty or missing the cell is unable to work
correctly and this can lead to disease and disability.

    The aim of gene therapy is to replace the faulty or missing gene with a
healthy one.

    And it is being hailed as the treatment of the 21st century for many of the
5,000 diseases caused by gene defects.

    Molecular biologist Dr Christine Kinnon, who works at the Institute of Child
Health in London, explains: "There has been a huge explosion of knowledge about
genes in the past 10 years.

    Faulty

    "We are now able to identify genes for many diseases."

    And at that stage the doctors can set about replacing faulty genes with
healthy ones.

    "Gene therapy involves making a normal copy of the gene in the laboratory
and placing it in the stem cells in the bone marrow," says Dr Kinnon.

    The reason for working on the stem cells is that most other blood cells have
a lifespan of only a few months or years.

    But as Dr Kinnon points out: "Each stem cell generates millions of blood
cells which will then all contain the correct gene.

    "Eventually missing or faulty genes die off and are replaced by cells with
the correct genes and the child is cured."

    Because genes are responsible for determining our intelligence, personality
and appearance, there are concerns about the safety of gene therapy.

    Many people are worried that tampering with nature will lead to genetic
engineering and even designer babies.

    But there is no need to worry. Such genetic tampering would be illegal.
There are tight controls and strict laws governing genetic research which ban
studies involving human embryos.

    Scientists are only allowed to manipulate genes once the child is born.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1996


                              267 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 12, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING FATAL FLAW;
GENE THERAPY IMMUNE DEFICIENCY BOY CASE STUDY: MIRROR HEALTH

BODY:


    OWEN Vincent was born with an immune deficiency which left him unable to
fight infection. The 18-month-old toddler has SCID - severe combined immune
deficiency - the disease known as Baby In The Bubble Syndrome because its
sufferers have to live in a sterile environment.

    It is the most severe of all genetic diseases - and usually fatal. Because
Owen was born with no immunity against disease, even the slightest cold could
kill him.

    Mum Ann, 32, a chartered accountant from Penge in South London, had no idea
she carried the faulty gene which would threaten her young son's life.

    She recalls: "Owen got a cold and within a couple of days it had developed
into double pneumonia.

    "He was taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital where I was told Owen's only
hope was a bone marrow transplant." But neither Ann nor husband Mark, a
surveyor, were suitable donors.

    Thankfully, a matching donor was found and last year Owen had a successful
operation.

    He still needs daily drugs to fight infection, but his own immune system is
now starting to work.

    Says Ann: "Once gene therapy is perfected all that would have been needed is
a simple injection."

GRAPHIC: BUBBLE TROUBLE: But after his bone marrow op Owen is recovering well

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1996


                              268 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                           Copyright 1996 MGN Ltd.
                                  Daily Mirror

                           February 12, 1996, Monday

SECTION: FEATURES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: DESIGNS ON GENES;
WEAR YOUR JEANS AND HELP THERAPY FUND POCKET CASH;
THE DEVELOPMENT OF GENE THERAPY: MIRROR HEALTH

BYLINE: Jill Palmer Medical Correspondent

BODY:


    NO MATTER how smart the dress code at your office, on March 1 everyone who
works there ought to be wearing denim - and that includes your normally pin
-striped boss.

    That's because this will be National Jeans For Genes Day. And everyone in
the country, from schoolkids to scientists, from doctors to dockers, is being
asked to wear a pair of jeans for the day and make a donation of pounds 1
towards gene therapy research.

    Every year, thousands of children are unfortunate enough to be born with
crippling and even deadly diseases which they have inherited from their parents'
genes.

    Jeans For Genes aims to raise pounds 2 million and establish a new gene
therapy research centre to help these children.

    Chronic

    The charity has been set up by Great Ormond Street Children's Hospital Fund,
and three genetic and metabolic disease groups, the Primary Immunodeficiency
Association, the Chronic Granulomatous Disorder Research Trust, and The Society
for Mucopolysaccaride Diseases.

    So what is gene therapy? Our bodies are made up of millions of cells, each
one containing a total of 46 chromosomes which incorporate our genes.

    If one of these genes is faulty or missing the cell is unable to work
correctly and this can lead to disease and disability.

    The aim of gene therapy is to replace the faulty or missing gene with a
healthy one.

    And it is being hailed as the treatment of the 21st century for many of the
5,000 diseases caused by gene defects.

    Molecular biologist Dr Christine Kinnon, who works at the Institute of Child
Health in London, explains: "There has been a huge explosion of knowledge about
genes in the past 10 years.

    Faulty

    "We are now able to identify genes for many diseases."

    And at that stage the doctors can set about replacing faulty genes with
healthy ones.

    "Gene therapy involves making a normal copy of the gene in the laboratory
and placing it in the stem cells in the bone marrow," says Dr Kinnon.

    The reason for working on the stem cells is that most other blood cells have
a lifespan of only a few months or years.

    But as Dr Kinnon points out: "Each stem cell generates millions of blood
cells which will then all contain the correct gene.

    "Eventually missing or faulty genes die off and are replaced by cells with
the correct genes and the child is cured."

    Because genes are responsible for determining our intelligence, personality
and appearance, there are concerns about the safety of gene therapy.

    Many people are worried that tampering with nature will lead to genetic
engineering and even designer babies.

    But there is no need to worry. Such genetic tampering would be illegal.
There are tight controls and strict laws governing genetic research which ban
studies involving human embryos.

    Scientists are only allowed to manipulate genes once the child is born.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1996


                              269 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 25, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 70

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: New products keep biotech on the boil

BYLINE: Shirley Skeel

BODY:


    IF YOU missed out on last year's

    biotech boom, it is not too late - but do not expect another hair-raising
run So says Biotechnology Investments Ltd, advised by Rothschild Asset
Management, which boosted its net asset value by 40pc in just six months.

    Adviser Carol Werther says though a repeat of 1995 is unlikely, a stream of
new products should keep the sector boiling.

    One clear sign of the end of a bull run - when new issues start flopping has
not appeared. Some new US issues are still leaping by half.

    BIL's net asset value per share jumped from £2.09 to £3.04 in the half year
to November, mirroring the US biotech sector. Its shares, up 3p to 293p, have
nearly doubled since May.

    The group reveals it bailed out of UK favourite British Biotech before last
November's news that doubled the shares. Not a lack of faith, BIL insists, just
normal recycling of funds after making a killing.

    BIL is still in high flyers Biocompatibles and Cantab, though most of its
money is in private and public US companies.

    It is keen on keyhole surgery, gene therapy, women's healthcare and medical
instruments. Of 106 private investments made since its 1981 launch, 38 have gone
public. BIL has had some lacklustre times.

    But while the biotech run lasts, as one analyst says: 'It is exactly what
you want. A bunch of experts making the choice for you and spreading the risk

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1996


                              270 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1996 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                                January 25, 1996

SECTION: Pg. 70

LENGTH: 235 words

HEADLINE: New products keep biotech on the boil

BYLINE: Shirley Skeel

BODY:


    IF YOU missed out on last year's

    biotech boom, it is not too late - but do not expect another hair-raising
run So says Biotechnology Investments Ltd, advised by Rothschild Asset
Management, which boosted its net asset value by 40pc in just six months.

    Adviser Carol Werther says though a repeat of 1995 is unlikely, a stream of
new products should keep the sector boiling.

    One clear sign of the end of a bull run - when new issues start flopping has
not appeared. Some new US issues are still leaping by half.

    BIL's net asset value per share jumped from £2.09 to £3.04 in the half year
to November, mirroring the US biotech sector. Its shares, up 3p to 293p, have
nearly doubled since May.

    The group reveals it bailed out of UK favourite British Biotech before last
November's news that doubled the shares. Not a lack of faith, BIL insists, just
normal recycling of funds after making a killing.

    BIL is still in high flyers Biocompatibles and Cantab, though most of its
money is in private and public US companies.

    It is keen on keyhole surgery, gene therapy, women's healthcare and medical
instruments. Of 106 private investments made since its 1981 launch, 38 have gone
public. BIL has had some lacklustre times.

    But while the biotech run lasts, as one analyst says: 'It is exactly what
you want. A bunch of experts making the choice for you and spreading the risk

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1996


                              275 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 07, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 42

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL NOTES;
GOOD HEALTH

BODY:


    DRINKING more than three glasses of wine a day may reduce women's risk of
hip fractures, say researchers. A study in the American Journal of Epidemiology
involving more than 1,100 women and men aged over 68 found alcohol increases
bone mineral density even after allowing for factors like age, smoking and
oestrogen use. Post-menopausal women consuming either two drinks of spirits,
three beers or three glasses of wine a day increased their bone density up to
five per cent more than non-drinkers. (Men were unaffected.) It is thought that
alcohol may improve bone mineral density by increasing oestrogen levels.

    HERNIAS are the most common surgical problem and this is Hernia Week when
patients are being given more information about the operation. One of the latest
techniques involves the use of tension-free mesh, which dramatically reduces the
risk of problems recurring. The makers of Marlex Mesh are backing a new Helpline
to assist sufferers in finding hernia surgeons who use the technique. It is
available all this week on 0171-600 7374.

    EVERYONE is talking about genes . . . but how much do you know? Diving Into
The Gene Pool is an eight-page guide that explains how genes determine our
physical characteristics and how they can cause ill-health. It gives a brief
guide to gene therapy (a new approach to treating disease) and looks at some of
the difficult ethical questions raised by our increasing knowledge. A short
directory gives contacts for further advice. The guide, produced by the Medical
Research Council and the Wellcome Trust, is available from the Publications
Group, MRC, 20 Park Crescent, London W1N 4AL, tel. 0171-636 5422.

    DOCTORS believe that psychological stress can delay physical healing of
wounds. Professor Janice Kiecolt-Glaser, from the Ohio State University of
Medicine, monitored the healing capacity of 26 women who had been given
identical superficial flesh wounds. Fifty per cent of the volunteers were under
considerable stress because they were caring for relatives with dementia, and
these women took one-third longer to heal, say researchers reporting in The
Lancet medical journal. They found people most at risk are producing lower
levels of a powerful hormone-like substance called interleukin-1, which is vital
to maintain a healthy defence system.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1995


                              276 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              DAILY MAIL (London)

                               November 07, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 42

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL NOTES;
GOOD HEALTH

BODY:


    DRINKING more than three glasses of wine a day may reduce women's risk of
hip fractures, say researchers. A study in the American Journal of Epidemiology
involving more than 1,100 women and men aged over 68 found alcohol increases
bone mineral density even after allowing for factors like age, smoking and
oestrogen use. Post-menopausal women consuming either two drinks of spirits,
three beers or three glasses of wine a day increased their bone density up to
five per cent more than non-drinkers. (Men were unaffected.) It is thought that
alcohol may improve bone mineral density by increasing oestrogen levels.

    HERNIAS are the most common surgical problem and this is Hernia Week when
patients are being given more information about the operation. One of the latest
techniques involves the use of tension-free mesh, which dramatically reduces the
risk of problems recurring. The makers of Marlex Mesh are backing a new Helpline
to assist sufferers in finding hernia surgeons who use the technique. It is
available all this week on 0171-600 7374.

    EVERYONE is talking about genes . . . but how much do you know? Diving Into
The Gene Pool is an eight-page guide that explains how genes determine our
physical characteristics and how they can cause ill-health. It gives a brief
guide to gene therapy (a new approach to treating disease) and looks at some of
the difficult ethical questions raised by our increasing knowledge. A short
directory gives contacts for further advice. The guide, produced by the Medical
Research Council and the Wellcome Trust, is available from the Publications
Group, MRC, 20 Park Crescent, London W1N 4AL, tel. 0171-636 5422.

    DOCTORS believe that psychological stress can delay physical healing of
wounds. Professor Janice Kiecolt-Glaser, from the Ohio State University of
Medicine, monitored the healing capacity of 26 women who had been given
identical superficial flesh wounds. Fifty per cent of the volunteers were under
considerable stress because they were caring for relatives with dementia, and
these women took one-third longer to heal, say researchers reporting in The
Lancet medical journal. They found people most at risk are producing lower
levels of a powerful hormone-like substance called interleukin-1, which is vital
to maintain a healthy defence system.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1995


                              281 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                               September 29, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: A CANCER REVOLUTION;
SCIENTISTS FORECAST GOLDEN AGE FOR CURES

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE next quarter century will see a golden age in the prevention and cure of
cancer, say scientists, with an extra 75,000 lives a year being saved.

    Although an ageing population means the number at risk of dying from the
disease is likely to soar to 220,000 annually by the year 2020, new treatments
will cut the toll by a third.

    The explosion in new forms of cancer prevention and treatment is forecast in
a report for the Imperial Cancer Research Fund by 30 scientists and doctors.

    It says the revolution will be led by genetic breakthroughs, making it
possible to identify people at high risk and carry out early detection of
pre-cancerous cells.

    Other advances will include a genetic-risk analysis for everyone from the
age of two, computer imaging of tumours, tailored radiography and drug treatment
and seek-and-destroy compounds.

    There will also be blocker drugs to stop cancer cells activating, robotic
surgery, computer-aided distance surgery, gene therapy, cancer vaccines, a GCSE
in personal health and better support for cancer patients living longer in the
community.

    The Government's chief medical officer has asked to see the report - Our
Vision for Cancer - which could help shape NHS strategy. But the report points
out that if the best treatment currently available were offered to all patients,
16,000 lives a year could be saved without further advances.

    About 163,000 Britons die from cancer every year. ICRF statistician Dr Jack
Cuzick estimates that the expected death rate of 220,000 within 25 years could
be cut by at least a third with genetic screening, early detection and treatment
advances.

    Fewer smokers could reduce lung cancer deaths by 30 per cent and screening
might cut bowel cancer deaths by 40 per cent.

    Professor Karol Sikora, the ICRF's deputy director of clinical research,
said: 'Gradually, we shall see more and more potential cancers being prevented
or identified when the patient has early, easily treatable pre-cancer changes in
cells and this will have an enormous impact on deaths.  For those who do develop
cancer, we are now starting a new golden age of drug discovery from a knowledge
base built up in research laboratories over the last 15 years.'

    IN 2020, women with an above-average risk of breast cancer will be taking a
preventive drug. Some will be testing a vaccine and all women will have routine
two-yearly genetic tests to check DNA changes.

    If the result proves positive for breast cancer, a woman will be offered
action the same day. Her doctor will send her immediately for a blood test and
scan. Twenty minutes later, she will be with a doctor and specialist nurse
looking at a virtual reality image of her tumour.

    The lump could be dealt with in three ways - by laser, radiotherapy or a
painless, scarless operation using a computer-assisted robot. The woman will
have her treatment the same day, knowing doctors could try another approach if
the first failed.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1995


                              282 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                               September 29, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 29

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: A CANCER REVOLUTION;
SCIENTISTS FORECAST GOLDEN AGE FOR CURES

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE next quarter century will see a golden age in the prevention and cure of
cancer, say scientists, with an extra 75,000 lives a year being saved.

    Although an ageing population means the number at risk of dying from the
disease is likely to soar to 220,000 annually by the year 2020, new treatments
will cut the toll by a third.

    The explosion in new forms of cancer prevention and treatment is forecast in
a report for the Imperial Cancer Research Fund by 30 scientists and doctors.

    It says the revolution will be led by genetic breakthroughs, making it
possible to identify people at high risk and carry out early detection of
pre-cancerous cells.

    Other advances will include a genetic-risk analysis for everyone from the
age of two, computer imaging of tumours, tailored radiography and drug treatment
and seek-and-destroy compounds.

    There will also be blocker drugs to stop cancer cells activating, robotic
surgery, computer-aided distance surgery, gene therapy, cancer vaccines, a GCSE
in personal health and better support for cancer patients living longer in the
community.

    The Government's chief medical officer has asked to see the report - Our
Vision for Cancer - which could help shape NHS strategy. But the report points
out that if the best treatment currently available were offered to all patients,
16,000 lives a year could be saved without further advances.

    About 163,000 Britons die from cancer every year. ICRF statistician Dr Jack
Cuzick estimates that the expected death rate of 220,000 within 25 years could
be cut by at least a third with genetic screening, early detection and treatment
advances.

    Fewer smokers could reduce lung cancer deaths by 30 per cent and screening
might cut bowel cancer deaths by 40 per cent.

    Professor Karol Sikora, the ICRF's deputy director of clinical research,
said: 'Gradually, we shall see more and more potential cancers being prevented
or identified when the patient has early, easily treatable pre-cancer changes in
cells and this will have an enormous impact on deaths.  For those who do develop
cancer, we are now starting a new golden age of drug discovery from a knowledge
base built up in research laboratories over the last 15 years.'

    IN 2020, women with an above-average risk of breast cancer will be taking a
preventive drug. Some will be testing a vaccine and all women will have routine
two-yearly genetic tests to check DNA changes.

    If the result proves positive for breast cancer, a woman will be offered
action the same day. Her doctor will send her immediately for a blood test and
scan. Twenty minutes later, she will be with a doctor and specialist nurse
looking at a virtual reality image of her tumour.

    The lump could be dealt with in three ways - by laser, radiotherapy or a
painless, scarless operation using a computer-assisted robot. The woman will
have her treatment the same day, knowing doctors could try another approach if
the first failed.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1995


                              289 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 25, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 1, 3

LENGTH: 2614 words

HEADLINE: 'I WEPT WHEN THE DOCTORS TOLD ME I HAD NERVE DISEASE';
FOOTBALL STAR REVEALS HIS SECRET TORTURE

BYLINE: Frank Gilfeather

BODY:


    FOOTBALL star Brian Irvine faces the biggest challenge of his life after
being diagnosed as a multiple sclerosis sufferer.  He has spent seven weeks
keeping the tragic secret away from Aberdeen FC fans, but yesterday bravely
predicted he would recover and return to the playing field.

    He admitted to breaking down when the news was given to him, as he sat in a
hospital wheelchair. The diagnosis threatens to shatter not only his career but
also a happy family life.

    f=News701 Roman s=7.5 w=7.7 l=7.6As Irvine struggled to accept the
condition, his club had described the Scottish international's condition as a
'trapped nerve'.

    He said: 'Sometimes, whenever I am alone, I find myself overcome with grief
and my eyes fill with tears.'

    Keeping knowledge of the diagnosis to himself, his wife Donna and a close
circle of friends, was an ordeal in itself. 'I feel as if I have been living a
lie but, now that it is out, it is a relief,' he added.

    One of the country's cleanest-living athletes, Irvine is a non-smoking,
teetotal born-again Christian. His worst fear was an accident on the football
pitch.

    The 30-year-old told the Scottish Daily Mail of his traumatic experience
after being diagnosed as one of Britain's 100,000 MS sufferers. 'As a footballer
you worry about injury finishing your career but this is my life we are talking
about now. I don't know why it should be me but it is and I have to accept it -
but it is difficult.'

    The Aberdeen defender, married with two young daughters, is still stunned by
the uncertainty of his future following the news, given to him by a specialist
in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary seven weeks ago.

    It was Irvine who first alerted doctors to his problem.

    He said: 'When I was driving one day I felt tingling sensations in my left
foot which quickly spread to both my legs. It is like an electric shock that is
happening all the time.

    'It alarmed me and I went to see my GP, who immediately arranged for me to
see a specialist.  I told him all the Continued from Page One Before the
bombshell: Brian and Donna Irvine with their first daughter, Hannah Irvine as
Aberdeen FC fans know him Moment of truth: The footballer making his
announcement yesterday The

    andNow I begin the fight for my life A TINGLING WAS THE FIRST BRIAN IRVINE
KNEW SOMETHING WAS WRONG The day a doctor broke the worst news of all they broke
the dreadful news Brian faces a battle for his life They put a Do Not Disturb
sign on the door and I wept f=News701 Roman s=7.5 w=7.7 l=7.6symptoms I had and
mentioned that, when I was playing football last season, I seemed to be
suffering from double vision at times.

    'After the tests I was taken in a wheelchair into a private room at the
hospital and the specialist began telling me what was wrong with me. When he
mentioned I had contracted MS it just went right by me at first.

    'I couldn't quite take it in but, as the specialist continued, it became
clear that he was discussing the most serious of issues for me.

    'He left me at that point to put a 'do not disturb' sign on the door and I
sat and wept.

    'I have a faint recollection of a hospital worker coming into the room as I
sat there in shock; my mind was in turmoil.'

    At that stage Irvine, capped nine times for Scotland and a leading figure in
Aberdeen's fight to avoid relegation last season, knew little of MS, a disease
with no known cure and 8,000 sufferers in Scotland.

    Since then he has learned that the double vision problems and the tingling
in his extremities are symptoms of the illness.

    After the specialist broke the news to him Irvine phoned his wife Donna from
hospital to tell her the dreadful news.

    The footballer said: 'I started to tell her about what had been said to me
but became so overcome with emotion that I could not speak. Donna broke down
when she realised the severity of the situation and neither of us could converse
because of the emotions we both felt.'

    Later that night he drove his sponsored Rover with its personalised number
plate to his semi-detached home in an upmarket suburb of Aberdeen. There, with
his two children - Hannah, two, and weeks-old Christina - safely in bed he
discussed his family's future.

    The following weeks passed in a blur and Irvine admits he is confused by
what is happening to him.

    'I have to remember that while, as a private person, I would have wished
this terrible news to have remained confidential, I am also a public figure and
therefore feel obliged to tell the truth about it.

    'Sometimes, when I meet people in the street and they ask me how I am in
general terms, I hate myself for not being able to tell them of my condition.
'Now that the story is out in the open it is a tremendous relief and I hope
that, in a short time, people will accept that I have MS and that I will not
have to explain myself.'

    Irvine's public silence ended yesterday in a short statement issued by the
club on his behalf.

    It followed rumours that all was not well with him after he failed to report
for pre-season training. He was said to have been suffering from a trapped
nerve.

    In the statement, Irvine said he hoped he would recover from the initial
attack, adding: 'MS covers a large number of complaints and nobody would be able
to say exactly what the prognosis is for any individual sufferer.

    'However, I have been assured by the medical experts that my recovery will
be complete and I will be able to resume training shortly and be back to full
fitness and playing very soon thereafter.

    'I have nothing further that I wish to add at this time and hope I am left
in peace and privacy to continue with my recovery and get back to playing as
soon as possible.'

    But, standing outside his home only an hour after the statement was issued,
he vowed: 'I'll play again.

    'I hope you will all be queuing to see me play for Aberdeen - that's what I
want to do.'

    Thousands of football fans in Aberdeen and throughout Scotland will be upset
at the disclosure.

    Aberdeen manager Roy Aitken said: 'Everyone at the club - and I speak, I am
sure, for the supporters too - will be 100 per cent behind Brian's
rehabilitation programme. I am confident he will make a full recovery and he
will be given every support and assistance.'

    His case parallels that of Ray Kennedy, the 17-times capped Liverpool and
Arsenal player who was told in 1984, when he was 35, that he had Parkinson's
disease.

    Aberdeen's club doctor, Derek Gray, said: 'Brian is making a steady and
progressive recovery from this attack and I expect him to make a full recovery
from it and be back training and playing in matter of weeks.

    'We must remember MS is a condition which can either be very mild or
extremely aggressive. There are long periods of remission and I have had
patients who have suffered one attack and no more for 20 years.

    'But we must be realistic in recognising that every symptom is variable and
we cannot make predictions about any one case.'

    If anything can help Irvine it will be his faith. Since learning he has
contracted MS he has been using the Church as a pillar of support. The Baptist
Church he attends is in the attractive suburb of Milltimber, eight miles from
the city.

    Yesterday a member of the congregation said: 'We are praying he will get
better and we maintain the hope that all will be well.'

    And Irvine admitted: 'It is my faith and hope which is keeping me going. I
have to hang on to the belief that I will be strong enough to get through this
and to play football again.'

    MS is caused when, myelin, the white, fatty substance that sheathes nerve
fibres is gradually destroyed and multiple lesions develop in the brain and
spinal cord.

    The cause of the disease, which chiefly attacks individuals between the age
of 20 and 40, is unknown. The roots could lie in defective genes or a virus.

    The symptons vary according to the sites of the lesions in the nervous
system but the commonest include affected vision, tremors of the hands and
weakness of the extremities. One of its most visible effects is that the
sufferer slurs his or her speech.

    The normal pattern is for it to develop into a series of disabling attacks
punctuated by periods of relative calm.

    Relapses can occur over several years gradually producing permananent
disabilities with the sufferer movements becoming clumsier and more enfeebled.
Treatment through physical and occupational therapy can help the patient but in
most cases MS is eventually fatal.

    The latest research includes a study to see if dietary changes can hold back
the relapses which are a marked feature of MS. The search for such a treatment
has been made into a film starring Nick Nolte and Susan Sarandon.  But some
scientists are sceptical this line of research will produce results and believe
that gene therapy or a better understanding of the immune system is the way
forward.

    It is at the Baptist Church of the Deeside Christian Fellowship that he
shared his problem with close friends in the congregation.

GRAPHIC: Loving couple: Brian Irvine with his wife Donna

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1995


                              290 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 25, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 1, 3

LENGTH: 1516 words

HEADLINE: 'I WEPT WHEN THE DOCTORS TOLD ME I HAD NERVE DISEASE';
FOOTBALL STAR REVEALS HIS SECRET TORTURE

BYLINE: Frank Gilfeather

BODY:


    FOOTBALL star Brian Irvine faces the biggest challenge of his life after
being diagnosed as a multiple sclerosis sufferer.  He has spent seven weeks
keeping the tragic secret away from Aberdeen FC fans, but yesterday bravely
predicted he would recover and return to the playing field.

    He admitted to breaking down when the news was given to him, as he sat in a
hospital wheelchair. The diagnosis threatens to shatter not only his career but
also a happy family life.

    f=News701 Roman s=7.5 w=7.7 l=7.6As Irvine struggled to accept the
condition, his club had described the Scottish international's condition as a
'trapped nerve'.

    He said: 'Sometimes, whenever I am alone, I find myself overcome with grief
and my eyes fill with tears.'

    Keeping knowledge of the diagnosis to himself, his wife Donna and a close
circle of friends, was an ordeal in itself. 'I feel as if I have been living a
lie but, now that it is out, it is a relief,' he added.

    One of the country's cleanest-living athletes, Irvine is a non-smoking,
teetotal born-again Christian. His worst fear was an accident on the football
pitch.

    The 30-year-old told the Scottish Daily Mail of his traumatic experience
after being diagnosed as one of Britain's 100,000 MS sufferers. 'As a footballer
you worry about injury finishing your career but this is my life we are talking
about now. I don't know why it should be me but it is and I have to accept it -
but it is difficult.'

    The Aberdeen defender, married with two young daughters, is still stunned by
the uncertainty of his future following the news, given to him by a specialist
in Aberdeen Royal Infirmary seven weeks ago.

    It was Irvine who first alerted doctors to his problem.

    He said: 'When I was driving one day I felt tingling sensations in my left
foot which quickly spread to both my legs. It is like an electric shock that is
happening all the time.

    'It alarmed me and I went to see my GP, who immediately arranged for me to
see a specialist.  I told him all the Continued from Page One Before the
bombshell: Brian and Donna Irvine with their first daughter, Hannah Irvine as
Aberdeen FC fans know him Moment of truth: The footballer making his
announcement yesterday The

    andNow I begin the fight for my life A TINGLING WAS THE FIRST BRIAN IRVINE
KNEW SOMETHING WAS WRONG The day a doctor broke the worst news of all they broke
the dreadful news Brian faces a battle for his life They put a Do Not Disturb
sign on the door and I wept f=News701 Roman s=7.5 w=7.7 l=7.6symptoms I had and
mentioned that, when I was playing football last season, I seemed to be
suffering from double vision at times.

    'After the tests I was taken in a wheelchair into a private room at the
hospital and the specialist began telling me what was wrong with me. When he
mentioned I had contracted MS it just went right by me at first.

    'I couldn't quite take it in but, as the specialist continued, it became
clear that he was discussing the most serious of issues for me.

    'He left me at that point to put a 'do not disturb' sign on the door and I
sat and wept.

    'I have a faint recollection of a hospital worker coming into the room as I
sat there in shock; my mind was in turmoil.'

    At that stage Irvine, capped nine times for Scotland and a leading figure in
Aberdeen's fight to avoid relegation last season, knew little of MS, a disease
with no known cure and 8,000 sufferers in Scotland.

    Since then he has learned that the double vision problems and the tingling
in his extremities are symptoms of the illness.

    After the specialist broke the news to him Irvine phoned his wife Donna from
hospital to tell her the dreadful news.

    The footballer said: 'I started to tell her about what had been said to me
but became so overcome with emotion that I could not speak. Donna broke down
when she realised the severity of the situation and neither of us could converse
because of the emotions we both felt.'

    Later that night he drove his sponsored Rover with its personalised number
plate to his semi-detached home in an upmarket suburb of Aberdeen. There, with
his two children - Hannah, two, and weeks-old Christina - safely in bed he
discussed his family's future.

    The following weeks passed in a blur and Irvine admits he is confused by
what is happening to him.

    'I have to remember that while, as a private person, I would have wished
this terrible news to have remained confidential, I am also a public figure and
therefore feel obliged to tell the truth about it.

    'Sometimes, when I meet people in the street and they ask me how I am in
general terms, I hate myself for not being able to tell them of my condition.
'Now that the story is out in the open it is a tremendous relief and I hope
that, in a short time, people will accept that I have MS and that I will not
have to explain myself.'

    Irvine's public silence ended yesterday in a short statement issued by the
club on his behalf.

    It followed rumours that all was not well with him after he failed to report
for pre-season training. He was said to have been suffering from a trapped
nerve.

    In the statement, Irvine said he hoped he would recover from the initial
attack, adding: 'MS covers a large number of complaints and nobody would be able
to say exactly what the prognosis is for any individual sufferer.

    'However, I have been assured by the medical experts that my recovery will
be complete and I will be able to resume training shortly and be back to full
fitness and playing very soon thereafter.

    'I have nothing further that I wish to add at this time and hope I am left
in peace and privacy to continue with my recovery and get back to playing as
soon as possible.'

    But, standing outside his home only an hour after the statement was issued,
he vowed: 'I'll play again.

    'I hope you will all be queuing to see me play for Aberdeen - that's what I
want to do.'

    Thousands of football fans in Aberdeen and throughout Scotland will be upset
at the disclosure.

    Aberdeen manager Roy Aitken said: 'Everyone at the club - and I speak, I am
sure, for the supporters too - will be 100 per cent behind Brian's
rehabilitation programme. I am confident he will make a full recovery and he
will be given every support and assistance.'

    His case parallels that of Ray Kennedy, the 17-times capped Liverpool and
Arsenal player who was told in 1984, when he was 35, that he had Parkinson's
disease.

    Aberdeen's club doctor, Derek Gray, said: 'Brian is making a steady and
progressive recovery from this attack and I expect him to make a full recovery
from it and be back training and playing in matter of weeks.

    'We must remember MS is a condition which can either be very mild or
extremely aggressive. There are long periods of remission and I have had
patients who have suffered one attack and no more for 20 years.

    'But we must be realistic in recognising that every symptom is variable and
we cannot make predictions about any one case.'

    If anything can help Irvine it will be his faith. Since learning he has
contracted MS he has been using the Church as a pillar of support. The Baptist
Church he attends is in the attractive suburb of Milltimber, eight miles from
the city.

    Yesterday a member of the congregation said: 'We are praying he will get
better and we maintain the hope that all will be well.'

    And Irvine admitted: 'It is my faith and hope which is keeping me going. I
have to hang on to the belief that I will be strong enough to get through this
and to play football again.'

    MS is caused when, myelin, the white, fatty substance that sheathes nerve
fibres is gradually destroyed and multiple lesions develop in the brain and
spinal cord.

    The cause of the disease, which chiefly attacks individuals between the age
of 20 and 40, is unknown. The roots could lie in defective genes or a virus.

    The symptons vary according to the sites of the lesions in the nervous
system but the commonest include affected vision, tremors of the hands and
weakness of the extremities. One of its most visible effects is that the
sufferer slurs his or her speech.

    The normal pattern is for it to develop into a series of disabling attacks
punctuated by periods of relative calm.

    Relapses can occur over several years gradually producing permananent
disabilities with the sufferer movements becoming clumsier and more enfeebled.
Treatment through physical and occupational therapy can help the patient but in
most cases MS is eventually fatal.

    The latest research includes a study to see if dietary changes can hold back
the relapses which are a marked feature of MS. The search for such a treatment
has been made into a film starring Nick Nolte and Susan Sarandon.  But some
scientists are sceptical this line of research will produce results and believe
that gene therapy or a better understanding of the immune system is the way
forward.

    It is at the Baptist Church of the Deeside Christian Fellowship that he
shared his problem with close friends in the congregation.

GRAPHIC: Loving couple: Brian Irvine with his wife Donna

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1995


                              292 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 12, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 53

LENGTH: 1507 words

HEADLINE: Feuds that mar sport of hereos

BYLINE: Ian Wooldridge

BODY:


    IF THE British Grand Prix runs true to form at Silverstone on Sunday, Damon
Hill will spend another dangerous and frustrating afternoon driving in the
exhaust of his German rival, Michael Schumacher.

    His Williams-Renault is reliable enough but, unless his engineers tinker
another few miles an hour out of its innards, it isn't fast enough. Hill admits
as much in a remarkable interview with Andrew Duncan in this week's Radio Times.

    It is the best profile of a racing driver I have ever read because it strips
the glamour from a sport in which the skill and heroism of the drivers has
become engulfed by engineering science, the dexterity of pit-teams who can
change four wheels in 7.8 seconds instead of 12.3 and constant rule changes so
sudden and baffling that even Murray Walker can't keep abreast of them.  Hill
states unequivocally: 'We should have one set of tyres and no refuelling. At the
moment it's just flat-out blast from beginning to end and if anything goes
slightly wrong, you've had it.'

    He is absolutely right.  Race after race the same three or four men appear
on the podium, fidget through the same national anthems, spray the same brand of
champagne over spectators and then give the same po-faced television interviews
which are less about answering questions than photo opportunities to display the
sponsored trade names they are paid handsomely to wear on their visors and
jackets.  What is diplomatically held in check at these sessions is the actual
dislike some of these drivers have for one another.

    For example, Hill says of Schumacher: 'Sponsors are controlling the
characters and all they get are clones. Schumacher is a good example. He's been
taught how to handle himself by the Mercedes public relations team.  He's a
product rather than a person.' He adds: 'I don't say hello if I can help it.'
Hill has grounds for a grudge in that it was Schumacher who ran him off the
track in Adelaide last year to deprive him of a possible championship title. But
I find it sad that men bonded by a common danger can be so cold to one another.
It is what happens when great sport becomes greedy business.  Witness Boris
Becker's post-Wimbledon gripe that he didn't appear on the Centre Court as often
as Andre Agassi, thus depriving him of the chance to get his brands of tennis
gear similar TV exposure.

    Motor-racing never used to have this fractious edge. Fangio, a genius, could
have been an Argentinian diplomat. Moss was an eternal undergrad.  Damon's dad,
Graham Hill, was a dandy. Hawthorn was crazy. Clark was devastatingly charming.
Stewart was brilliant but a shop steward for increased safety.  James Hunt, a
vastly intelligent social rebel, once summed it up for me. 'Motor racing,' he
said, 'is about people going to tracks to see the likes of me killed. They will
deny it, but that's the truth. They like to say they were there when it happened
and, provided they pay me £1million per race for the privilege, I regard that as
a pretty fair deal.'

    It was a chilling remark. James never got £1m a race and tragically died of
natural causes shortly after retiring as world champion.

    But he drove in the halcyon days when the sport was about men, not
machinery, and the sooner we get back to them the better.

    ABSOLUTELY everyone is now homing in on the National Lottery's profits to
finance anything from a new stadium to a set of cricket gear.

    I still have great regard for the local communities whose pride insists they
do it for themselves which is why, yesterday, I wrote a £50 cheque to join a new
golf club.

    Bargain? Considerably. Without facing some committee inquiring into my
father's Army rank (private) or my public school (none), I shall tomorrow be a
life member of the Harris Golf Club, entitled to play there any time I please
and enter its annual club championship.

    Where is Harris? It is in the Western Isles of the Outer Hebrides off
Scotland's most inaccessible shore.

    It is aiming at £75,000 to get the course in shape and has had the brilliant
idea of asking golf freaks like me from around the world to join.  Nick Faldo is
already a member. So are club golfers from Kuwait, South Africa, America,
Bermuda, Hong Kong and Germany. Heavens, are we going to have some fun up there
if ever we can find it.

    AS EVER, Stirling Moss was in roaring form. 'Good God, old boy, I wouldn't
use the stuff if they gave it to me free.'

    My sentiments entirely.

    Stirling, as he has these past 30 years, had devoured the Daily Mail at
breakfast and was thus au fait with yesterday's front-page trailed article by
Hazel Knowles reporting that scientists are close to a cure for the 'misery' of
baldness.

    'Misery, old boy? Look here, you just tell this Hazel girl that I went bald
at 25 and never gave a damn about it then or since. Just imagine it. If I took
this gene therapy and started growing hair, people wouldn't recognise me. I
wouldn't like that a bit.'

    Stirling Moss is right. In common with him and two other sports heroes,
Brian Close and Steve Ovett, I started losing my hair in my mid-20's. It didn't
inhibit them from scaling the heights and it has never curtailed my great
privilege in being paid to watch them.

    Hazel Knowles says there are eight million British men going thin on top.
Forget it, chaps. Reject those toupees which fly off in high winds at Royal
Ascot, avoid those scalp implants which from 20 paces look like clods of
Siberian tundra.

    Baldness is not exactly cancer or septicaemia. It is a state of mind,
worrying only the vain or the uncertain. And if your lady doesn't like it, find
another one.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                              293 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 12, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 53

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Feuds that mar sport of hereos

BYLINE: Ian Wooldridge

BODY:


    IF THE British Grand Prix runs true to form at Silverstone on Sunday, Damon
Hill will spend another dangerous and frustrating afternoon driving in the
exhaust of his German rival, Michael Schumacher.

    His Williams-Renault is reliable enough but, unless his engineers tinker
another few miles an hour out of its innards, it isn't fast enough. Hill admits
as much in a remarkable interview with Andrew Duncan in this week's Radio Times.

    It is the best profile of a racing driver I have ever read because it strips
the glamour from a sport in which the skill and heroism of the drivers has
become engulfed by engineering science, the dexterity of pit-teams who can
change four wheels in 7.8 seconds instead of 12.3 and constant rule changes so
sudden and baffling that even Murray Walker can't keep abreast of them.  Hill
states unequivocally: 'We should have one set of tyres and no refuelling. At the
moment it's just flat-out blast from beginning to end and if anything goes
slightly wrong, you've had it.'

    He is absolutely right.  Race after race the same three or four men appear
on the podium, fidget through the same national anthems, spray the same brand of
champagne over spectators and then give the same po-faced television interviews
which are less about answering questions than photo opportunities to display the
sponsored trade names they are paid handsomely to wear on their visors and
jackets.  What is diplomatically held in check at these sessions is the actual
dislike some of these drivers have for one another.

    For example, Hill says of Schumacher: 'Sponsors are controlling the
characters and all they get are clones. Schumacher is a good example. He's been
taught how to handle himself by the Mercedes public relations team.  He's a
product rather than a person.' He adds: 'I don't say hello if I can help it.'
Hill has grounds for a grudge in that it was Schumacher who ran him off the
track in Adelaide last year to deprive him of a possible championship title. But
I find it sad that men bonded by a common danger can be so cold to one another.
It is what happens when great sport becomes greedy business.  Witness Boris
Becker's post-Wimbledon gripe that he didn't appear on the Centre Court as often
as Andre Agassi, thus depriving him of the chance to get his brands of tennis
gear similar TV exposure.

    Motor-racing never used to have this fractious edge. Fangio, a genius, could
have been an Argentinian diplomat. Moss was an eternal undergrad.  Damon's dad,
Graham Hill, was a dandy. Hawthorn was crazy. Clark was devastatingly charming.
Stewart was brilliant but a shop steward for increased safety.  James Hunt, a
vastly intelligent social rebel, once summed it up for me. 'Motor racing,' he
said, 'is about people going to tracks to see the likes of me killed. They will
deny it, but that's the truth. They like to say they were there when it happened
and, provided they pay me £1million per race for the privilege, I regard that as
a pretty fair deal.'

    It was a chilling remark. James never got £1m a race and tragically died of
natural causes shortly after retiring as world champion.

    But he drove in the halcyon days when the sport was about men, not
machinery, and the sooner we get back to them the better.

    ABSOLUTELY everyone is now homing in on the National Lottery's profits to
finance anything from a new stadium to a set of cricket gear.

    I still have great regard for the local communities whose pride insists they
do it for themselves which is why, yesterday, I wrote a £50 cheque to join a new
golf club.

    Bargain? Considerably. Without facing some committee inquiring into my
father's Army rank (private) or my public school (none), I shall tomorrow be a
life member of the Harris Golf Club, entitled to play there any time I please
and enter its annual club championship.

    Where is Harris? It is in the Western Isles of the Outer Hebrides off
Scotland's most inaccessible shore.

    It is aiming at £75,000 to get the course in shape and has had the brilliant
idea of asking golf freaks like me from around the world to join.  Nick Faldo is
already a member. So are club golfers from Kuwait, South Africa, America,
Bermuda, Hong Kong and Germany. Heavens, are we going to have some fun up there
if ever we can find it.

    AS EVER, Stirling Moss was in roaring form. 'Good God, old boy, I wouldn't
use the stuff if they gave it to me free.'

    My sentiments entirely.

    Stirling, as he has these past 30 years, had devoured the Daily Mail at
breakfast and was thus au fait with yesterday's front-page trailed article by
Hazel Knowles reporting that scientists are close to a cure for the 'misery' of
baldness.

    'Misery, old boy? Look here, you just tell this Hazel girl that I went bald
at 25 and never gave a damn about it then or since. Just imagine it. If I took
this gene therapy and started growing hair, people wouldn't recognise me. I
wouldn't like that a bit.'

    Stirling Moss is right. In common with him and two other sports heroes,
Brian Close and Steve Ovett, I started losing my hair in my mid-20's. It didn't
inhibit them from scaling the heights and it has never curtailed my great
privilege in being paid to watch them.

    Hazel Knowles says there are eight million British men going thin on top.
Forget it, chaps. Reject those toupees which fly off in high winds at Royal
Ascot, avoid those scalp implants which from 20 paces look like clods of
Siberian tundra.

    Baldness is not exactly cancer or septicaemia. It is a state of mind,
worrying only the vain or the uncertain. And if your lady doesn't like it, find
another one.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1995


                              294 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 11, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1480 words

HEADLINE: Are we close to a cure for baldness?

BYLINE: Hazel Knowles

BODY:


    FOR years, scientists have searched for an answer to baldness with the
promise of a multi-million pound bonus for the one who comes up with the cure.
Now two teams of scientists working independently in Bradford and America have
made separate breakthroughs which, they say, mean the cure is finally within
their grasp.

    It is only a matter of a few years before the bald man will become a chapter
in history. Hair transplant surgery and toupees will become a thing of the past
and the cosmetic and health industry will be deprived of millions of pounds made
from the sale of 'hair-restoring' lotions, creams and potions.  Instead, balding
men (and women) will be given genetically-engineered vaccines concocted from the
gene responsible for hair growth.

    Around eight million men in Britain are balding to some degree. The extent
varies from almost complete hair loss to the receding hairline which troubles
many from their 20s onwards.

    Experts estimate that almost two thirds have some visible thinning on top by
the time they reach 50 and, contrary to the myth that bald men are more sexy,
most would rather hold on to their hair.

    The breakthrough has been made following studies at Bradford University and
the AntiCancer biotechnolgy company in San Diego on America's West Coast.

    The Bradford team claims to have isolated, for the first time, the
regulatory cells from the bottom of a balding-hair follicle. Previously, this
had been managed only from non-balding follicles.

    Although scientists knew that the cells existed in balding follicles, no one
had ever managed to isolate them and culture them in test tubes.

    The discovery, say researchers Nigel Hibberts and Dr Val Randall, has taken
them a major step nearer to finding the actual gene responsible for controlling
hair growth.

    Dr Randall said: 'Now we will be able to compare the cells from non-balding
hair follicles with those in balding follicles to try to discover the difference
- and then, ultimately, the genetic cause of balding.  'From then, it is
perfectly feasible that scientists will be able to develop gene therapy to cure
baldness.'

    Across the Atlantic, the AntiCancer biotechnolgy company revealed that it
had perfected the way to target gene therapy to hair follicle cells.

    Researchers Robert Hoffman and Ligna Li found that they could deliver
genetic material into hair follicles if they first packed it into liposomes -
microscopic droplets of fat.

    This means that, as soon as the hair-growth gene is discovered, science has
the means to deliver gene therapy literally to the root of the problem.

    'The critical step for any sort of gene therapy is finding a way of getting
the genetic material into the right cells,' reported Hoffman in the publication
Nature Medicine.

    The American researchers also believe that their discovery could be used to
reverse and prevent grey hair.

    Scientists already know what causes greying: hair colour is maintained by
pigments called melanins and Japanese researchers have discovered that melanin
production depends on an enzyme called tyrosinase.

    'Our next step is to take the gene which controls this enzyme and see if we
can direct it into hair follicles to see if we can influence hair colour,' said
Hoffman.

    Dr Randall, who is also the secretary of the European Hair Research Society,
added: 'The two discoveries together represent a big step forward.

    'It's all very exciting. The Americans have just approached the problem from
the other end.

    'If we put the two studies together, a cure for baldness is certainly within
our grasp.

    'The American research means that once we have discovered the relevant gene,
we will be able to target gene therapy to the right cells.'

    In many men, balding is accelerated by the male hormone testosterone which,
paradoxically, encourages beard growth.

    The American team believes it may be a defect in the male hormone receptor
present in hair follicles which causes baldness.

    They also believe that gene therapy will help people suffering from
hair-loss conditions such as alopecia, although the gene needed to cure the sort
of balding which comes with ageing will be different from the ones required to
prevent other hair-loss conditions.

    Professor Michael Philpott was one of the team at Cambridge University who
managed to first grow hair in a test-tube five years ago.

    He said: 'I am aware of the work Hoffman and Li have been doing in
America.It's entirely possible that gene therapy could be the way to prevent
baldness, but no one has yet isolated the gene.

    'There is a lot of money in store for the person who finds it and there are
already many biotechnology companies racing to find the gene.

    'Some people have claimed to have found it in the past but, so far, these
claims have been unconvincing.'

    Without doubt, for the vast majority of men watching their locks disappear,
the discovery will not be a moment too soon.

    What is gone today, really could be hair tomorrow.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                              295 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 July 11, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 841 words

HEADLINE: Are we close to a cure for baldness?

BYLINE: Hazel Knowles

BODY:


    FOR years, scientists have searched for an answer to baldness with the
promise of a multi-million pound bonus for the one who comes up with the cure.
Now two teams of scientists working independently in Bradford and America have
made separate breakthroughs which, they say, mean the cure is finally within
their grasp.

    It is only a matter of a few years before the bald man will become a chapter
in history. Hair transplant surgery and toupees will become a thing of the past
and the cosmetic and health industry will be deprived of millions of pounds made
from the sale of 'hair-restoring' lotions, creams and potions.  Instead, balding
men (and women) will be given genetically-engineered vaccines concocted from the
gene responsible for hair growth.

    Around eight million men in Britain are balding to some degree. The extent
varies from almost complete hair loss to the receding hairline which troubles
many from their 20s onwards.

    Experts estimate that almost two thirds have some visible thinning on top by
the time they reach 50 and, contrary to the myth that bald men are more sexy,
most would rather hold on to their hair.

    The breakthrough has been made following studies at Bradford University and
the AntiCancer biotechnolgy company in San Diego on America's West Coast.

    The Bradford team claims to have isolated, for the first time, the
regulatory cells from the bottom of a balding-hair follicle. Previously, this
had been managed only from non-balding follicles.

    Although scientists knew that the cells existed in balding follicles, no one
had ever managed to isolate them and culture them in test tubes.

    The discovery, say researchers Nigel Hibberts and Dr Val Randall, has taken
them a major step nearer to finding the actual gene responsible for controlling
hair growth.

    Dr Randall said: 'Now we will be able to compare the cells from non-balding
hair follicles with those in balding follicles to try to discover the difference
- and then, ultimately, the genetic cause of balding.  'From then, it is
perfectly feasible that scientists will be able to develop gene therapy to cure
baldness.'

    Across the Atlantic, the AntiCancer biotechnolgy company revealed that it
had perfected the way to target gene therapy to hair follicle cells.

    Researchers Robert Hoffman and Ligna Li found that they could deliver
genetic material into hair follicles if they first packed it into liposomes -
microscopic droplets of fat.

    This means that, as soon as the hair-growth gene is discovered, science has
the means to deliver gene therapy literally to the root of the problem.

    'The critical step for any sort of gene therapy is finding a way of getting
the genetic material into the right cells,' reported Hoffman in the publication
Nature Medicine.

    The American researchers also believe that their discovery could be used to
reverse and prevent grey hair.

    Scientists already know what causes greying: hair colour is maintained by
pigments called melanins and Japanese researchers have discovered that melanin
production depends on an enzyme called tyrosinase.

    'Our next step is to take the gene which controls this enzyme and see if we
can direct it into hair follicles to see if we can influence hair colour,' said
Hoffman.

    Dr Randall, who is also the secretary of the European Hair Research Society,
added: 'The two discoveries together represent a big step forward.

    'It's all very exciting. The Americans have just approached the problem from
the other end.

    'If we put the two studies together, a cure for baldness is certainly within
our grasp.

    'The American research means that once we have discovered the relevant gene,
we will be able to target gene therapy to the right cells.'

    In many men, balding is accelerated by the male hormone testosterone which,
paradoxically, encourages beard growth.

    The American team believes it may be a defect in the male hormone receptor
present in hair follicles which causes baldness.

    They also believe that gene therapy will help people suffering from
hair-loss conditions such as alopecia, although the gene needed to cure the sort
of balding which comes with ageing will be different from the ones required to
prevent other hair-loss conditions.

    Professor Michael Philpott was one of the team at Cambridge University who
managed to first grow hair in a test-tube five years ago.

    He said: 'I am aware of the work Hoffman and Li have been doing in
America.It's entirely possible that gene therapy could be the way to prevent
baldness, but no one has yet isolated the gene.

    'There is a lot of money in store for the person who finds it and there are
already many biotechnology companies racing to find the gene.

    'Some people have claimed to have found it in the past but, so far, these
claims have been unconvincing.'

    Without doubt, for the vast majority of men watching their locks disappear,
the discovery will not be a moment too soon.

    What is gone today, really could be hair tomorrow.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1995


                              296 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 June 27, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 1707 words

HEADLINE: DO YOU WANT TO LIVE TO BE 118?

BYLINE: Hazel Knowles

BODY:


    FOR YEARS, scientists have told us the answer to staying young was in our
genes - if you wanted to see how a person defied the slings and arrows of time,
just look at their parents.

    And as we cannot decide who our parents are, controlling how long we live
has always been out out of hands. But now scientists believe they are one step
nearer to unlocking the door to longer and healthier life.

    A team in America has identified a gene - which they have called Age-1 - in
earthworms which controls ageing and researchers in Britain believe they are
only years away from finding the human equivalent.

    But the discovery has also opened up a whole can of worms.

    Supporters believe the find is an important step towards conquering such
ageing diseases as Alzheimer's, osteoporosis and arthritis. Some even feel it
might eventually prevent wrinkles, grey hair and balding.

    But sceptics fear it is just another example of Man trying to take life and
death in his own hands.

    Once the 'ageing-genes' in humans have been isolated it will only be a
matter of time before genetics tests will show who is more prone to old-age
diseases.

    The next step would be genetically-engineered vaccines to help the body
fight off the effects of ageing. Gene therapy - a technique where isolated genes
are used to treat certain genetically-controlled conditions - is already being
used in trials to treat arthritis, cancer and cystic fibrosis.  It would mean
that old people would live longer and be free of diseases that rob them of their
mobility and independence. They would be able to care for themselves longer,
therefore curbing society's ever-increasing cost of age care.

    On the downside, gene therapy for 'stop the clock' cures is likely to be
expensive, so the rich would stay young while the poor would grow old.

    Professor Tom Kirkwood is one of the scientist searching for the human Age-1
gene. He believes despite the ethical questions, research should go on but with
top priority on its use for stopping old-age diseases only.

    Later this year he will joined by Gordon Lithgow, one of the researchers who
discovered Age-1 in the earthworms.

    They will be working on a huge research project analysing blood samples of
centenarians to see if they can isolate a common gene which helped them survive
to old age.

    The Age-1 gene was uncovered in experiments with a microscopic form of
earthworm. The research showed that Age-1 controlled the repair of those cells
which degenerate in old age.

    Worms with a certain mutation in the gene lived 65 per cent longer and
showed a greater resistance to wear and tear cause by environmental toxins,
extremes of temperatures and ultraviolet radiation.

    If a human 'long-life gene' worked on similar lines, it could add an extra
46 years on to a man's life, increasing it from today's average of 72 to 118.
Women, who already survive longer than men, could live on to 128.

    'To say that the work may lead to discoveries which could extend human life
by 40 years is perhaps over-stretching things a little,' said Professor
Kirkwood.

    'But we are very excited. We believe we are only 10-15 years away from
understanding the basics of the ageing process and it is certainly not going
into the realms of science fiction to think in the future we will be able to
live better healthier lives in our old age.

    'Ultimately, our goal is about improving quality of life in later years.
Hopefully, it will reduce suffering and help people retain their good health and
independence.'

    The Alzheimer's Disease Society has welcomed the discovery but also
expressed fears.

    'Our main concern is how any development would be used,' said spokesman
Simon Denegri.

    'If a genetic test for an ageing disease was available before a cure, then
it could be used to restrict a person's access to all manner of things, such as
mortgage health care insurance.

    'A person known to have a greater chance of developing an old age genetic
disease, like Alzheimer's, would be considered a high risk.'

    Imagine the scenario if genetic testing on a 35-year-old man applying for
mortgage or life insuraance policy showed he was likely to be struck down with a
certain disease prematurely.

    Likewise, how would an insurance company react if a potential customer
wanting to join a personal pension scheme, showed they were likely to live to
100.

    This is a view echoed in part by the National Consumer Council which
recently stressed it feared the misuse of genetic tests could create a pool of
uninsurable people.

    And if access to gene therapy depended on wealth, inequalities would be
increased, with treatment becoming the preserve of the privileged few, says the
council.

    John Grimley Evans, professor of gerontology at Oxford University, is
exicted about the development. But shares some anxieties.

    'What matters in all this is the quality of life. If this research prolongs
life at the same time as preventing disabilities and keeping us healthy then it
all very well and good. But if it prolongs life without reducing the
disabilities, then that is not a good thing.'

    Professor Kirkwood plans to start his research later this year. But it is
likely to be a few years before society will have to face up ethics of
prolonging life.

    In the meatime, Professor Grimley Evans says we have no other option than to
keep following the doctors advice.

    'It all sounds very boring but until they isolate the gene in humans, the
only way we can try to ensure we stay health in old age is to exercise, have a
good diet, drink alcohol moderately and don't smoke.

    'The new genetic research is all very exciting and in the long term will
produce some interesting some interesting results. But at the moment improving
our lifestyle is the only option we have.'

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1995


                              297 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 June 27, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 37

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: DO YOU WANT TO LIVE TO BE 118?

BYLINE: Hazel Knowles

BODY:


    FOR YEARS, scientists have told us the answer to staying young was in our
genes - if you wanted to see how a person defied the slings and arrows of time,
just look at their parents.

    And as we cannot decide who our parents are, controlling how long we live
has always been out out of hands. But now scientists believe they are one step
nearer to unlocking the door to longer and healthier life.

    A team in America has identified a gene - which they have called Age-1 - in
earthworms which controls ageing and researchers in Britain believe they are
only years away from finding the human equivalent.

    But the discovery has also opened up a whole can of worms.

    Supporters believe the find is an important step towards conquering such
ageing diseases as Alzheimer's, osteoporosis and arthritis. Some even feel it
might eventually prevent wrinkles, grey hair and balding.

    But sceptics fear it is just another example of Man trying to take life and
death in his own hands.

    Once the 'ageing-genes' in humans have been isolated it will only be a
matter of time before genetics tests will show who is more prone to old-age
diseases.

    The next step would be genetically-engineered vaccines to help the body
fight off the effects of ageing. Gene therapy - a technique where isolated genes
are used to treat certain genetically-controlled conditions - is already being
used in trials to treat arthritis, cancer and cystic fibrosis.  It would mean
that old people would live longer and be free of diseases that rob them of their
mobility and independence. They would be able to care for themselves longer,
therefore curbing society's ever-increasing cost of age care.

    On the downside, gene therapy for 'stop the clock' cures is likely to be
expensive, so the rich would stay young while the poor would grow old.

    Professor Tom Kirkwood is one of the scientist searching for the human Age-1
gene. He believes despite the ethical questions, research should go on but with
top priority on its use for stopping old-age diseases only.

    Later this year he will joined by Gordon Lithgow, one of the researchers who
discovered Age-1 in the earthworms.

    They will be working on a huge research project analysing blood samples of
centenarians to see if they can isolate a common gene which helped them survive
to old age.

    The Age-1 gene was uncovered in experiments with a microscopic form of
earthworm. The research showed that Age-1 controlled the repair of those cells
which degenerate in old age.

    Worms with a certain mutation in the gene lived 65 per cent longer and
showed a greater resistance to wear and tear cause by environmental toxins,
extremes of temperatures and ultraviolet radiation.

    If a human 'long-life gene' worked on similar lines, it could add an extra
46 years on to a man's life, increasing it from today's average of 72 to 118.
Women, who already survive longer than men, could live on to 128.

    'To say that the work may lead to discoveries which could extend human life
by 40 years is perhaps over-stretching things a little,' said Professor
Kirkwood.

    'But we are very excited. We believe we are only 10-15 years away from
understanding the basics of the ageing process and it is certainly not going
into the realms of science fiction to think in the future we will be able to
live better healthier lives in our old age.

    'Ultimately, our goal is about improving quality of life in later years.
Hopefully, it will reduce suffering and help people retain their good health and
independence.'

    The Alzheimer's Disease Society has welcomed the discovery but also
expressed fears.

    'Our main concern is how any development would be used,' said spokesman
Simon Denegri.

    'If a genetic test for an ageing disease was available before a cure, then
it could be used to restrict a person's access to all manner of things, such as
mortgage health care insurance.

    'A person known to have a greater chance of developing an old age genetic
disease, like Alzheimer's, would be considered a high risk.'

    Imagine the scenario if genetic testing on a 35-year-old man applying for
mortgage or life insuraance policy showed he was likely to be struck down with a
certain disease prematurely.

    Likewise, how would an insurance company react if a potential customer
wanting to join a personal pension scheme, showed they were likely to live to
100.

    This is a view echoed in part by the National Consumer Council which
recently stressed it feared the misuse of genetic tests could create a pool of
uninsurable people.

    And if access to gene therapy depended on wealth, inequalities would be
increased, with treatment becoming the preserve of the privileged few, says the
council.

    John Grimley Evans, professor of gerontology at Oxford University, is
exicted about the development. But shares some anxieties.

    'What matters in all this is the quality of life. If this research prolongs
life at the same time as preventing disabilities and keeping us healthy then it
all very well and good. But if it prolongs life without reducing the
disabilities, then that is not a good thing.'

    Professor Kirkwood plans to start his research later this year. But it is
likely to be a few years before society will have to face up ethics of
prolonging life.

    In the meatime, Professor Grimley Evans says we have no other option than to
keep following the doctors advice.

    'It all sounds very boring but until they isolate the gene in humans, the
only way we can try to ensure we stay health in old age is to exercise, have a
good diet, drink alcohol moderately and don't smoke.

    'The new genetic research is all very exciting and in the long term will
produce some interesting some interesting results. But at the moment improving
our lifestyle is the only option we have.'

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1995


                              300 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  May 22, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 187 words

HEADLINE: Nose-drop weapon in cystic fibrosis

BODY:


    GENE therapy aimed at helping patients with cystic fibrosis is to go on
trial this week in Oxford.

    Scientists will try to replace 'faulty' genes with a correct copy by
inserting it into the nose via a liquid. If the experiments prove effective,
trials on the lungs will begin.

    The trial on 12 patients is the first to involve women. Scientists now have
evidence that the technique does not affect reproductive cells. They hope the
methods used will eventually benefit sufferers from a range of other genetic
disorders and even cancers. A similar trial in under way in London.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995


                              301 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  May 22, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 23

LENGTH: 99 words

HEADLINE: Nose-drop weapon in cystic fibrosis

BODY:


    GENE therapy aimed at helping patients with cystic fibrosis is to go on
trial this week in Oxford.

    Scientists will try to replace 'faulty' genes with a correct copy by
inserting it into the nose via a liquid. If the experiments prove effective,
trials on the lungs will begin.

    The trial on 12 patients is the first to involve women. Scientists now have
evidence that the technique does not affect reproductive cells. They hope the
methods used will eventually benefit sufferers from a range of other genetic
disorders and even cancers. A similar trial in under way in London.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1995


                              313 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                January 17, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 39

LENGTH: 280 words

HEADLINE: Death blow for killer?

BODY:


    A BRITISH team has come one step closer to defeating cystic fibrosis, a
disease which kills many sufferers before they reach 30.

    Researchers at the Royal Brompton and St Mary's Hospitals in London and the
Human Genetics Unit at Edinburgh University have developed a new method of
inserting healthy copies of the defective gene into the lining of sufferers'
lungs.

    It uses microscopic doplets of fat, known as liposomes, which are sprayed
into the lungs to release healthy DNA into the cells to compensate for the
genetic defect. Researchers have already successfully introduced the healthy
genes into cells lining the nose. These are very similar to the lung lining, but
easier to monitor.

    This new technique promises to be much safer than previous attempts at gene
therapy which used genetically-engineered viruses to carry DNA into the lungs.
These had the unfortunate side-effect of causing inflammation in sufferers
already-damaged organs.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995


                              314 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1995 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                January 17, 1995

SECTION: Pg. 39

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: Death blow for killer?

BODY:


    A BRITISH team has come one step closer to defeating cystic fibrosis, a
disease which kills many sufferers before they reach 30.

    Researchers at the Royal Brompton and St Mary's Hospitals in London and the
Human Genetics Unit at Edinburgh University have developed a new method of
inserting healthy copies of the defective gene into the lining of sufferers'
lungs.

    It uses microscopic doplets of fat, known as liposomes, which are sprayed
into the lungs to release healthy DNA into the cells to compensate for the
genetic defect. Researchers have already successfully introduced the healthy
genes into cells lining the nose. These are very similar to the lung lining, but
easier to monitor.

    This new technique promises to be much safer than previous attempts at gene
therapy which used genetically-engineered viruses to carry DNA into the lungs.
These had the unfortunate side-effect of causing inflammation in sufferers
already-damaged organs.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995


                              318 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                               December 31, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 17

LENGTH: 547 words

HEADLINE: BREAKTHROUGH IN THE SEARCH FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE

BODY:


    DOCTORS are celebrating a major breakthrough in the search for a cure for
one of the most common fatal inherited diseases.

    The research findings offer hope of treatment within several years for the
6,000 people in Britain, mainly young children, who suffer from cystic fibrosis.

    The new optimism follows the first gene therapy trial for the congenital
condition, masterminded by the Royal Brompton Hospital, London.

    In the trial a spray of DNA coated with fat droplets, known as liposomes,
was used to ferry copies of a healthy gene into 15 patients to compensate for
the faulty CF gene.

    The liposomes, provided by the University of Pittsburgh in the U.S., were
tested on cells lining the nose. The lack of harmful side effects opens the way
to more ambitious attempts to treat lungs damaged by the disease and clogged
with mucus.

    The treatment corrected the biological defect by about 20 per cent for
several days. This compares well with other studies using common cold viruses,
which can cause inflammation.

    Involved in the trial were doctors from the National Heart and Lung
Institute and St Mary's Hospital Medical School in London and the Medical
Research Council Human Genetics Unit in Edinburgh. Details were reported in the
journal Nature Medicine.

    However, the researchers and the Cystic Fibrosis Trust stress this result is
just the start and it will take several years before the treatment can be
perfected.

    Dr Martin Scott, of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust, said: 'The results represent
a significant step forward, and will give hope to the thousands of children
affected by CF and their families.

    'We now need more money to ensure that the work continues as quickly as
possible.'

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1995


                              324 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                                December 4, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 21, 22, 23

LENGTH: 3934 words

HEADLINE: GUNFIGHT IN BIOTECH VALLEY;
NIGHT & DAY

BYLINE: Brian James

BODY:


    When Mickey Mouse reached his 65th birthday last year, the suits that run
the Disney Corporation erected a statue to their repellent rodent. 'The world's
never had a mouse who makes money like Mickey. And never will, right?' Wrong. At
the other end of California from Disneyland, you'll find HuMAB, a mouse with the
potential to pull in enough cash to make poor Mickey seem more at home in a
church.

    HuMAB is the scampering leader of a race of super-mice which has cost over
£20 million to breed. The scientists at GenPharm, who 'built' him genetically,
don't claim that HuMAB will ever match Mickey's ability to squeak in English:
but he is 'human' in a vastly more important way. He is the first animal to
carry human genes successfully and is thus a living test-bed on which to develop
treatments, and even cures, for a host of human diseases.  The earning potential
of a mouse on which treatment for arthritis, transplant rejection and cancers in
humans can be developed and then mass-produced is awesome. Dr Robert Kay - a
British expat and joint leader of the scientific team at GenPharm - puts it this
way: 'There are so many ways to go - we are like kids in a candy store.'

    But there is one problem - this is not a one-mouse race. A few dozen miles
north of GenPharm's Mountain View laboratory near San Francisco, the scientists
at Cell Genesys introduce you to Xenomouse, a golden-brown rodent whose ability
to carry human genes was reached at roughly the same time as that of HuMAB. Cell
Genesys claims it is no coincidence and has accused GenPharm of taking a bit of
a short cut - by stealing some of their secrets.  No one is forecasting when the
case will come to court, and no one envies the laymen who will have to
understand the subtleties of the science involved. But all eyes will be on Dr
Frederick Alt, a vastly distinguished scientist recently elected to the American
Academy of Science, whom Cell Genesys have named as one of the rat-finks who
stole the secrets of their super-mouse.  Alt became a consultant to the company
in 1989, and in January 1990 was given written details of the company's
super-mouse, just 13 days after it had taken out a US patent. Alt, who is said
to have signed a five-year non-disclosure agreement, announced at a meeting in
June that he would also, as part of his wide-ranging interests, be advising
GenPharm.

    Cell Genesys allege that when GenPharm filed its own US patent on the
super-mice in August 1990, the details were 'so strikingly similar' to their own
that GenPharm must have had access to confidential information via Alt.

    Americans habitually sue each other for millions of dollars each time
someone trips over another's lawn-rake; but this case has implications far
beyond the mind-boggling damages each side will be demanding. It strikes at that
blurred line between 'pure' science and profit-driven research - a line which
academics have traditionally wandered across at will, like monks on medieval
battlefields, welcomed by both sides.

    One Californian professor complained that 'this secrecy is against the
culture of the academic world. How are people with the brightest minds going to
talk freely, exchange notions, if they fear they may be

    accused of some sort of espionage?'

    The point is taken by one of the key players: HuMAB inventor Kay. He was
born in Weymouth, educated largely in New Zealand and served with the Imperial
Cancer Research Fund before another British scientist, Jonathan MacQuitty,
brain-drained him to California.

    'In the nine months since that allegation was made against us at GenPharm, I
have calmed down a little,' says Kay, 'but not much. I had known Fred Alt for
quite some time. In this area he is a guru. But for him to be accused, with me,
of being some sort of conduit for stolen trade secrets is just

    monstrous. This is a man of tremendous integrity.' Someone had remarked that
it was like hearing Einstein accused of picking pockets: 'Yes, that about sums
it up. Unthinkable.'

    Over at Cell Genesys, the chairman and MD Dr Stephen Sherwin takes a more
commercial view. 'This is not an emotional issue. We have no alternative but to
take the steps we must to protect the interests of our shareholders. We don't
leave papers lying about on desks. People are trained to be careful of what they
discuss in public. I wouldn't use the term cutthroat, but with finite resources
of venture risk capital, of talent and technology available to all, the cost of
failure to protect what you have is very high: it can be fatal.' As these two
mouse-making companies prepare to go at each other like Tom and Jerry, you sense
why the protection of intellectual property - brainwaves and other original
ideas - is becoming another of the great growth industries of the world's legal
systems. In 1991 the World Intellectual Property Organisation reported that
Japan alone had nearly 400,000 claims to invention that year. America,
naturally, holds the record for damages - the $ 900 million Kodak was

    ordered to pay Polaroid for an infringement.

    To understand more of this conflict you need to know a little about the
science and the biotech business. It is no coincidence that both companies are
based in northern California. This is 'Gene County' - row after row of suburban
streets with newly-laid lawns and hundreds of single-storey companies with the
word 'gene' in their logos.

    Here, they say, is the cutting edge of the biotech business. The genesis of
every start-up in Gene County is this - a scientist gets an idea to engineer
genes to grow a fatter tomato or more hair on a bald head; he persuades a
risk-capital finance house to put up a few million dollars, hires help from the
brightest output of Harvard or Oxbridge, and moves in.

    But most of these businesses are doomed to disappear through takeover bids
or lack of funding. The analogy is a slew of factories designing motorcars,
while waiting for someone to perfect the wheel. 'It is early days,' says Sherwin
unabashedly. 'Our biotech industry has only been going for about 15 years.' This
almost bizarrely disdainful attitude to earnings now permeates Cell Genesys'
annual report. 'The company has been unprofitable since its inception and
expects to incur substantial and increasing losses over at least the next
several years,' it reports with Micawberish cheeriness. The company's shares
have dropped from a high of $ 24 last year to just $ 7.50. So you can see why
Cell Genesys is so thrilled to welcome the $ 46 million that Japan Tobacco
(desperate to diversify out of cigarettes) has so far pledged to become joint
owners of Xenomouse.

    It's all about the timing. The San Francisco Chronicle recently devised a
Monopoly-style board game for the biotech industry. The trick was to work around
the board towards the winning-post of Food and Drug Administration approval: you
lose turns or are sent back several spaces if you land on squares marked
'Evaluation - drug no better than existing pills', or 'Serious side-effects - go
to Dead End'. Both Cell Genesys and GenPharm had copies of the article lying
about their offices when I visited.

    There was no square marked 'Go To Jail', I observed to Dr David Winter,
president of GenPharm and a scientist whose track record includes helping Nasa
send mice into space. 'No,' he replied, 'but plenty that mean 'Drop dead!' ' The
same remark caused Sherwin to observe tightly that there was also no square
marked 'Go Back Five Spaces, Your Secret's Stolen'. Which is why Cell Genesys
now 'have three full-time patent attorneys working in-house'.  Decisions will
not be easy for the attorneys and patent office clerks. They are

    dealing with the subtle rearrangements of, literally, the stuff of life: the
still-unmapped three billion possible combinations of amino acids that compose
strips of DNA, the building blocks of the tissue of mice and men and all other
living things on the planet.

    The Austrian priest Gregor Mendel (1822-84) is credited with the discovery
of how genes act as the set of instructions for forming the strings of DNA which
pass characteristics from one generation to the next. But it wasn't until the
Seventies that technology made it possible to tinker with the make-up of these
genes.

    As two out of three people die because of faults in their genes, the most
exciting part of the super-mouse research is the discovery that antibodies (the
body's natural defence systems against disease) can be 'cloned' or duplicated in
immense quantities outside the body, using the cells of mice.  What's more,
these antibodies can be crafted to target specific illnesses.  One limb of the
Y-shaped antibody can lurk in the bloodstream of treated patients to attach
itself to invading viruses, while the stem of the antibody reaches out to
assemble the best disease-killing cells of the patient's own immune system.
Medicine hailed the DNA breakthrough as the 'magic bullets' with which to fight
disease.

    The trouble is that human killer cells are not only very effective, they are
also pretty dim. Instead of welcoming the reinforcement of these cloned
antibodies, they see them as 'foreigners'. So the natural defensive cells attack
these allies, often setting up life-threatening reactions in patients. The
super-mouse research was aimed at finding a source of

    antibodies that would escape detection as 'foreigners' when injected into
humans.

    'The theory was in place, the method of putting it to use was not,' says
Winter. 'We were reaching back into a long tradition - simple farmers had been
changing the genes of corn for hundreds of years, by trial and

    error. We had an objective; there was no need to wait for chance.'

    What both companies have done - by slightly different routes - is to strip
out snippets of the gene proteins that make a mouse a mouse, and use
micro-injection to replace them, at the stage when the mouse is a single cell,
with strains of human DNA, to breed an animal that, in tiny but significant
ways, is just like a human.

    'It takes 81 separate steps,' says Winter, 'then you wait 21 days for the
mouse to have pups and examine their DNA to see if you have got it right.
Nearly all the time you find you haven't. So you re-examine your notes, tinker
with a little more DNA, and try again, waiting for the day you can cry 'bingo'.'
This was precisely the word used in a cable sent to Kay in Osaka, where he was
helping drum up more funds, on the day colleagues in California finally cracked
the equation. That bare telegram - 'somatic mutation - bingo' is still pinned up
in his California office. It made him feel 'pretty lonely.  This was it, the
moment. And the one place I wanted to be was back with the gang who had made it
happen.'

    Kay says the bingo message did not mean the problem was cracked in a single
step. 'There was no one eureka moment. You get over an obstacle, then go looking
for the next.' His rival, Dr Krisztina Zsebo, vice-president of research and
development in charge of Xenomouse agrees: 'We got there; this triumph was by
incremental steps. Though there was a night when we knew the last of those steps
had been taken. Then we all went downtown, and went a bit wild, and drank
liquids in perhaps unwise quantities.'

    Neither side will give a date for that day they felt bathed in a golden
light - a Santa Clara courthouse will hear it first. In many other ways GenPharm
and Cell Genesys speak from the same script. Both say they are going down side
two of that Monopoly board: side one was Invention; now they are in Development.
Which means making a better mouse - 'HuMAB needs to be more robust, now he's
rather a weakling,' and 'The first Xenomouse was our Model-T. Now we are working
on the Cadillac version.' (Although they talk of their mouse as if it were an
individual, each is now a breed, several hundred in number.) It is not only mice
that are being recruited by man to make our lives longer and less painful. In
Holland, GenPharm developed Herman, a transgenic bull which has sired the first
herd of cows which will eventually give milk containing human lactoferin, a
digestive aid to premature babies and weakened cancer or Aids patients. Goats
are being used to develop treatments against heart attack, and sheep genes offer
hope for emphysema sufferers.  Plants, too, may help in surprising ways;
gene-treated potatoes have potential for producing proteins that help patients
recover from surgery.  Perhaps the most delicious irony in the field, though, is
the identified potential for the leaves of tobacco plants to trigger a
genetically designed drug to combat lung cancer.  The next step is finding out
the antigens (the catalyst that provokes the production of antibodies) of which
diseases offer the most promising prospect. GenPharm favours working towards
treatment for certain cancers and inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis, while Cell Genesys candidates include these as well as allergic
disorders and transplant rejection.  Both say Side Three of the Monopoly board -
Clinical Trials - can't be rushed. And both say Side Four, the wait for FDA
approval, ought not to be feared. 'You make sure of passing through this process
by planning every step,' says Sherwin, 'by not daring to take risks with the
statistical issues, such as doing too limited a trial, and by resisting the
temptation - often ruinous - of stopping your experiments to take a peek at the

    results'.

    Both teams recognise that they will need to shift at a brisk clip down the
remaining sides of the Monopoly board to reach the point where the antibodies
can be brewed in silo-sized vats and then shipped out as injections, pills and
powders before the year 2000.

    And both share 3am nightmares about contamination, such as through some
rodent rapist. 'There is hardly a lab in the world that has not had a midnight
visitor,' says Winter. 'Get one of those sneaking in and two years' work could
go back to square one.'

    Visitors won't easily see a mouse at either company - except the display of
fluffy models a clerk with a sense of humour has assembled beside her in the
office. At GenPharm the real mice are in the centre of the complex, within a
maze of corridors entered only by those with codes to the key-pad locks at every
phase: 'Even as president I don't have the code to enter,' Winter insists. 'It
is all on need-to-know.'

    However, the notion that because of the work of GenPharm and Cell Genesys,
doctors will be able to do a simple test on patients, prescribe them a few
strips of molecular thread and send them home to await certain cure, does not -
perhaps amazingly - enthrall all. A poll conducted by Time magazine this year
found 49 per cent of people questioned said they would prefer to remain ignorant
of any disease their genes indicated they were likely to suffer in later life.
Fifty-eight per cent went further, declaring that altering human genes, for any
purpose, was against the will of God.

    On this issue at least Cell Genesys and GenPharm are in harmony. Sherwin
says, 'Ethics is simply not an issue. We are not building 'human mice'. We are
in human healthcare. There is a line not to be crossed between gene therapy,
where we are, and gene-tinkering with reproductive cells.'

    Winter says, 'I see the point about

    privacy, but I see also a need to be positive. If in 20 years we could take
a pinch of skin, identify future threat, and begin steps that would prevent a
man dying from heart disease or his wife developing breast cancer, then
shouldn't we at least perfect the technique? If the individual would rather be
dead then, sure, permit him to ignore what could be known: but no one worth a
damn believes we can retreat into ignorance.'

    Of course, the gene scientists - most with qualifications after their names
as long as a ribbon of DNA - stand to get rich on their efforts. Most of them
have shares and stock options in ventures that could generate millions: or,
alternatively, never make a cent. But what, I ask two of the brightest, was the
dream?

    'I did not come into this to make better perfumes,' says Zsebo. 'You look
around, see the old and the young who are afflicted - chronic diseases, terrible
things such as multiple sclerosis - and know there is a chance, a real chance .
. . we can help. The dream, as you put it, takes shape around that.' Kay prefers
to call it the 'human aspect'. He says, 'Yes, our work will usually be expressed
in statistics, percentages, rates of improvement and change. But it would be
gratifying if one day I could just happen to be there . . . that day somewhere
down the road, when there will be a child in a hospital bed. And because of the
work we have done here, the kid will get up and walk . . .'

    It looks, as they used to say in the

    cartoons, like a job for Mighty Mouse.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994


                              330 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                October 29, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 1214 words

HEADLINE: MERRICK WAS A TRAGIC CASE OF MISTAKEN IDENTIFICATION;
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS

BODY:


    If the so-called Elephant Man, Joseph Carey Merrick, were alive today, would
a whole or partial cure be available to him?

    IN 1905, on somewhat scanty evidence, Joseph Merrick was diagnosed as
suffering from Von Recklinghausen's disease, a genetic disorder of the nerve
tissue, now called Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Nf1).

    Nf causes tumours, usually non-malignant, to appear on nerve tissue under
the skin and inside the body. Rarely, a lump of fibrous tissue may appear on the
face and no doubt this heightened confusion regarding Merrick's plight.

    But Merrick's distorted skull and other areas of overgrowth had a quite
different origin - they were due to Proteus Syndrome. This causes random and
asymmetrical overgrowth of tissue and bone.

    The syndrome is genetic but probably a chance mutation and not heritable,
unlike Nf where a parent with a faulty gene has a 50:50 chance of passing on the
disorder.

    Ironically, John Hurt's performance in the film The Elephant Man sparked
interest in the disease and led to the formation of the Neurofibromatosis
Association.

    Research scientists have discovered the genes which cause the disorder and
there is realistic hope of treatment through gene therapy in five to ten years.

    Sadly, because Proteus Syndrome occurs sporadically, it is less likely that
gene therapy could assist Joseph Merrick were he alive today. However, the
increased skill and improved technology in plastic and orthopaedic surgery,
modern drugs and better diagnosis might have alleviated some of the problems
which he bore with such gentle fortitude.

    Col John Blackwell, CBE,

    Director, Neurofibromatosis Association,

    Kingston upon Thames, Surrey.

    If the universe is expanding after the Big Bang, in which direction should I
look in the sky to see where it started?

    THE simple answer is 'up'. One of the main reasons we believe there was a
Big Bang is that we can see a dim shadow of the fires of its creation.  Wherever
we look in the universe, in whatever direction, we can detect a microwave
background radiation: heat radiating at minus 270 degrees Centigrade.  Matt
Bacon,

    Science and technology editor,

    Focus Magazine, London.

    There's a marathon argument in my family over the film, All Quiet On The
Western Front. I saw it in the Fifties, with Beryl Mercer playing Lew Ayres's
mother. My brother saw the film abroad and swears that the distinctive American
comedienne ZaSu Pitts had the role of the mother. One of us must be wrong, but
which?

    SURPRISINGLY, both of you are correct. Director Lewis Milestone made two
versions of the anti-war classic in 1930, a talkie and a silent version for
cinemas not yet equipped for sound. Though Lew Ayres and others featured in
both, Beryl Mercer was the mother in the talkie while Pitts did the silent
version.

    Tony Cleverleigh, Clevedon, Avon.

    Why do some people receive an electric shock when getting out of a car,
while others never do?

    MOTORISTS often experience painful shocks because of the static generated as
they slide out of their seat. The level of shock depends on their clothing and
footwear, the seating material and the humidity.

    Synthetic materials can create 10,000 volts or more when rubbed together, so
natural materials can alleviate the problem.

    Gordon Rowlands,

    Statpad Limited, Macclesfield, Cheshire.

    Q: WHATEVER happened to the author of the wonderful poem For Lisa, With
Love, published in the Mail more than 20 years ago and the little girl whom it
described?

    Anthony Carr,

    South Shields, Tyne and Wear.

GRAPHIC: Courageous: John Hurt's portrayal in The Elephant Man

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1994


                              331 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                October 25, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1814 words

HEADLINE: THE MORAL MAZE;
ONE OF BRITAIN'S MOST RESPECTED SPIRITUAL LEADERS ASKS WHETHER GENETIC
ENGINEERING IS ADVANCING TOO FAST FOR SOCIETY'S GOOD

BYLINE: Julia Neuberger

BODY:


    HARDLY a day goes by without another news story about some great scientific
advance in the field of genetic engineering.

    Only yesterday, we read about the genetic discovery that could extend the
lifespan of human cells by up to 30 per cent - the elixir of youth that
scientists have been searching for since the dawn of alchemy.

    Last week, a team of researchers in the U.S. claimed to have located the
gene which causes dyslexia.

    In July, British scientists claimed to have found the gene responsible for
one of the diseases leading to kidney failure.

    In September, Oxford scientists discovered two genes which could contribute
to childhood diabetes. And last month, U.S. and British researchers tracked down
a gene responsible for a form of inherited breast cancer.  Meanwhile, there were
accounts last year from the U.S. National Cancer Institute about a genetic
predisposition towards homosexuality, with the apparent discovery of the gene
concerned. This led to the former Chief Rabbi, Lord Jakobovits, suggesting that,
if it were possible to genetically engineer that gene out of future children,
parents might choose to do so.

    The furore caused by that view was considerable; the reaction from the gay
community was understandably hostile and cries of 'eugenics' were heard
throughout the land. But if we were to follow that position to its conclusion,
we would have to ask whether we should be able to engineer the dyslexia gene,
for instance, to stop our children suffering considerable problems?  Or whether
we should be able to know that the children we carry in our wombs are likely to
be alcoholic, diabetic or have kidney failure later in life? And, if we know it,
what should we do about it?

    Should we be aborting such children as 'undesirable', or to prevent them
suffering? Should we even want to know what the future holds for ourselves or
our children?

    Does it really help to have all this knowledge about our future illnesses,
or is this merely too much knowledge which will make the life choices we all
have to decide even harder?

    For if we know we are bearing a child with a defect, we may have to decide
between abortion or, where possible, treating the foetus in a dish by
manipulating the gene and replacing it in the womb.

    Yet perhaps the truth is that we should be leaving well alone. In the
Twenties, compulsory sterilisation of mentally ill and handicapped people seemed
perfectly acceptable in the USA, and Marie Stopes was concerned to limit the
breeding of the very poor.

    There was undoubtedly a sense that it was right to create the perfect human
beings - in one's own image - and to limit the breeding of others.

    It was only the Nazis' appalling destruction of people with learning
difficulties, the mentally ill, Jews, gipsies and homosexuals that made people
think again about the wisdom of eugenics.

    Yet genetic engineering implies eugenics, of a sophisticated kind. If we can
remove or repair one gene, we might be able to prevent cystic fibrosis, for
instance, a heart-rending condition leading to early death.

    We might even be able to do something about the genetic element in inherited
breast cancer.

    For until now it was merely thought that women with mothers and sisters who
had had the disease were more likely to get it, so that those seen as being at
high risk, genetically speaking, occasionally had preventive double
mastectomies. If we were able to pinpoint more accurately those women at risk,
we might be able to target them better and treat them preventively.

    We are not there yet, but the gradual ability to screen, and increasingly to
engineer, genetically makes such possibilities more likely.

    Few people would quarrel with doing something for people with cystic
fibrosis. Still fewer would quarrel with doing something to halt the
relentlessly growing death rate from breast cancer of women in the UK and

    worldwide. But even so, the ethical issues won't go away.

    First among these is the question of creating 'perfect' human beings.  Some
of our talent may well be genetically transmitted - such as our degree of
musicality, for instance, or our mathematical ability - as well as some of our
defects.

    A world a century hence when genetically transmitted diseases have been
virtually eliminated might see the genetic engineers' attention turning to
creating geniuses of one sort or other. There are already sperm banks in the USA
which sell the seed of Nobel prizewinners to ambitious would-be mothers so such
a picture is not entirely unrealistic.

    We should be terribly uneasy about this. The use of genetic engineering to
provide healing for terrible diseases is one thing, morally speaking, although
even that requires strict legal and ethical governance - and full consent and
the maintenance of confidentiality would be essential.

    But the creation of super-children is quite different, and begs many
questions, including what value is put on those of us who are less than perfect.
Does it suggest we should have been treated genetically, or discarded?  We must
take care to regulate genetic engineering, and particularly gene therapy, in
humans. Gene therapy is now vetted after the Polkinghorne Committee considered
it in depth.

    But even if regulations are strict in the UK, other countries will not be so
demanding. Gene therapy is where abuse could take place, and also where public
understanding has not yet caught up with the speed of scientific advance.

    For the eugenicists may be in the ascendant in some countries where the
birthrate is too high, where parents are only allowed to produce one child,
where infertility treatments are growing and where the prospect of the perfect
child seems remarkably attractive. Strict controls are necessary, with some
international force. But so is a public debate about what is acceptable,
nationally and internationally.

    In genetic screening, however, there is the beginning of a genuine public
debate, as the result of the work of the Nuffield Council on Bioethics and its
report published late last year.

    Should insurance companies be able to require genetic screening when it
would materially affect policies? How should society deal wih confidentiality?
Should screening ever be required by employers, so that they know everything
they can about us? These are some of the questions with which we have to
grapple.

    But there is a urgent need for public debate, so that people can decide
which kinds of interventions are acceptable, and which are not, what we should
try to prevent, and what we should not, and who, ultimately, should take control
of this fascinating, but deeply disturbing, series of scientific advances.

    * JULIA NEUBERGER is a rabbi and a member of the Human Fertilisation and
Embryology Authority.

GRAPHIC: The perfect baby: Is genetic tinkering the face of tomorrow?

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1994


                              333 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                               September 21, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 947 words

HEADLINE: GENE 'SAVIOUR' FOR INNOCENT DOGS WHO WAIT ON DEATH ROW

BYLINE: Greg Hadfield

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have identified a gene which will help isolate pit bull terriers
and take many dogs off death row.

    It means a simple blood test could save many family pets from being
destroyed under the controversial Dangerous Dogs Act.

    Some of the animals which have been seized by police - and kept in kennels
at taxpayers' expense - have never attacked any one.

    A growing number of owners, who insist their dogs are crossbreeds, have
SCIENTISTS have identified a gene which will help isolate pit bull terriers and
take many dogs off death row.started long and costly legal battles to prov
unregistered 'pit bull-types'.

    But yesterday Professor Geoffrey Goldspink, one of Britain's leading experts
in gene therapy, revealed a breakthrough by his researchers which could end the
controversy.

    He said they had identified the gene that gives pit bulls their remarkable
muscular power.

    And if 'genetic fingerprinting' shows a dog does not have the gene, then it
cannot be a pit bull, said Professor Goldspink.

    He said: 'This could halt many of the prosecutions in their tracks if courts
accept it as admissible evidence.'

    Although he emphasised that more work was needed it is thought that the test
- developed at London's Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine - could be
available within a year. It has already been carried out on more than 20 dogs.

    'Eventually, there is no reason why it should not be done using a single
hair,' said Professor Goldspink, 55, head of the Royal Free's department of
anatomy and development biology.

    The Kennel Club, which is funding the research, hailed the breakthrough as
offering the first scientific way of determining a dog's breed.

    'What a dog looks like can be misleading. It will clear a lot of dogs, but
it is impossible to say how many,' said Brian Leonard, the club's external
affairs officer.

    'The Act is a mess and the chief problem is one of identification.' When the
research is complete, the Kennel Club hopes it will be able to use genetic
testing to compile its 3.5million-strong register of pedigree dogs by
differentiating between each of 188 recognised breeds.

    Last night a Home Office spokesman promised to study the findings, adding:
'We will be interested in details of any scientific advance that may be of use
in cases under the Dangerous Dogs Act'.

    It was also welcomed by Karen Brock, whose dog Buster won a last-minute stay
of execution to enable her to appeal to the European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg.

    She said: 'This is exactly what we need to prove whether a dog is a pit bull
and stop all this confusion.'

    However, some campaigners were unimpressed. They insisted courts should take
heed of a dog's behaviour, not its genetic make-up.

    Dr Roger Mugford, an animal behaviourist, said the test could not tell the
difference between pit bulls, which are banned, and Staffordshire bull terriers,
which are not.

    Just because a dog has the newly-identified gene does not prove that it is a
pit bull, he added.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1994


                              338 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                August 25, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1033 words

HEADLINE: HOW DARE THEY MARKET THE MIRACLE OF LIFE?

BYLINE: Lord Jakobovits

BODY:


    AN ADVERTISEMENT in a national paper here in Britain this week made a new,
startling offer: human eggs for sale, for implantation. The advertisement was
placed by an American fertility clinic seeking custom.

    The eggs came from American women, who had reportedly been paid more that
£6,000 each for their eggs; the advertisement was aimed at childless couples
desperate to raise a family. But as an advertisement, and as a procedure, it was
morally reprehensible.

    It offered that most priceless thing, the generation of human life, as a
commercial transaction. The most precious gift of all was here reduced to a
commodity of the marketplace, to be bought and sold. All the enticements that
are used to sell clothing, or houses, or insurance, were here applied to human
life itself. Even the words were the same: 'immediate availability'; 'no waiting
list'.

    In the attempt to bring healing to human suffering, many techniques are
perfectly legitimate. Genetic engineering is just one such technique. Like other
methods of therapy, it can bring relief to those who are sick in mind or body.

    As just one example, a gene therapy for some cancers could go into clinical
trials later this year. Its role is to make the afflicted whole again; and in
that role it is to be welcomed.

    But here we are speaking not of curing, but of creating. Genetic engineering
is utterly unacceptable as a replacement for the mystery of generating life.
Love is what creates life: the love between a man and a woman that is one of the
supreme gifts of God. Here we see a denial of that role. We see human life
created in cold, clinical conditions, away from the personal intimacy of human
love.

    The method this advertisement proposes denies more: while helping to create
a child, it denies to that child a knowledge of his or her origin.  That child
can never know its genetic identity; it cannot know who, among all the women of
the world, is the one who gave it being, who is responsible for the colour of
its hair, its eyes, the outline of its face, the form of its body - or the form
of its mind or soul. I would call such a child a foundling; for it has been
deprived of its birthright to know its own identity.  The alternative -
identifying the donors to the recipients - is quite impossible. In a nightmare
scenario, imagine how a clinic would describe the source of its embryos to
potential recipients. Would it offer only eggs from sources of proven high IQ,
or from high-quality athletes? Or charge more for guaranteeing blue-eyed
children, or blondes? Or, appallingly, reject some willing donors as a
'genetically inferior' breed? The human mind must recoil from the horror
involved.

    Under the system of anonymous donors, however, one donor woman may give - or
sell - many eggs to such a clinic. One man may provide millions of sperm.
Divided among 'customers' - what a word to describe women desperate for
children! - the result may be huge numbers of half-brothers and half-sisters,
all the 'products' of one commercial donor. One man may thus have a huge number
of direct biological descendants - all of them unknown to him, and to each
other.

    The danger of incest from such a happening is not acute at present, but it
has happened. In California not long ago, a man was about to marry a bride 20
years his junior. The bride's 'father' thought it only right to disclose that
his daughter was the product of artificial insemination. The groom, taken aback,
inquired further, as to dates and places. Pursued to the origin, he found that
he himself had been the donor of the sperm; he had been about to marry his own
daughter.

    I must add one thing. As Jews, we certainly feel deeply for the longing to
be blessed with children. To this day we hear the agonised cry - which
schoolchildren read in their Old Testaments - of Rachel to her husband Jacob:
'Give me children, or else I am as dead.'

    It is a desire that cannot fail to speak to the heart; but it cannot be
satisfied if the cost is degrading the dignity of life itself. Nor can it be
used to deny a child one of our inalienable rights: the right to know our own
identity.

    Even adopted children have that right. Records are kept, and the child will
eventually, when it is grown, be entitled to obtain that information.  It is one
thing to privatise medicine, for the State or the patient to buy certain medical
services; it is quite another for commerce to invade the inner sanctum of human
existance. I am very relieved to see that the Department of Health and spokesmen
of the medical profession have warned women to beware of this apparently easy,
if costly, solution to their problem. One infertility specialist has denounced
the advertisement as 'flagrant commercialism'. And that is exactly what it is.

    I am glad that this country has reacted as it has. The pressures are all the
other way, and they will grow. Commercial incentives to introduce such a system
here will not decrease. There will always be those willing to cash in, and
exploit the desperation of women who seek help.

    But unhappiness, and the economics of the marketplace, are just not good
enough as determinants of right and wrong. In this most intimate of human
relationships, other criteria apply. Morality stands above all else; and some
things, no matter how much money may be made from them, remain wrong.

    It was wrong to place such an advertisement, and wrong to accept it.  There
are certain limits. Most good papers would not accept advertisements which are
indecent, for example. This advertisement breached the guidelines of moral
decency. Those who placed or featured it were aiding and abetting an
unacceptable practice.

    We open here a hornets' nest. We see, in the practices advertised, the
beginnings of a new attitude to life. In his novel Brave New World, Aldous
Huxley drew a picture of such attitudes in their final stages. All children were
made in factories, on production lines. Human sexuality had become a mere
recreation - and love, it seemed, was absent. We have to draw the line somewhere
if we are not to be reduced to mere mechanical beings, with bodies and minds -
but no spirit.

GRAPHIC: BRAVE NEW WORLD:NOW HUMAN LIFE IS BEING ADVERTISED AS ANOTHER COMMODITY
U FOR SALE

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1994


                              349 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  May 3, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 34

LENGTH: 1160 words

HEADLINE: SECRETS OF THE ASTHMA GENES;
PART TWO OF OUR SPECIAL REPORT LOOKS AT NEW HOPES FOR A CURE

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE ultimate treatment for asthma could lie in scientists tracking down the
genes responsible for the disease.

    Specialists agree that a predisposition to asthma is created by family
inheritance. Add in environmental triggers ranging from dust mites to grass
pollen and the chances of having an asthma attack soar.

    Researchers based in Oxford believe they are closer than ever to identifying
two genes they claim are central to atopy - the predisposition to allergy that
can be expressed as asthma, hay fever and eczema.

    After studying more than 1,000 members of 100 families for five years, the
team has homed in on a gene on chromosome 11 found in one in two asthma
families. A second gene on chromosome 14 appears to be associated with allergies
to specific substances.

    The hope is that such discoveries will eventually lead to genetic
manipulation or gene therapy to block the development of asthma in vulnerable
people.  But that is only half the story, say leading specialists such as Dr
Martyn Partridge, chief medical adviser to the National Asthma Campaign charity
and prime mover of a series of successful initiatives aimed at improving
awareness and treatment.

    'Even if we pinpoint the genetic component of the disease, it could be light
years before we can do anything about it,' he says.

    A more effective approach may be to help people avoid the allergen - the
allergy trigger - that switches on asthma and other atopic reactions. Some
people never come into contact with theirs and never realise they are asthmatic.
The changes in the environment in recent times are thought by some experts to
have contributed to the modern epidemic of asthma. Twenty years ago, it affected
perhaps one in 10 people, now one in five children and nearly as many adults
suffer. 'Treatment will not be necessary at all if we could stop asthma being
switched on,' said Dr Partridge.

    About £2 million is spent each year on research by the National Asthma
Campaign - more than any other non-commercial concern, including the Government.
Director Melinda Letts says: 'Asthma can happen to any one at any time, and
every four hours someone dies from it. We need research into all aspects of
causes and treatment.'

    Scientists experimenting with new therapies are aiming to counteract the
narrowing of airways within the lung which causes the characteristic
breathlessness and wheezing of an attack.

    The walls of the airways become inflamed, swollen and irritable after
contact with specific allergens or irritants.

    A promising approach by researchers at the National Heart and Lung
Institute, London, involves cyclosporin A, a drug used for the past decade to
suppress immunity in transplant patients to avoid organ rejection.

    The idea is to use it to suppress the activity of a prime player in the
body's immune system which makes the asthma sufferer hypersensitive to triggers.
Results from early trials to be published shortly are 'very exciting', says
Professor Barry Kay, director of the department of allergy and clinical
immunology. The main problem is getting the dose high enough to work but
sufficiently low so that it will not cause side-effects.

    A similar dual-purpose may be found for another anti-rejection drug, FK-506,
because it is more powerful in inhibiting a key element of the asthmatic
inflammation while being less toxic.

    Other treatments could be spin-offs from other lines of research.
Monoclonal antibodies, for example, have been tested against diseases ranging
from rheumatoid arthritis to Multiple Sclerosis, but these laboratory-engineered
substances could block over-activity of the asthmatic's immune system.  Many
asthma therapies have been used since the Chinese first recognised the disease
around 4,000 years ago but camel and crocodile excreta are probably the most
bizarre.

    They were heated over bricks with herbs and inhaled by the ancient Egyptians
as early as 1,000 BC.

    * THE NAC Asthma Helpline is open from 9am to 9pm weekdays on 0345 010203
and is staffed by trained nurses.

    A free NAC information pack, Take Control Of Asthma, explains treatments
available and can be ordered on a 24-hour information line on 0891 441188.
Calls cost 39p a minute cheap rate, 49p peak, and should last no longer than two
minutes.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994


                              350 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                  May 3, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 34

LENGTH: 1160 words

HEADLINE: SECRETS OF THE ASTHMA GENES;
PART TWO OF OUR SPECOAL REPORT LOOKS AT NEW HOPES FOR A CURE

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE ultimate treatment for asthma could lie in scientists tracking down the
genes responsible for the disease.

    Specialists agree that a predisposition to asthma is created by family
inheritance. Add in environmental triggers ranging from dust mites to grass
pollen and the chances of having an asthma attack soar.

    Researchers based in Oxford believe they are closer than ever to identifying
two genes they claim are central to atopy - the predisposition to allergy that
can be expressed as asthma, hay fever and eczema.

    After studying more than 1,000 members of 100 families for five years, the
team has homed in on a gene on chromosome 11 found in one in two asthma
families. A second gene on chromosome 14 appears to be associated with allergies
to specific substances.

    The hope is that such discoveries will eventually lead to genetic
manipulation or gene therapy to block the development of asthma in vulnerable
people.  But that is only half the story, say leading specialists such as Dr
Martyn Partridge, chief medical adviser to the National Asthma Campaign charity
and prime mover of a series of successful initiatives aimed at improving
awareness and treatment.

    'Even if we pinpoint the genetic component of the disease, it could be light
years before we can do anything about it,' he says.

    A more effective approach may be to help people avoid the allergen - the
allergy trigger - that switches on asthma and other atopic reactions. Some
people never come into contact with theirs and never realise they are asthmatic.
The changes in the environment in recent times are thought by some experts to
have contributed to the modern epidemic of asthma. Twenty years ago, it affected
perhaps one in 10 people, now one in five children and nearly as many adults
suffer. 'Treatment will not be necessary at all if we could stop asthma being
switched on,' said Dr Partridge.

    About £2 million is spent each year on research by the National Asthma
Campaign - more than any other non-commercial concern, including the Government.
Director Melinda Letts says: 'Asthma can happen to any one at any time, and
every four hours someone dies from it. We need research into all aspects of
causes and treatment.'

    Scientists experimenting with new therapies are aiming to counteract the
narrowing of airways within the lung which causes the characteristic
breathlessness and wheezing of an attack.

    The walls of the airways become inflamed, swollen and irritable after
contact with specific allergens or irritants.

    A promising approach by researchers at the National Heart and Lung
Institute, London, involves cyclosporin A, a drug used for the past decade to
suppress immunity in transplant patients to avoid organ rejection.

    The idea is to use it to suppress the activity of a prime player in the
body's immune system which makes the asthma sufferer hypersensitive to triggers.
Results from early trials to be published shortly are 'very exciting', says
Professor Barry Kay, director of the department of allergy and clinical
immunology. The main problem is getting the dose high enough to work but
sufficiently low so that it will not cause side-effects.

    A similar dual-purpose may be found for another anti-rejection drug, FK-506,
because it is more powerful in inhibiting a key element of the asthmatic
inflammation while being less toxic.

    Other treatments could be spin-offs from other lines of research.
Monoclonal antibodies, for example, have been tested against diseases ranging
from rheumatoid arthritis to Multiple Sclerosis, but these laboratory-engineered
substances could block over-activity of the asthmatic's immune system.  Many
asthma therapies have been used since the Chinese first recognised the disease
around 4,000 years ago but camel and crocodile excreta are probably the most
bizarre.

    They were heated over bricks with herbs and inhaled by the ancient Egyptians
as early as 1,000 BC.

    * THE NAC Asthma Helpline is open from 9am to 9pm weekdays on 0345 010203
and is staffed by trained nurses.

    A free NAC information pack, Take Control Of Asthma, explains treatments
available and can be ordered on a 24-hour information line on 0891 441188.
Calls cost 39p a minute cheap rate, 49p peak, and should last no longer than two
minutes.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994


                              356 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                 March 14, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: New light on bald heads

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS believe they could be a hair's breadth from a cure for male
baldness.

    The cause could be a gene which runs in families and in women causes a
gynaecological disorder.

    The discovery could pave the way for the development of drugs or gene
therapy to rectify the problem.

    It follows research by Dr Adam Carey, of St Mary's Hospital Medical School
in Paddington, West London, into polycystic ovary disease, which can make women
infertile.

    Suspecting a genetic fault, he interviewed their fathers and brothers.
'Everywhere I looked, I saw bald heads,' Dr Carey said yesterday.

    'Now we have established a link, we hope to find the gene that causes the
conditions in the very near future.'

    The theory was described as 'interesting' by skin specialist Dr David
Fenton, of St Thomas's Hospital in London, who said it had been assumed several
genes were involved.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1994


                              358 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1994 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                                February 5, 1994

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1440 words

HEADLINE: RISKS AND REWARDS OF EXPERIMENTING WITH THE ESSENCE OF LIFE;
Are genetic researchers menders or meddlers? Failures in cancer lab safet regime

BYLINE: Sean Poulter,James Golden

BODY:


    THEY are experimenting with the very essence of life itself - the human
gene.

    In private laboratories nationwide, researchers are daily delving ever
deeper into once unfathomable scientific depths.

    They are a group who revel in obscurity, helped by the often impenetrable
jargon of their specialities. Almost always, their motives are benign.

    But occasionally, through arrogance or oversight, their actions can have
potentially deadly consequences.

    Such a failing was identified in the team led by Professor Phillip Gallimore
at Birmingham University's Department of Cancer Studies.

    They were trying to identify suspected cancer-causing genes by applying them
to human tissue, using a virus as a carrier for the gene and to speed its
assimilation.

    But this created a cancer linked to a virus as volatile and infectious as
the common cold - a mixture whose very existence conjures up a nightmare
scenario.

    Research into genetically-altered organisms generally falls into two areas -
those directly affecting humans and those with a wider environmental impact.

    The environmental area covers genetically-altered fruit and vegetables
which, unless controlled, threaten to disrupt the natural food chain. For
example, a strain of tomatoes has been given a fish gene which prevents freezing
in cold weather.

    For some, human genetic research heralds a Utopian future in which disease
and birth defects are eliminated. Scientists worldwide are now engaged in the
15-year Human Genome Project, aimed at identifying upwards of 100,000 genes to
help conquer disease. But others fear it could lead to a Brave New World of
production-line babies, or attempts to create a Nazi-style super-race.

    The failure of the Birmingham team to abide by the regulations allegedly put
research staff and others at risk, and alarmed a senior inspector of the
Government's Health and Safety Executive enough to halt their work.

    When he arrived on December 16, 1993, he was so appalled he wrote out an
prohibition order stopping experiments immediately. But it is understood the
Gallimore team had already been working on the project for a year.

    Materials used in the research were kept locked in one part of the
laboratory and had to be brought to the work area, raising the risk of a
spillage. There was also a possibility of mix-ups and confusion because the
laboratory accommodated up to a dozen researchers doing their own experiments at
any one time.

    Genes, viruses and human cells were mixed in test tubes and worked on in two
standard microbiological safety cabinets - which have air filtration systems -
by staff sitting on stools and wearing protective gloves. When not in use,
experimental material was kept in screw-top bottles locked in a cupboard on the
other side of the lab.

    The greatest failure of the team, it is claimed, was not to recognise and
properly assess what problems might occur, or how the virus-gene could
accidentally escape into the laboratory. Because of this, they could not show -
as legally required - that there was no risk of cross-infection to staff and
others.

    The Birmingham work was sponsored by the Cancer Research Campaign at a cost
of £250,000. Its director, Professor Gordon McVie, said he accepted the team was
guilty of 'an oversight', but the research was vitally important.

    'If cancer-causing genes can be identified, it would enable the disease to
be detected and tackled at an early stage, through drugs, vaccines or gene
therapy,' he added.

    He believes there was never a possibility of the virus spreading as it had
been 'castrated' and would have been unable to replicate itself. 'I accept the
team fell down on the point of risk assessment,' he added. 'They thought their
assessment of the risks was sufficient and the HSE obviously did not.

    'There is nothing sinister or negligent in that. It was more of an

    oversight and I certainly don't think there should be any witch-hunt to
point the finger of blame at whoever was responsible.

    'Of course we are dismayed when our laboratory and our science is involved
in something like this. It is now up to the university to satisfy us that the
research is safe.'

    Professor David Westbury, vice-principal of the university, said no
disciplinary action was warranted against Professor Gallimore and his team.  'We
stopped immediately we had the prohibition notice served,' he added. 'We are
extremely safety-conscious, and while we felt all necessary precautions were
being taken it is important that we are monitored so that improvements can be
made.

    'As far as we are concerned, there was never any question of the virus
escaping from the lab and affecting the general public.

    'If anyone was to be affected - and they have not been - it would have been
those working in the lab. It is important to reassure the public at large that
they have not been put at risk.

    'There are full safeguards in the facility and it is a matter of debate
about the sort of environment needed for every piece of work, every project.
Safety is paramount, but we believe there has been no risk to the public.

GRAPHIC: The killer: A virus associated with cancer Medical frontier: A
scientist working in a Birmingham University lab

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1994


                              369 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 30, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 2480 words

HEADLINE: Would you dare take the cancer gene test?;
New research may force women into facing a terrible choice

BYLINE: Sue Russell, Jenny Hope

BODY:


    YOUNG women at high risk of breast cancer could soon face an agonising
decision over whether to have their healthy breasts removed in advance to
prevent the disease.

    Scientists are close to pinpointing the gene responsible for the inherited
form of breast cancer which will lead to a new test predicting women who are '90
per cent' certain to develop it.

    Dr Ian Smith, consultant cancer physician at the Royal Marsden Hospital,
London, says women having the test could find it overshadows the rest of their
lives if the results are positive.

    He believes some women will want to end the uncertainty by having their
breast removed as a preventive measure. 'Women who test positive will know they
have a high risk of developing breast cancer, but the problem is that the
knowledge could blight their lives.

    'They will be in exactly the same position as people who now test positive
for HIV, yet the problem will affect greater numbers, and they will have to
consider carefully if they want a test at all given the social implications of a
positive result.'

    OTHER cancer specialists and women at risk also say the surgical solution is
far too drastic. Other options should be considered including preventive drug
treatment while gene therapy offers hope for the future, said Professor Gordon
McVie, scientific director of the Cancer Research Campaign.

    'We are all trying to help women avoid an operation which is mutilating,' he
said.

    Scientists around the world are racing to locate the breast cancer gene, and
a breakthrough is likely within the next few months.

    But the development of a test to tell women their chances of suffering
breast cancer poses ethical and practical problems. Such women could find it
impossible to get life insurance while employers might be reluctant to hire
someone at high risk of illness.

    About one in 20 of the 24,000 women who develop breast cancer in Britain
each year is likely to carry the gene and their daughters have a 50:50 chance of
inheriting it.

    Professor Ian Fentiman of Guy's said: 'A small number of women - about 1,200
a year - are involved, but their risk of developing cancer by the age of 70 is
between 70 and 90 per cent.

    'The test will probably involve examining DNA taken from the white blood
cells of women with breast cancer and looking for the gene abnormality.

    'The test could be offered to their daughters and they will have a 50 per
cent chance of being given the all-clear - at least from this inherited form of
the disease.'

    The big question was what options were available for women who tested
positive, he said. 'If some women insist on something being done, then bilateral
mastectomy is a possibility.'

    But surgery carried its own risks, he added, because it would take eight to
10 hours including breast reconstruction and separate operations might be
needed.

    Molecular biology research is likely to eventually produce ways to switching
off the cancer process in the vulnerable breast cells, he said. 'I think quite a
lot of women at risk will not opt for surgery to prevent something happening in
as much as 20 years' time. They will hope that science catches up and there is a
good chance that it will.'

    At a joint conference at the weekend, the Cancer Research Campaign and
Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund decided they should plan for the discovery of the
breast cancer gene, and others that will follow for different types of cancer.

    I considered my breasts to be lethal weapons BACK in July, Charlynn Ross,
36, a mother of two from North Carolina, had both healthy breasts removed. Her
mother had died of breast cancer at the age of 47 and both her elder sisters
Mary Jo and Judi had double mastectomies after being diagnosed with cancer.

    As a result, her younger sister Lauren had her healthy breasts removed in a
pre-emptive strike against the killer disease. After learning that she too had a
75-100 per cent chance of getting breast cancer, Charlynn became the last of the
sisters to undergo surgery.

    'Once I found out that my breasts could kill me, I stopped being sentimental
about them. I considered them lethal weapons, and I wanted them away from me. I
might get hit by a bus tomorrow, but by God, I will beat breast cancer.

    'We thought we'd paid our dues when our mother died. I don't know whether
that was denial or naivete. But when Mary Jo and Judi were diagnosed, I was
completely devastated. It was almost as if my limbic system stopped, I had to
think about breathing.

    'It was obvious something very bad was happening in our family. Something
had tripped in our genetic make-up.

    'I'd never heard of prophylactic surgery at that point, all I knew was that
I had to amputate my breasts or I might die. Even if I hadn't been able to have
reconstruction, I'd have done it anyway. I'd have been crazy not to.  I'm just
grateful that it wasn't my arm or leg.

    MY HUSBAND immediately said: 'Go for it!' It was much more important to him
for me to be alive and healthy than for me to have breasts. We've been married
nearly 20 years and the hardest thing for him was to watch my sisters and their
families suffer, and to watch me take it so badly. I cried buckets. I was
frightened for their children, frightened for all of the family.

    'You'd think I would grieve for the loss of my breasts, but I was so happy
to get into that operating room that I was clicking my heels all the way down
the hall.

    'It had been like living with the sword of Damocles hanging over my head.  I
can't describe the terror, knowing the odds were so terrific. Cancer has caused
so much grief and destruction in my family that the surgery was an emotional and
psychological relief. I have children I want to see grow up, and a husband I
love very much.

    'I didn't hide what was going on from my boys. Sure, I showed them my
breasts right after the surgery. What's terrifying to children is the unknown,
the tricks played by their imaginations. I would much prefer them to see the
real thing, and it wasn't bad to look at.

    'For someone to criticise us, they don't know what they're talking about.
They're simply ignorant. Now, do I think this is a reasonable or acceptable
thing to do? No! It's been a very extreme step and I'm sorry that I was that
desperate. But tell me an alternative? Right now, I don't know have any.

    'Why do 46,000 women have to die every year in America? We have 181,000 new
cases each year. The breast cancer rate is even worse in Britain. I pray that
money is put into researching cause and cure. I want the powers-that-be to
realise that they've got to stop this terrible disease. I don't want my nieces
or granddaughters to have to go through this.'

    IN FAVOUR JEANNE KICKS will be among the first in the queue for a gene test
once it is available.

    She has strong family history of breast cancer. Her maternal grandmother
contrcated breast cancer, her cousin has had it and her mother's sister died
from the disease.

    'I would definitely have a test. Given the chance, I would like to know if I
have inherited the gene that puts me at extra risk,' she said.

    Jeanne, 53, who lives in west London with her husband John, has been having
regular breast checks for 20 years because of her family history and the fact
that she has needed treatment for lumps.

    For the last two years she has been taking part in a pilot trial to find out
whether the drug tamoxifen will prevent breast cancer in women at high risk. She
takes a daily tablet but doesn't know if it's the real thing or a placebo.

    'I don't like swallowing tablets if I don't have to. A gene test would allow
me to make a choice about carrying on with 'medication'. If it was negative I
would stop taking the pills, but if it was positive I would feel it was all
worthwhile and was doing me some good.'

    AGAINST

    NIKKI HILL, 34, works for BACUP, the British Association of Cancer United
Patients. Her mother was diagnosed as having breast cancer 15 years ago, and two
years ago she had a recurrence.

    There is no doubt that genetic testing poses a personal dilemma for me. I
have certainly wondered whether I might my mother's breast cancer might be
inherited and whether I too might have that gene. But at the moment I have no
intention of taking the test.

    It has occured to me that the test might be negative and my mind would be
put at rest. But I am well aware that if I went for the test and found that I
had the gene then it would really give me something to worry about.

    I have to ask myself what I would do with that information, particularly
when I am so young. I'm not old enough for screening and there is no way I would
have prophylactic surgery - a full mastectomy seems a very drastic option if you
do not actually have cancer.

    Above all, I'd want to be absolutely sure they'd got the right information
before I agreed to do anything radical. I wouldn't want to discover three or
four years later that they'd got slightly the wrong gene and my treatment had
been in vain.

GRAPHIC: Jeanne Kicks, left, is determined to have a gene test. American Sisters
Charlynn (centre) and Mary Jo both had mastectomies

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993


                              370 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 30, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 1512 words

HEADLINE: Would you dare take the cancer gene test?;
New research may force women into facing a terrible choice

BYLINE: Sue Russell, Jenny Hope

BODY:


    YOUNG women at high risk of breast cancer could soon face an agonising
decision over whether to have their healthy breasts removed in advance to
prevent the disease.

    Scientists are close to pinpointing the gene responsible for the inherited
form of breast cancer which will lead to a new test predicting women who are '90
per cent' certain to develop it.

    Dr Ian Smith, consultant cancer physician at the Royal Marsden Hospital,
London, says women having the test could find it overshadows the rest of their
lives if the results are positive.

    He believes some women will want to end the uncertainty by having their
breast removed as a preventive measure. 'Women who test positive will know they
have a high risk of developing breast cancer, but the problem is that the
knowledge could blight their lives.

    'They will be in exactly the same position as people who now test positive
for HIV, yet the problem will affect greater numbers, and they will have to
consider carefully if they want a test at all given the social implications of a
positive result.'

    OTHER cancer specialists and women at risk also say the surgical solution is
far too drastic. Other options should be considered including preventive drug
treatment while gene therapy offers hope for the future, said Professor Gordon
McVie, scientific director of the Cancer Research Campaign.

    'We are all trying to help women avoid an operation which is mutilating,' he
said.

    Scientists around the world are racing to locate the breast cancer gene, and
a breakthrough is likely within the next few months.

    But the development of a test to tell women their chances of suffering
breast cancer poses ethical and practical problems. Such women could find it
impossible to get life insurance while employers might be reluctant to hire
someone at high risk of illness.

    About one in 20 of the 24,000 women who develop breast cancer in Britain
each year is likely to carry the gene and their daughters have a 50:50 chance of
inheriting it.

    Professor Ian Fentiman of Guy's said: 'A small number of women - about 1,200
a year - are involved, but their risk of developing cancer by the age of 70 is
between 70 and 90 per cent.

    'The test will probably involve examining DNA taken from the white blood
cells of women with breast cancer and looking for the gene abnormality.

    'The test could be offered to their daughters and they will have a 50 per
cent chance of being given the all-clear - at least from this inherited form of
the disease.'

    The big question was what options were available for women who tested
positive, he said. 'If some women insist on something being done, then bilateral
mastectomy is a possibility.'

    But surgery carried its own risks, he added, because it would take eight to
10 hours including breast reconstruction and separate operations might be
needed.

    Molecular biology research is likely to eventually produce ways to switching
off the cancer process in the vulnerable breast cells, he said. 'I think quite a
lot of women at risk will not opt for surgery to prevent something happening in
as much as 20 years' time. They will hope that science catches up and there is a
good chance that it will.'

    At a joint conference at the weekend, the Cancer Research Campaign and
Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund decided they should plan for the discovery of the
breast cancer gene, and others that will follow for different types of cancer.

    I considered my breasts to be lethal weapons BACK in July, Charlynn Ross,
36, a mother of two from North Carolina, had both healthy breasts removed. Her
mother had died of breast cancer at the age of 47 and both her elder sisters
Mary Jo and Judi had double mastectomies after being diagnosed with cancer.

    As a result, her younger sister Lauren had her healthy breasts removed in a
pre-emptive strike against the killer disease. After learning that she too had a
75-100 per cent chance of getting breast cancer, Charlynn became the last of the
sisters to undergo surgery.

    'Once I found out that my breasts could kill me, I stopped being sentimental
about them. I considered them lethal weapons, and I wanted them away from me. I
might get hit by a bus tomorrow, but by God, I will beat breast cancer.

    'We thought we'd paid our dues when our mother died. I don't know whether
that was denial or naivete. But when Mary Jo and Judi were diagnosed, I was
completely devastated. It was almost as if my limbic system stopped, I had to
think about breathing.

    'It was obvious something very bad was happening in our family. Something
had tripped in our genetic make-up.

    'I'd never heard of prophylactic surgery at that point, all I knew was that
I had to amputate my breasts or I might die. Even if I hadn't been able to have
reconstruction, I'd have done it anyway. I'd have been crazy not to.  I'm just
grateful that it wasn't my arm or leg.

    MY HUSBAND immediately said: 'Go for it!' It was much more important to him
for me to be alive and healthy than for me to have breasts. We've been married
nearly 20 years and the hardest thing for him was to watch my sisters and their
families suffer, and to watch me take it so badly. I cried buckets. I was
frightened for their children, frightened for all of the family.

    'You'd think I would grieve for the loss of my breasts, but I was so happy
to get into that operating room that I was clicking my heels all the way down
the hall.

    'It had been like living with the sword of Damocles hanging over my head.  I
can't describe the terror, knowing the odds were so terrific. Cancer has caused
so much grief and destruction in my family that the surgery was an emotional and
psychological relief. I have children I want to see grow up, and a husband I
love very much.

    'I didn't hide what was going on from my boys. Sure, I showed them my
breasts right after the surgery. What's terrifying to children is the unknown,
the tricks played by their imaginations. I would much prefer them to see the
real thing, and it wasn't bad to look at.

    'For someone to criticise us, they don't know what they're talking about.
They're simply ignorant. Now, do I think this is a reasonable or acceptable
thing to do? No! It's been a very extreme step and I'm sorry that I was that
desperate. But tell me an alternative? Right now, I don't know have any.

    'Why do 46,000 women have to die every year in America? We have 181,000 new
cases each year. The breast cancer rate is even worse in Britain. I pray that
money is put into researching cause and cure. I want the powers-that-be to
realise that they've got to stop this terrible disease. I don't want my nieces
or granddaughters to have to go through this.'

    IN FAVOUR JEANNE KICKS will be among the first in the queue for a gene test
once it is available.

    She has strong family history of breast cancer. Her maternal grandmother
contrcated breast cancer, her cousin has had it and her mother's sister died
from the disease.

    'I would definitely have a test. Given the chance, I would like to know if I
have inherited the gene that puts me at extra risk,' she said.

    Jeanne, 53, who lives in west London with her husband John, has been having
regular breast checks for 20 years because of her family history and the fact
that she has needed treatment for lumps.

    For the last two years she has been taking part in a pilot trial to find out
whether the drug tamoxifen will prevent breast cancer in women at high risk. She
takes a daily tablet but doesn't know if it's the real thing or a placebo.

    'I don't like swallowing tablets if I don't have to. A gene test would allow
me to make a choice about carrying on with 'medication'. If it was negative I
would stop taking the pills, but if it was positive I would feel it was all
worthwhile and was doing me some good.'

    AGAINST

    NIKKI HILL, 34, works for BACUP, the British Association of Cancer United
Patients. Her mother was diagnosed as having breast cancer 15 years ago, and two
years ago she had a recurrence.

    There is no doubt that genetic testing poses a personal dilemma for me. I
have certainly wondered whether I might my mother's breast cancer might be
inherited and whether I too might have that gene. But at the moment I have no
intention of taking the test.

    It has occured to me that the test might be negative and my mind would be
put at rest. But I am well aware that if I went for the test and found that I
had the gene then it would really give me something to worry about.

    I have to ask myself what I would do with that information, particularly
when I am so young. I'm not old enough for screening and there is no way I would
have prophylactic surgery - a full mastectomy seems a very drastic option if you
do not actually have cancer.

    Above all, I'd want to be absolutely sure they'd got the right information
before I agreed to do anything radical. I wouldn't want to discover three or
four years later that they'd got slightly the wrong gene and my treatment had
been in vain.

GRAPHIC: Jeanne Kicks, left, is determined to have a gene test. American Sisters
Charlynn (centre) and Mary Jo both had mastectomies

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1993


                              374 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 2, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 627 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL NOTES

BODY:


    * RESTLESS legs - or Ekbom's Syndrome - affects many more elderly people
than was previously realised, say Irish doctors in the Postgraduate Medical
Journal. The syndrome, which can be relieved by movement, creates unpleasant
sensations in the legs and can cause insomnia. A survey of 420 elderly patients
attending hospital for acute, unrelated problems found one in 20 suffered from
the syndrome. The commonest cause seemed to be iron deficiency.

    * CUTE drawings by children feature in a 1994 calendar from Action Research,
one of Britain's leading health research charities which has supported major
prevention projects including vaccines against polio and rubella and the
development of gene therapy. The calendar is available from Action Research,
North Parade, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 2DP. Cheques for £3.20 inc p&p made
payable to Action Research Sales Ltd.

    * IF you are one of seven million carers looking after disabled people, it
pays to prevent back problems before they start. Two-thirds of members surveyed
by the Carers National Association said their own health had suffered as a
result of helping others. Tips on handling and lifting disabled people are given
in The Carers' Guide which costs £1.50 from the National Back Pain Association,
31-33 Park Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 OAB.

    * GOOD news for women who put off starting a family until later life.
Although the risks of first pregnancies are known to increase with the age of
the mother, there has been little research to show the risks of subsequent
births. Swedish research shows the risk of serious problems for women over 35
having second births is no greater than that of younger women.  Having an
unsuccessful first pregnancy should not deter women from trying again.

    * SHINGLES is a devastatingly painful skin condition that affects thousands
of people each year, but American researchers have developed a new form of pain
relief. A drug-soaked patch using lidocaine, an anaesthetic, worked for 12 hours
at a time and it is hoped doctors elsewhere will experiment with this new way of
applying local anaesthetic.

    * MANY readers have written in requesting more information about
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle abnormality that can affect young,
apparently fit sportsmen and women like Daniel Yorath. Contact the HC
Association, Waverley Lodge Drive, Lodge Drive, Rickmansworth Herts WD3 4PT,
tel: 0923 896776. Those wanting to help raise money for screening and research
via the Skipathon appeal, send a large SAE to Alison Cox, PO Box 28, Ashtead,
Surrey.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1993


                              375 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           November 2, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 35

LENGTH: 431 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL NOTES

BODY:


    * RESTLESS legs - or Ekbom's Syndrome - affects many more elderly people
than was previously realised, say Irish doctors in the Postgraduate Medical
Journal. The syndrome, which can be relieved by movement, creates unpleasant
sensations in the legs and can cause insomnia. A survey of 420 elderly patients
attending hospital for acute, unrelated problems found one in 20 suffered from
the syndrome. The commonest cause seemed to be iron deficiency.

    * CUTE drawings by children feature in a 1994 calendar from Action Research,
one of Britain's leading health research charities which has supported major
prevention projects including vaccines against polio and rubella and the
development of gene therapy. The calendar is available from Action Research,
North Parade, Horsham, West Sussex RH12 2DP. Cheques for £3.20 inc p&p made
payable to Action Research Sales Ltd.

    * IF you are one of seven million carers looking after disabled people, it
pays to prevent back problems before they start. Two-thirds of members surveyed
by the Carers National Association said their own health had suffered as a
result of helping others. Tips on handling and lifting disabled people are given
in The Carers' Guide which costs £1.50 from the National Back Pain Association,
31-33 Park Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 OAB.

    * GOOD news for women who put off starting a family until later life.
Although the risks of first pregnancies are known to increase with the age of
the mother, there has been little research to show the risks of subsequent
births. Swedish research shows the risk of serious problems for women over 35
having second births is no greater than that of younger women.  Having an
unsuccessful first pregnancy should not deter women from trying again.

    * SHINGLES is a devastatingly painful skin condition that affects thousands
of people each year, but American researchers have developed a new form of pain
relief. A drug-soaked patch using lidocaine, an anaesthetic, worked for 12 hours
at a time and it is hoped doctors elsewhere will experiment with this new way of
applying local anaesthetic.

    * MANY readers have written in requesting more information about
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy, the heart muscle abnormality that can affect young,
apparently fit sportsmen and women like Daniel Yorath. Contact the HC
Association, Waverley Lodge Drive, Lodge Drive, Rickmansworth Herts WD3 4PT,
tel: 0923 896776. Those wanting to help raise money for screening and research
via the Skipathon appeal, send a large SAE to Alison Cox, PO Box 28, Ashtead,
Surrey.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1993


                              380 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 12, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1160 words

HEADLINE: Nobel triumph for pioneer British scientist

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A BRITISH scientist was awarded the Nobel Prize for Medicine yesterday for a
discovery that brought new understanding about the way diseases such as cancer
work.

    The findings laid the foundations for techniques of gene therapy now used to
tackle previously incurable inherited conditions. Dr Richard Roberts made his
breakthrough in 1977 at the same time as U.S. researcher Phillip Sharp
independently came to the same conclusion. The two men share the prize.

    They found that genes were not always laid out in exactly the same way
within DNA, as previously thought. Knowing that brought new thinking about the
way genes behave and opened the door to medical advances.

    Dr Roberts, 50 and born in Derby, is in charge of research at New England
Biolab, at Beverly, Massachusetts. Dr Sharp, 49, heads the Biology Department at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

    They will receive their award, worth £250,000 each, in Stockholm in
December.

    Previously it was assumed that a gene was a continuous segment within long
double-stranded DNA molecules.

    But experiments by the two men revolutionised scientific thinking. They
showed genes could be made up of several, well-separated segments.

    This led to the discovery of a natural process known as gene splicing, which
scientists believe speeds the evolution of man and other higher animals.

    Errors in gene splicing cause some hereditary diseases, including types of
anaemia and blood cancer. Scientists estimate that no fewer than 5,000 diseases
are caused in this way.

    It was 6am when Dr Roberts, twice married and a father of four, heard of his
award.

    'At first I was annoyed that the phone was ringing so early,' he said.  'But
when I realised why, it was OK. It was every scientist's dream come true.'

    He recalled when the breakthrough happened. He had been working since 1972
at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island, New York, headed by James
Watson, co-discoverer of DNA structure.

    'I went in on a Saturday in March 1977 to discuss the previous week's
experiments with another scientist, Richard Gelinas,' said Dr Roberts, who
became part of the 'brain drain' when he left Britain on New Year's Day 1969.

    'We got into the habit of going over the work at the weekend. Then this idea
for an experiment came to me. We talked it over with two colleagues, who said
they could do it. By Tuesday, we had the answer.

    'We'd been working on the problem for two years and thought we knew what we
were looking for. But everyone else said they wanted proof. In the end, it took
only 2 1/2 days to prove it.

    'It was super. It was probably the best moment of my life - moments like
that don't come along very often in science.

    'Everybody thought that genes were laid out in exactly the same way, and so
it came as a tremendous surprise.

    'It was one of the discoveries where dogma is completely overthrown.'

    The Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy said the discoveries by Dr
Roberts and Dr Sharp had shaped the course of modern biology.

    Dr Roberts is a former student of Sheffield University, where he gained a
PhD in chemistry. Then he decided to switch subjects.

    'I asked for advice from some lecturers about going into molecular biology
but they said there was no future in it,' he recalled.

    However, his former professor, David Ollis, now at Birmingham University,
encouraged him to go as a research associate to Harvard University.

    'He was highly enterprising with a remarkable originality,' said Dr Ollis.

    Dr Roberts's mother, Edna, 79, lives in Saltford, near Bath. She said: 'It's
great news. Richard loves his work. He lives for it - he would rather work than
do anything.'

GRAPHIC: Dr Roberts: Breakthrough

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              381 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 12, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 18

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Nobel triumph for pioneer British scientist

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    A BRITISH scientist was awarded the Nobel Prize for Medicine yesterday for a
discovery that brought new understanding about the way diseases such as cancer
work.

    The findings laid the foundations for techniques of gene therapy now used to
tackle previously incurable inherited conditions. Dr Richard Roberts made his
breakthrough in 1977 at the same time as U.S. researcher Phillip Sharp
independently came to the same conclusion. The two men share the prize.

    They found that genes were not always laid out in exactly the same way
within DNA, as previously thought. Knowing that brought new thinking about the
way genes behave and opened the door to medical advances.

    Dr Roberts, 50 and born in Derby, is in charge of research at New England
Biolab, at Beverly, Massachusetts. Dr Sharp, 49, heads the Biology Department at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

    They will receive their award, worth £250,000 each, in Stockholm in
December.

    Previously it was assumed that a gene was a continuous segment within long
double-stranded DNA molecules.

    But experiments by the two men revolutionised scientific thinking. They
showed genes could be made up of several, well-separated segments.

    This led to the discovery of a natural process known as gene splicing, which
scientists believe speeds the evolution of man and other higher animals.

    Errors in gene splicing cause some hereditary diseases, including types of
anaemia and blood cancer. Scientists estimate that no fewer than 5,000 diseases
are caused in this way.

    It was 6am when Dr Roberts, twice married and a father of four, heard of his
award.

    'At first I was annoyed that the phone was ringing so early,' he said.  'But
when I realised why, it was OK. It was every scientist's dream come true.'

    He recalled when the breakthrough happened. He had been working since 1972
at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory on Long Island, New York, headed by James
Watson, co-discoverer of DNA structure.

    'I went in on a Saturday in March 1977 to discuss the previous week's
experiments with another scientist, Richard Gelinas,' said Dr Roberts, who
became part of the 'brain drain' when he left Britain on New Year's Day 1969.

    'We got into the habit of going over the work at the weekend. Then this idea
for an experiment came to me. We talked it over with two colleagues, who said
they could do it. By Tuesday, we had the answer.

    'We'd been working on the problem for two years and thought we knew what we
were looking for. But everyone else said they wanted proof. In the end, it took
only 2 1/2 days to prove it.

    'It was super. It was probably the best moment of my life - moments like
that don't come along very often in science.

    'Everybody thought that genes were laid out in exactly the same way, and so
it came as a tremendous surprise.

    'It was one of the discoveries where dogma is completely overthrown.'

    The Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy said the discoveries by Dr
Roberts and Dr Sharp had shaped the course of modern biology.

    Dr Roberts is a former student of Sheffield University, where he gained a
PhD in chemistry. Then he decided to switch subjects.

    'I asked for advice from some lecturers about going into molecular biology
but they said there was no future in it,' he recalled.

    However, his former professor, David Ollis, now at Birmingham University,
encouraged him to go as a research associate to Harvard University.

    'He was highly enterprising with a remarkable originality,' said Dr Ollis.

    Dr Roberts's mother, Edna, 79, lives in Saltford, near Bath. She said: 'It's
great news. Richard loves his work. He lives for it - he would rather work than
do anything.'

GRAPHIC: Dr Roberts: Breakthrough

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              382 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                         September 15, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Glaxo boss warning on costs of the gene genie

BYLINE: Tim Freeborn

BODY:


    GOVERNMENTS may already be rattled by soaring health bills, but Glaxo chief
executive Richard Sykes warns that new drug technologies will send costs through
the roof.

    'The biological explosion will open the whole thing up in the next 20
years,' he says. 'Gene therapy will be very expensive.' This is the technique
which tries to tackle diseases by changing patients' genetic make-up.

    The big drugs companies want to foster debate on how spiralling health costs
can be financed and controlled. Sykes's warning came at the launch of a report
on health systems, sponsored by the drug companies.

    The report, carried out by economists from private consultancy NERA,
compared 12 different countries. Britain has the toughest method of curbing
costs, it says.

    The Government is effectively the only buyer and uses its power to ration
supply to patients. In America, at the other extreme, private individuals decide
how much care they want, and can afford. Health swallows 14pc of national income
in the US compared with 6pc here.

    NERA says health demand falls 1pc to 3pc when charges rise 10pc. So it
suggests people should be charged for each visit to the doctor to deter casual
users.

    Sykes: Tough UK controls

    Sykes: 'Therapy will be very expensive'

GRAPHIC: SYKES:THERAPY WILL BE VERY EXPENSIVE

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              383 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                         September 15, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: Pg. 46

LENGTH: 214 words

HEADLINE: Glaxo boss warning on costs of the gene genie

BYLINE: Tim Freeborn

BODY:


    GOVERNMENTS may already be rattled by soaring health bills, but Glaxo chief
executive Richard Sykes warns that new drug technologies will send costs through
the roof.

    'The biological explosion will open the whole thing up in the next 20
years,' he says. 'Gene therapy will be very expensive.' This is the technique
which tries to tackle diseases by changing patients' genetic make-up.

    The big drugs companies want to foster debate on how spiralling health costs
can be financed and controlled. Sykes's warning came at the launch of a report
on health systems, sponsored by the drug companies.

    The report, carried out by economists from private consultancy NERA,
compared 12 different countries. Britain has the toughest method of curbing
costs, it says.

    The Government is effectively the only buyer and uses its power to ration
supply to patients. In America, at the other extreme, private individuals decide
how much care they want, and can afford. Health swallows 14pc of national income
in the US compared with 6pc here.

    NERA says health demand falls 1pc to 3pc when charges rise 10pc. So it
suggests people should be charged for each visit to the doctor to deter casual
users.

    Sykes: Tough UK controls

    Sykes: 'Therapy will be very expensive'

GRAPHIC: SYKES:THERAPY WILL BE VERY EXPENSIVE

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              384 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           August 26, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 494 words

HEADLINE: The pioneer patients;
Nine cystic fibrosis victims to put gene therapy to the test

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    PATIENTS with cystic fibrosis are to be tested with gene therapy for the
first time.

    It is hoped that thousands of people who inherited the life-threatening
condition could benefit from the revolutionary treatment within five years.

    Nine patients will start the trial at the Royal Brompton Hospital, West
London, next month and if successful it will be expanded.

    The aim is to replace the defective gene which causes the most common severe
genetic disorder in the UK. Cystic fibrosis affects between 6,000 and 7,000
young adults and a baby is born with it virtually every day.

    Sufferers develop severe lung and digestive problems and need daily
physiotherapy and drug treatment, but many die before the age of 30.

    Doctors plan to ease breathing by replacing the faulty gene with a copy of a
normal one. This will be carried to the nose and lungs in a fine mist through an
inhaler similar to that used by asthma victims. Patients would need regular
doses, probably once a month.

    Patient Darren Keen, 23, a caterer from Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, is
one of the nine pioneers - all male. But he will not know until November whether
he was given a proper inhaler or a dummy. 'I am just pleased to help', said Mr
Keen, who takes up to 70 tablets a day and undergoes rigorous physiotherapy to
keep his condition under control.

    This is the first wholly UK trial of gene therapy for any disease. The one
in March involving baby Carly Todd, who suffers from a severe immunodeficiency
disorder, was part of an international effort.

    Specialists said there were no ethical problems because the intention is to
correct a defect rather than alter the gene pattern with which an individual is
born.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              385 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           August 26, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 20

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: The pioneer patients;
Nine cystic fibrosis victims to put gene therapy to the test

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    PATIENTS with cystic fibrosis are to be tested with gene therapy for the
first time.

    It is hoped that thousands of people who inherited the life-threatening
condition could benefit from the revolutionary treatment within five years.

    Nine patients will start the trial at the Royal Brompton Hospital, West
London, next month and if successful it will be expanded.

    The aim is to replace the defective gene which causes the most common severe
genetic disorder in the UK. Cystic fibrosis affects between 6,000 and 7,000
young adults and a baby is born with it virtually every day.

    Sufferers develop severe lung and digestive problems and need daily
physiotherapy and drug treatment, but many die before the age of 30.

    Doctors plan to ease breathing by replacing the faulty gene with a copy of a
normal one. This will be carried to the nose and lungs in a fine mist through an
inhaler similar to that used by asthma victims. Patients would need regular
doses, probably once a month.

    Patient Darren Keen, 23, a caterer from Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, is
one of the nine pioneers - all male. But he will not know until November whether
he was given a proper inhaler or a dummy. 'I am just pleased to help', said Mr
Keen, who takes up to 70 tablets a day and undergoes rigorous physiotherapy to
keep his condition under control.

    This is the first wholly UK trial of gene therapy for any disease. The one
in March involving baby Carly Todd, who suffers from a severe immunodeficiency
disorder, was part of an international effort.

    Specialists said there were no ethical problems because the intention is to
correct a defect rather than alter the gene pattern with which an individual is
born.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              401 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            June 24, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 24, 25, 24, 25

LENGTH: 2414 words

HEADLINE: A case of life and death;
AS DIAGNOSIS LOOKS BLEAK FOR CARE IN THE CAPITAL, A TRANSPLANT FOR
MILLION-TO-ONE BOY

BYLINE: Jason Lewis

BODY:


    Axe poised over eight London hospitals after new report by doctors THE
future looked increasing bleak for nine London hospitals last night after a
Government inquiry proposed cuts that would effectively mean closure.

    The recommendations, if put into effect, could mean the axing of the
renowned Royal Marsden cancer hospital, in Fulham, and St Bartholomews, in the
City.

    St Thomas's, on the South Bank of the Thames, and the pioneering heart
transplant centre at Harefield were also on the closure list.

    But within hours of the announcement, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley
appeared to back away from the full implications of the proposals and to offer a
reprieve to Harefield, in North London.

    She told MPs that no hospital would be closed on the recomendations alone.
And of Harefield, she said: 'I do not myself see any prospect of Harefield
moving from its present site in the near future.'

    The review was 'not a blueprint for the future,' the Health Secretary went
on. However she stressed: 'There are difficult decisions ahead. No change is no
option.'

    The controversial closure recommendations were announced by six independent
review panels appointed by the Government to look at ways to improve specialist
care in London.

    The panels of leading doctors and consultants were asked to re-examine
controversial proposals, originally put forward by Sir Bernard Tomlinson, to
reorganise health care in the capital.

    His report recommended the axing of some of London's leading teaching
hospitals and specialist units, claiming they were inefficient or surplus to
requirements.

    The new report comes to the similar conclusions, earmarking some of London's
most historic hospitals as candidates for closure in a shake-up aimed at
providing better specialist units dealing with cancer, heart disease, renal
care, neurosciences, plastic surgery and children.

    Its conclusions recommend the effective closure of the Brook hospital,
Greenwich; Oldchurch hospital, at Romford, Essex; Queen Elizabeth's Hospital for
Children, Hackney; the London Chest Hospital, Bethnal Green, and the Atkinson
Morley's Hospital, Wimbledon.

    Dr Chris Paine, chairman of the Cancer Speciality Review, said: 'Our
proposals will result in fewer, but larger centres, more closely linked to
general hospitals.

    'This will lead to a stronger service and research base. I believe it will
give all Londoners the best possible services for cancer care for the 21st
century.'

    Professor Geoffrey Smith, chairman of the Cardiac Speciality Review, said
none of London's existing 14 centres provided comprehensive cardiac services,
and many were inadequate.

    But leading doctors at the hospitals earmarked for closure were swift in
their condemnation.

    At Harefield, medical director Rosemary Radley-Smith warned: 'Patients will
suffer. Some will die as a result.'

    And heart transplant pioneer Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub said the proposals
could badly damage the way heart disease was treated in Britain.

    Professor Michael Baum, cancer specialist at the Royal Marsden Hospital,
said: 'It has been widely leaked that they want to close the Fulham Road branch
of the Royal Marsden.

    'That would be catastrophic, not just for London but for Europe. It would be
tearing the heart out of the body. It is not just the heart out of the body of
the Royal Marsden, it is the heart out of the body of cancer research in the
NHS.'

    Professor Michael Besser, chief executive of St Bartholomew's, said the
report's conclusions seemed to have been pre-determined. He doubted that other
hospitals could provide as good a service as Barts. Clinical and research
services could only be damaged if moved to inferior conditions.

    The Association of London Authorities said: 'These proposals will create
widespread anxiety and alarm for Londoners and amongst health service staff.
London is not over-resourced in the acute services. It is nonsense to suggest
that nine hospitals must close.'


    Historic

    Hope beats in baby Hal's new heart

    Daily Mail Reporter



    SURGEONS began a race against time yesterday to save a baby with a disease
which cannot be treated.

    Hal Brodhurst, six months old, was given a new heart as the first stage of a
revolutionary attempt to save him from a million-to-one disease.

    Next he will receive a transplant of bone marrow from the heart donor in the
fight against Pompe's Disease, a rare genetic disorder which because of a
missing enzyme renders the body unable to digest the sugar glycogen, a condition
which cripples the heart.

    On Tuesday, the Daily Mail's Good Health pages told the moving story of
Hal's parents, Robin and Desiree Brodhurst, and their determined fight for their
son's life.

    The disease resulted from a million-to-one chance that meant, unknown to
them, the couple both carried a recessive gene.

    Mr Brodhurst, a company director, and Desiree, who was brought up in the
Cayman Islands, met when she came to study law in London. She became pregnant
six months after they married.

    Medical experts told the couple Hal had no chance of survival until the
world famous cardiac team from Harefield agreed to help.

    A donor was found late on Tuesday night after a four month search throughout
the UK and Europe. Heart specialist Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub returned from a
medical conference in Paris to perform the seven-hour operation.

    The Brodhursts, form Putney, South-West London, now face a ten-day wait
until Hal is strong enough for bone marrow cells from the donor to be injected
into his body.

    Doctors hope the procedure will trigger the production of the missing
enzyme. The heart and bone marrow transplant were the only way forward.  Doctors
say the disease itself cannot be treated.

    However the delay, while crucial, is dangerous because in the meantime Hal's
new heart could be damaged as glycogen once again builds up in its muscle.

    A hospital spokesman said: 'First we had to save his life with a heart
transplant then we have to try to cure the disease with gene therapy.

    'This procedure has never been carried out anywhere in the world before.  We
don't really know if it will work. We have nothing to measure its progress
against.'

    The Brodhursts were 'dumbfounded' when they first heard that Hal had Pompe's
Disease, which is named after the Belgian doctor who identified it. 'We crawled
home and spent the next few days in floods of tears,' said Mr Brodhurst.

    'We decided we must be strong and fight for Hal, that we must explore every
possiblity available. We wanted the best medical care. But if medicine tells you
there is no hope - and that is what one hospital told us - all that is left is
faith and hope for a miracle.

    'We were recommended to see a specialist at another hospital, a professor
who was reckoned to be the leading authority on Pompe's Disease in this country.
But again we were told there was no hope.'

    Last night Mr Brodhurst kept vigil beside Hal in the intensive care unit of
Harefield, named earlier in the day in the list of doomed hospitals but later
apparently reprieved by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley.

    Mr Brodhurst added: 'Professsor Yacoub and his team at Harefield have given
Hal a fighting chance when other top specialists in the field said there was no
hope.

    'Hal's fight also gives renewed hope to other people in the same position
who have been told their children will not survive.

    'Already we have been contacted by other parents who have heard about Hal to
ask about the treatment.

    'Only Harefield can provide this help, and expertise, and we would have been
lost without them. Only Professor Yacoub thought he could do something for Hal.'

GRAPHIC: (1) LEFT: Loving mother Desiree Brodhurst with Hal as he waited for a
donor heart. (2) ABOVE: Father Robin, who told how the couple 'crawled home' and
wept.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              402 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            June 24, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 24, 25, 24, 25

LENGTH: 1295 words

HEADLINE: A case of life and death;
AS DIAGNOSIS LOOKS BLEAK FOR CARE IN THE CAPITAL, A TRANSPLANT FOR
MILLION-TO-ONE BOY

BYLINE: Jason Lewis

BODY:


    Axe poised over eight London hospitals after new report by doctors THE
future looked increasing bleak for nine London hospitals last night after a
Government inquiry proposed cuts that would effectively mean closure.

    The recommendations, if put into effect, could mean the axing of the
renowned Royal Marsden cancer hospital, in Fulham, and St Bartholomews, in the
City.

    St Thomas's, on the South Bank of the Thames, and the pioneering heart
transplant centre at Harefield were also on the closure list.

    But within hours of the announcement, Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley
appeared to back away from the full implications of the proposals and to offer a
reprieve to Harefield, in North London.

    She told MPs that no hospital would be closed on the recomendations alone.
And of Harefield, she said: 'I do not myself see any prospect of Harefield
moving from its present site in the near future.'

    The review was 'not a blueprint for the future,' the Health Secretary went
on. However she stressed: 'There are difficult decisions ahead. No change is no
option.'

    The controversial closure recommendations were announced by six independent
review panels appointed by the Government to look at ways to improve specialist
care in London.

    The panels of leading doctors and consultants were asked to re-examine
controversial proposals, originally put forward by Sir Bernard Tomlinson, to
reorganise health care in the capital.

    His report recommended the axing of some of London's leading teaching
hospitals and specialist units, claiming they were inefficient or surplus to
requirements.

    The new report comes to the similar conclusions, earmarking some of London's
most historic hospitals as candidates for closure in a shake-up aimed at
providing better specialist units dealing with cancer, heart disease, renal
care, neurosciences, plastic surgery and children.

    Its conclusions recommend the effective closure of the Brook hospital,
Greenwich; Oldchurch hospital, at Romford, Essex; Queen Elizabeth's Hospital for
Children, Hackney; the London Chest Hospital, Bethnal Green, and the Atkinson
Morley's Hospital, Wimbledon.

    Dr Chris Paine, chairman of the Cancer Speciality Review, said: 'Our
proposals will result in fewer, but larger centres, more closely linked to
general hospitals.

    'This will lead to a stronger service and research base. I believe it will
give all Londoners the best possible services for cancer care for the 21st
century.'

    Professor Geoffrey Smith, chairman of the Cardiac Speciality Review, said
none of London's existing 14 centres provided comprehensive cardiac services,
and many were inadequate.

    But leading doctors at the hospitals earmarked for closure were swift in
their condemnation.

    At Harefield, medical director Rosemary Radley-Smith warned: 'Patients will
suffer. Some will die as a result.'

    And heart transplant pioneer Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub said the proposals
could badly damage the way heart disease was treated in Britain.

    Professor Michael Baum, cancer specialist at the Royal Marsden Hospital,
said: 'It has been widely leaked that they want to close the Fulham Road branch
of the Royal Marsden.

    'That would be catastrophic, not just for London but for Europe. It would be
tearing the heart out of the body. It is not just the heart out of the body of
the Royal Marsden, it is the heart out of the body of cancer research in the
NHS.'

    Professor Michael Besser, chief executive of St Bartholomew's, said the
report's conclusions seemed to have been pre-determined. He doubted that other
hospitals could provide as good a service as Barts. Clinical and research
services could only be damaged if moved to inferior conditions.

    The Association of London Authorities said: 'These proposals will create
widespread anxiety and alarm for Londoners and amongst health service staff.
London is not over-resourced in the acute services. It is nonsense to suggest
that nine hospitals must close.'


    Historic

    Hope beats in baby Hal's new heart

    Daily Mail Reporter



    SURGEONS began a race against time yesterday to save a baby with a disease
which cannot be treated.

    Hal Brodhurst, six months old, was given a new heart as the first stage of a
revolutionary attempt to save him from a million-to-one disease.

    Next he will receive a transplant of bone marrow from the heart donor in the
fight against Pompe's Disease, a rare genetic disorder which because of a
missing enzyme renders the body unable to digest the sugar glycogen, a condition
which cripples the heart.

    On Tuesday, the Daily Mail's Good Health pages told the moving story of
Hal's parents, Robin and Desiree Brodhurst, and their determined fight for their
son's life.

    The disease resulted from a million-to-one chance that meant, unknown to
them, the couple both carried a recessive gene.

    Mr Brodhurst, a company director, and Desiree, who was brought up in the
Cayman Islands, met when she came to study law in London. She became pregnant
six months after they married.

    Medical experts told the couple Hal had no chance of survival until the
world famous cardiac team from Harefield agreed to help.

    A donor was found late on Tuesday night after a four month search throughout
the UK and Europe. Heart specialist Professor Sir Magdi Yacoub returned from a
medical conference in Paris to perform the seven-hour operation.

    The Brodhursts, form Putney, South-West London, now face a ten-day wait
until Hal is strong enough for bone marrow cells from the donor to be injected
into his body.

    Doctors hope the procedure will trigger the production of the missing
enzyme. The heart and bone marrow transplant were the only way forward.  Doctors
say the disease itself cannot be treated.

    However the delay, while crucial, is dangerous because in the meantime Hal's
new heart could be damaged as glycogen once again builds up in its muscle.

    A hospital spokesman said: 'First we had to save his life with a heart
transplant then we have to try to cure the disease with gene therapy.

    'This procedure has never been carried out anywhere in the world before.  We
don't really know if it will work. We have nothing to measure its progress
against.'

    The Brodhursts were 'dumbfounded' when they first heard that Hal had Pompe's
Disease, which is named after the Belgian doctor who identified it. 'We crawled
home and spent the next few days in floods of tears,' said Mr Brodhurst.

    'We decided we must be strong and fight for Hal, that we must explore every
possiblity available. We wanted the best medical care. But if medicine tells you
there is no hope - and that is what one hospital told us - all that is left is
faith and hope for a miracle.

    'We were recommended to see a specialist at another hospital, a professor
who was reckoned to be the leading authority on Pompe's Disease in this country.
But again we were told there was no hope.'

    Last night Mr Brodhurst kept vigil beside Hal in the intensive care unit of
Harefield, named earlier in the day in the list of doomed hospitals but later
apparently reprieved by Health Secretary Virginia Bottomley.

    Mr Brodhurst added: 'Professsor Yacoub and his team at Harefield have given
Hal a fighting chance when other top specialists in the field said there was no
hope.

    'Hal's fight also gives renewed hope to other people in the same position
who have been told their children will not survive.

    'Already we have been contacted by other parents who have heard about Hal to
ask about the treatment.

    'Only Harefield can provide this help, and expertise, and we would have been
lost without them. Only Professor Yacoub thought he could do something for Hal.'

GRAPHIC: (1) LEFT: Loving mother Desiree Brodhurst with Hal as he waited for a
donor heart. (2) ABOVE: Father Robin, who told how the couple 'crawled home' and
wept.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              403 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            June 17, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 58

LENGTH: 1067 words

HEADLINE: hunting:never mind that it's in the blood.it's in the genes

BYLINE: Lewis Wolpert

BODY:


    OUR biological inheritance is both beautiful and surprising. Without
science, who would guess that so much of our lives is determined by genes in the
form of very long, elegantly twisted molecules that carry their message in what
is essentially a four-letter code?

    The key to human genetics is change. It is the differences between people,
not the similarities, that genetics deals with. Indeed, mutation - change in the
message of the genes - is central to human experience.

    'It leads to old age, and death, but also to sex, to rebirth and to
evolution,' says the author of this brilliant and witty book. Were it not for
mutations some three thousand million years ago, there would have been no
evolution and no human life. For evolution relies on selecting the fittest
variants that result from accidental mutations.

    Contrary to popular myth, neither the radiation from Hiroshima, nor that
from Chernobyl, resulted in the birth of monsters nor significantly increased
the rate of mutation.

    It may be refreshing to think of how much of our existence is caused by
chance, and that it is sex which, in the long run, helps purge our offspring of
harmful mutations. Sex brings in new genes which can replace the old.

    Unfortunately, mutations do lead to genetic diseases like haemophilia,
muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis. It is a triumph of modern genetics that
we can now begin to reduce the incidence of such diseases by prenatal diagnosis
and also offer hope, as yet unfulfilled, of gene therapy to cure them.

    Such advances do bring some ethical problems, usually grotesquely
exaggerated into Frankensteinian proportions. Probably the most serious issue
that will come from knowing the entire message in our genes relates to health
insurance. How can we avoid discrimination against those carrying genes that
predispose them to disease?

    KNOWLEDGE in itself is not dangerous. The danger lies in how it is used, but
Jones does not emphasise this sufficiently. He does point out that scientists
are much more cautious with respect to genetic engineering than the public at
large. The world we live in is something of a mess, and genetic engineering, in
spite of its dangers, offers one of the best ways of resolving some of the
problems.

    There are about a 100,000 different genes in our cells and they carry within
them the fossil evidence of our past. Recent history can be seen in the Royal
Family. A mutation probably took place in the sperm produced by Queen Victoria's
father, the Duke of Kent. The result was that several of her grandsons were
haemophiliacs.

    More ancient history can be found by looking at genes from disparate groups
all over the world. Interestingly, the British have more hunting genes than, for
example, the Greeks, who descend from a more settled group of farmers. It also
seems that, in those times, hunters had to work less hard to survive than
farmers.

    By contrast, many Japanese lack the message in their genes for dealing with
alcohol. So when they drink, their faces go red and they feel ill.

    But the concept of race is an empty one, for individual differences are much
greater than those between groups. We don't quite understand the significance of
skin colour in the context of evolution. Perhaps being white was necessary to
ensure a good supply of vitamin D induced by sunlight as people migrated out of
Africa.

    Of great significance, however, is the very strong evidence for considering
humans as shaved monkeys. Human and chimps share 98.4 per cent of their DNA.

    Jones's book is highly literate, and he goes a long way to bridging the
deepening chasm between the supposedly two cultures. Not to know how genes
affect us is to ignore a central factor in our lives. But we must not let the
fascination with our genetics lead us to transfer the blame for our

    faults from the stars to our genes. Nature is a powerful determinant, but so
is nurture.

    * Dr Wolpert is Professor of Biology at University College, London, and
author of the acclaimed Unnatural Nature Of Sciece.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              404 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            June 17, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 58

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: hunting:never mind that it's in the blood.it's in the genes

BYLINE: Lewis Wolpert

BODY:


    OUR biological inheritance is both beautiful and surprising. Without
science, who would guess that so much of our lives is determined by genes in the
form of very long, elegantly twisted molecules that carry their message in what
is essentially a four-letter code?

    The key to human genetics is change. It is the differences between people,
not the similarities, that genetics deals with. Indeed, mutation - change in the
message of the genes - is central to human experience.

    'It leads to old age, and death, but also to sex, to rebirth and to
evolution,' says the author of this brilliant and witty book. Were it not for
mutations some three thousand million years ago, there would have been no
evolution and no human life. For evolution relies on selecting the fittest
variants that result from accidental mutations.

    Contrary to popular myth, neither the radiation from Hiroshima, nor that
from Chernobyl, resulted in the birth of monsters nor significantly increased
the rate of mutation.

    It may be refreshing to think of how much of our existence is caused by
chance, and that it is sex which, in the long run, helps purge our offspring of
harmful mutations. Sex brings in new genes which can replace the old.

    Unfortunately, mutations do lead to genetic diseases like haemophilia,
muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis. It is a triumph of modern genetics that
we can now begin to reduce the incidence of such diseases by prenatal diagnosis
and also offer hope, as yet unfulfilled, of gene therapy to cure them.

    Such advances do bring some ethical problems, usually grotesquely
exaggerated into Frankensteinian proportions. Probably the most serious issue
that will come from knowing the entire message in our genes relates to health
insurance. How can we avoid discrimination against those carrying genes that
predispose them to disease?

    KNOWLEDGE in itself is not dangerous. The danger lies in how it is used, but
Jones does not emphasise this sufficiently. He does point out that scientists
are much more cautious with respect to genetic engineering than the public at
large. The world we live in is something of a mess, and genetic engineering, in
spite of its dangers, offers one of the best ways of resolving some of the
problems.

    There are about a 100,000 different genes in our cells and they carry within
them the fossil evidence of our past. Recent history can be seen in the Royal
Family. A mutation probably took place in the sperm produced by Queen Victoria's
father, the Duke of Kent. The result was that several of her grandsons were
haemophiliacs.

    More ancient history can be found by looking at genes from disparate groups
all over the world. Interestingly, the British have more hunting genes than, for
example, the Greeks, who descend from a more settled group of farmers. It also
seems that, in those times, hunters had to work less hard to survive than
farmers.

    By contrast, many Japanese lack the message in their genes for dealing with
alcohol. So when they drink, their faces go red and they feel ill.

    But the concept of race is an empty one, for individual differences are much
greater than those between groups. We don't quite understand the significance of
skin colour in the context of evolution. Perhaps being white was necessary to
ensure a good supply of vitamin D induced by sunlight as people migrated out of
Africa.

    Of great significance, however, is the very strong evidence for considering
humans as shaved monkeys. Human and chimps share 98.4 per cent of their DNA.

    Jones's book is highly literate, and he goes a long way to bridging the
deepening chasm between the supposedly two cultures. Not to know how genes
affect us is to ignore a central factor in our lives. But we must not let the
fascination with our genetics lead us to transfer the blame for our

    faults from the stars to our genes. Nature is a powerful determinant, but so
is nurture.

    * Dr Wolpert is Professor of Biology at University College, London, and
author of the acclaimed Unnatural Nature Of Sciece.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              411 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             March 21, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: Why Britain's science cannot be sold short;
BY Dr JAMES WATSON,American winner of the Nobel Prize for Medicine

BYLINE: James Watson

BODY:


    FORTY years ago this month, at Cambridge University, Francis Crick and I
made one of the fundamental scientific breakthroughs of the 20th Century.

    We discovered the double helical structure of DNA, the molecule that carries
genetic information. And the repercussions have touched millions of people
around the world.

    Because of that single piece of pure research, enormous progress has been
made in the fight against such diseases as diabetes, kidney complaints and heart
trouble. Only this week there was news that genetic therapy may provide hope for
cystic fibrosis sufferers.

    In 1953, we did not know what would result from our work. The problems we
attacked in our laboratory were fundamental only to biology. We did not consider
any benefits to practical medicine, or commercial spin-offs.

    Fortunately for us, we could test our theories at Cambridge University - in
a tiny unit devoted to pure research supported by the world-renowned Medical
Research Council. Like many scientists before and since, the MRC invested in our
talent, supporting us without regard to any possible application of our work.
This you British have always done superbly. You have always allowed scientists
to take the long view.

    Which is why I am so concerned that the traditional role of the laboratory
at Cambridge is under threat.

    As the Government's White Paper on the role for science and technology
approaches, there have been suggestions that the Laboratory of Molecular Biology
at the new Addenbrooke's Hospital will be hived off from the MRC and perhaps
privatised. I have no doubt any such move would jeopardise the lab's world
leadership in the biomedical field. It is unlikely it could maintain its quality
in a climate which required it to seek its main funding from contracts.

    Companies looking for assured profits would have no time for research in
fields not yet fully formed. In America firms put money only on things which can
be done - which means, as a scientist, that you are never first.

    When I arrived at Cambridge in 1951 we could think long term and not worry
about objections that we were wasting Government money on products unlikely to
come to fruition in the foreseeable future.

    The MRC unit became the envy of the scientific world.

    Happily it is still at the forefront of biology. Four Nobel Prizes (Fred
Sanger, Aaron Klug, Cesar Milsten and George Kohler) have recognised the science
accomplished at the laboratory since 1962 and we can confidently expect more.

    One large grant from the MRC keeps the lab on its grand path. Some of the
advances made have created wealth in the form of new products and techniques.

    The fear is that by focusing on clearly defined goals, we shall miss the
unanticipated big advances which generate real competitive advantages for our
industries.

    For the laboratory the possibility of priv-atisation poses not a question of
survival, but of greatness, and particularly the greatness of British scientific
tradition.

    Why not stick to a tradition which has succeeded so brilliantly? If only
more Government monies were spent so well, we would not have to worry so much
for the British advances which have so enriched the world.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              412 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             March 21, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 19

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: Why Britain's science cannot be sold short;
BY Dr JAMES WATSON,American winner of the Nobel Prize for Medicine

BYLINE: James Watson

BODY:


    FORTY years ago this month, at Cambridge University, Francis Crick and I
made one of the fundamental scientific breakthroughs of the 20th Century.

    We discovered the double helical structure of DNA, the molecule that carries
genetic information. And the repercussions have touched millions of people
around the world.

    Because of that single piece of pure research, enormous progress has been
made in the fight against such diseases as diabetes, kidney complaints and heart
trouble. Only this week there was news that genetic therapy may provide hope for
cystic fibrosis sufferers.

    In 1953, we did not know what would result from our work. The problems we
attacked in our laboratory were fundamental only to biology. We did not consider
any benefits to practical medicine, or commercial spin-offs.

    Fortunately for us, we could test our theories at Cambridge University - in
a tiny unit devoted to pure research supported by the world-renowned Medical
Research Council. Like many scientists before and since, the MRC invested in our
talent, supporting us without regard to any possible application of our work.
This you British have always done superbly. You have always allowed scientists
to take the long view.

    Which is why I am so concerned that the traditional role of the laboratory
at Cambridge is under threat.

    As the Government's White Paper on the role for science and technology
approaches, there have been suggestions that the Laboratory of Molecular Biology
at the new Addenbrooke's Hospital will be hived off from the MRC and perhaps
privatised. I have no doubt any such move would jeopardise the lab's world
leadership in the biomedical field. It is unlikely it could maintain its quality
in a climate which required it to seek its main funding from contracts.

    Companies looking for assured profits would have no time for research in
fields not yet fully formed. In America firms put money only on things which can
be done - which means, as a scientist, that you are never first.

    When I arrived at Cambridge in 1951 we could think long term and not worry
about objections that we were wasting Government money on products unlikely to
come to fruition in the foreseeable future.

    The MRC unit became the envy of the scientific world.

    Happily it is still at the forefront of biology. Four Nobel Prizes (Fred
Sanger, Aaron Klug, Cesar Milsten and George Kohler) have recognised the science
accomplished at the laboratory since 1962 and we can confidently expect more.

    One large grant from the MRC keeps the lab on its grand path. Some of the
advances made have created wealth in the form of new products and techniques.

    The fear is that by focusing on clearly defined goals, we shall miss the
unanticipated big advances which generate real competitive advantages for our
industries.

    For the laboratory the possibility of priv-atisation poses not a question of
survival, but of greatness, and particularly the greatness of British scientific
tradition.

    Why not stick to a tradition which has succeeded so brilliantly? If only
more Government monies were spent so well, we would not have to worry so much
for the British advances which have so enriched the world.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              413 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             March 19, 1993, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 600 words

HEADLINE: DNA may hold the key to beating a killer

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have made the vital first steps towards developing gene therapy
for millions of cystic fibrosis patients.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common severe genetic disorder in the UK,
affecting one in 2,500 children.

    Trials

    Sufferers of the inherited condition can develop serious lung problems which
need daily physiotherapy. They are often dead by the age of 30.

    Researchers say they have had success in combating the disease in mice using
specially-coated DNA containing a human CF gene.

    According to a report in the scientific journal Nature, this method may also
provide effective treatment for humans.

    A team funded by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Wellcome Trust and
Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust is discussing clinical trials on patients.

    It is hoped the work will provide a model for use in developing gene therapy
for other diseases, including cancer.

    Professor Christopher Higgins, head of the research team, said: 'This work
provides hope that the lung problems of cystic fibrosis can be corrected through
gene therapy.

    'There is no guarantee that the success with mice can be reproduced in human
cystic fibrosis patients, and clinical trials will take time, but we are
optimistic.'

    Patients would need regular doses of the DNA about once a month.

    Mist

    It can be suspended in droplets of fat which can be turned into a fine mist
administered to the lungs through an inhaler similar to that used by asthma
sufferers.

    Dr Martin Evans, of the Wellcome Trust, said: 'I am really hopeful that our
fundamental genetic research may lead on to real improvements in treatment for
the thousands of children so tragically afflicted with this disease.'

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              414 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             March 19, 1993, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 33

LENGTH: 287 words

HEADLINE: DNA may hold the key to beating a killer

BODY:


    SCIENTISTS have made the vital first steps towards developing gene therapy
for millions of cystic fibrosis patients.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common severe genetic disorder in the UK,
affecting one in 2,500 children.

    Trials

    Sufferers of the inherited condition can develop serious lung problems which
need daily physiotherapy. They are often dead by the age of 30.

    Researchers say they have had success in combating the disease in mice using
specially-coated DNA containing a human CF gene.

    According to a report in the scientific journal Nature, this method may also
provide effective treatment for humans.

    A team funded by the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the Wellcome Trust and
Cystic Fibrosis Research Trust is discussing clinical trials on patients.

    It is hoped the work will provide a model for use in developing gene therapy
for other diseases, including cancer.

    Professor Christopher Higgins, head of the research team, said: 'This work
provides hope that the lung problems of cystic fibrosis can be corrected through
gene therapy.

    'There is no guarantee that the success with mice can be reproduced in human
cystic fibrosis patients, and clinical trials will take time, but we are
optimistic.'

    Patients would need regular doses of the DNA about once a month.

    Mist

    It can be suspended in droplets of fat which can be turned into a fine mist
administered to the lungs through an inhaler similar to that used by asthma
sufferers.

    Dr Martin Evans, of the Wellcome Trust, said: 'I am really hopeful that our
fundamental genetic research may lead on to real improvements in treatment for
the thousands of children so tragically afflicted with this disease.'

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              415 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            March 18, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 267 words

HEADLINE: Medical first may save a baby's life

BODY:


    A BABY should make medical history today when an attempt is made to cure her
of an inherited killer disease.

    Carly Todd is due to become the first Briton to have gene therapy to help
her overcome a condition which killed her 14-month-old brother.

    Eight-month-old Carly from Lennoxtown, Glasgow, suffers from a rare immune
disorder called ADA deficiency which leaves her unable to fight infections.
Doctors at the Hospital for Sick Children in Great Ormond Street, London, will
start a five-day course of treatment in which a copy of the gene she lacks is
implanted in her body using a virus.

    Carly's body may then be able to make enough ADA to repair her immune
system.

    Gene therapy has been used on only three other children with this disorder,
two girls and a boy in the U.S. and Italy.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              416 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            March 18, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: Pg. 27

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: Medical first may save a baby's life

BODY:


    A BABY should make medical history today when an attempt is made to cure her
of an inherited killer disease.

    Carly Todd is due to become the first Briton to have gene therapy to help
her overcome a condition which killed her 14-month-old brother.

    Eight-month-old Carly from Lennoxtown, Glasgow, suffers from a rare immune
disorder called ADA deficiency which leaves her unable to fight infections.
Doctors at the Hospital for Sick Children in Great Ormond Street, London, will
start a five-day course of treatment in which a copy of the gene she lacks is
implanted in her body using a virus.

    Carly's body may then be able to make enough ADA to repair her immune
system.

    Gene therapy has been used on only three other children with this disorder,
two girls and a boy in the U.S. and Italy.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              427 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           February 16, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 31

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: Long live adults of tomorrow

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    BY THE year 2050 the majority of today's teenagers will still be around,
benefitting from a revolution in medicine only just getting underway.

    We have learned more about the human body in the last 20 years than since
the history of modern medicine began, and the pace of discovery will quicken.

    In the year 2050, when life expectancy will be in the 80s, anti-ageing
wrinkle creams will be a reality, cures for baldness far more effective and the
dental plate obsolete.

    Scientists may even have cracked the mystery of 'death genes', the genes
which allegedly control the length of our lives, says Dr Brian Richards,
research scientist with emerging pharmaceutical company British Bio-technology.

    'Research is currently taking place into the mechanisms controlling cell
death, by which development and maintenance of the cell breaks down, and a
proper understanding could eventually make it possible to stave off death,' he
says.

    The development of gene therapy will lead to sophisticated treatments for
common killers like heart disease.

    It will be possible to insert genes into genetically normal cells so they
produce a therapeutic protein, for example, into the cell walls of blood vessels
where they can for ever pump out proteins to fight tumours or scour plaque from
arteries.

    And what about the other major killer, cancer? Today's teenagers smoke less
than their older brothers and sisters did and will reap the health benefits but,
again, gene therapy will make a drastic difference. By the year 2050,
anti-cancer agents will be used to switch selected genes on and off and to
prevent tumours from becoming malignant.

    Designer drugs will also be used, which are neutral until they reach their
target. When in place they will be activated by light, monoclonal antibodies or
enzymes, avoiding any effect on other cells.

    The doctor's surgery will become primarily a genetic screening centre where
patients find out their predisposition to diseases and may be advised, for
example, to steer clear of alcohol if they are at risk of liver problems.

    They will be sent to the 'medical supermarket' - today's hospital - for
spare parts and repairs, says John Wickham, president of the Society for
Minimally Invasive Therapy.

    'Keyhole surgery will be the norm and stitching a wound will be redundant.
Instruments will get ever more delicate and be used by robots,' he says.

    'Staples, tissue glues and compression will be used. Looking back, today's
methods will be regarded as using the equivalent of agricultural machinery to
sort out surgical problems.'

    Pregnancies will be intensively monitored to produce a healthy baby; many
genetic and other defects will be detected in the womb and remedied before
birth.

    And the dangers of AIDS will have receded - scientists claim a worldwide
research effort will yield effective treatments and a vaccine within 30 years.

    But what's the betting there will still be no cure for the common cold?

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              428 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           February 16, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 31

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: Long live adults of tomorrow

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    BY THE year 2050 the majority of today's teenagers will still be around,
benefitting from a revolution in medicine only just getting underway.

    We have learned more about the human body in the last 20 years than since
the history of modern medicine began, and the pace of discovery will quicken.

    In the year 2050, when life expectancy will be in the 80s, anti-ageing
wrinkle creams will be a reality, cures for baldness far more effective and the
dental plate obsolete.

    Scientists may even have cracked the mystery of 'death genes', the genes
which allegedly control the length of our lives, says Dr Brian Richards,
research scientist with emerging pharmaceutical company British Bio-technology.

    'Research is currently taking place into the mechanisms controlling cell
death, by which development and maintenance of the cell breaks down, and a
proper understanding could eventually make it possible to stave off death,' he
says.

    The development of gene therapy will lead to sophisticated treatments for
common killers like heart disease.

    It will be possible to insert genes into genetically normal cells so they
produce a therapeutic protein, for example, into the cell walls of blood vessels
where they can for ever pump out proteins to fight tumours or scour plaque from
arteries.

    And what about the other major killer, cancer? Today's teenagers smoke less
than their older brothers and sisters did and will reap the health benefits but,
again, gene therapy will make a drastic difference. By the year 2050,
anti-cancer agents will be used to switch selected genes on and off and to
prevent tumours from becoming malignant.

    Designer drugs will also be used, which are neutral until they reach their
target. When in place they will be activated by light, monoclonal antibodies or
enzymes, avoiding any effect on other cells.

    The doctor's surgery will become primarily a genetic screening centre where
patients find out their predisposition to diseases and may be advised, for
example, to steer clear of alcohol if they are at risk of liver problems.

    They will be sent to the 'medical supermarket' - today's hospital - for
spare parts and repairs, says John Wickham, president of the Society for
Minimally Invasive Therapy.

    'Keyhole surgery will be the norm and stitching a wound will be redundant.
Instruments will get ever more delicate and be used by robots,' he says.

    'Staples, tissue glues and compression will be used. Looking back, today's
methods will be regarded as using the equivalent of agricultural machinery to
sort out surgical problems.'

    Pregnancies will be intensively monitored to produce a healthy baby; many
genetic and other defects will be detected in the womb and remedied before
birth.

    And the dangers of AIDS will have receded - scientists claim a worldwide
research effort will yield effective treatments and a vaccine within 30 years.

    But what's the betting there will still be no cure for the common cold?

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              432 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            January 18, 1993, Monday

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: All-party rebels speak out;
Gene tests 'go ahead'

BODY:


    MPs of all parties led a rally yesterday calling for a referendum on the
Maastricht Treaty.

    Tory dissidents Sir Teddy Taylor, Teresa Gorman, Richard Shepherd and Bill
Cash shared a platform in Trafalgar Square with Labour's Peter Shore, Anthony
Wedgwood Benn and Austin Mitchell, and Nick Harvey for the Liberal Democrats.

    About 1,000 demonstrators attended the rally, and later 200 staged a
torch-lit vigil near Downing Street.

    EXPERIMENTS using gene therapy to treat inherited diseases are expected to
get the Government go-ahead this week.

    The American-pioneered technique will at first be used to combat cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, but may eventually be applied to cancer and
heart disease.

    Bid for new Ulster talks

    ULSTER Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew is expected to meet the new Irish
foreign minister, Dick Spring, later this month in an attempt to revive the
cross-border political talks which collapsed last autumn.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              433 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            January 18, 1993, Monday

SECTION: Pg. 13

LENGTH: 161 words

HEADLINE: All-party rebels speak out;
Gene tests 'go ahead'

BODY:


    MPs of all parties led a rally yesterday calling for a referendum on the
Maastricht Treaty.

    Tory dissidents Sir Teddy Taylor, Teresa Gorman, Richard Shepherd and Bill
Cash shared a platform in Trafalgar Square with Labour's Peter Shore, Anthony
Wedgwood Benn and Austin Mitchell, and Nick Harvey for the Liberal Democrats.

    About 1,000 demonstrators attended the rally, and later 200 staged a
torch-lit vigil near Downing Street.

    EXPERIMENTS using gene therapy to treat inherited diseases are expected to
get the Government go-ahead this week.

    The American-pioneered technique will at first be used to combat cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy, but may eventually be applied to cancer and
heart disease.

    Bid for new Ulster talks

    ULSTER Secretary Sir Patrick Mayhew is expected to meet the new Irish
foreign minister, Dick Spring, later this month in an attempt to revive the
cross-border political talks which collapsed last autumn.

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 1993


                              436 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            October 25, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: Why girls are born survivors;
MEN ARE THE WEAKER SEX WHEN IT COMES TO BATTLES AT WORK

BYLINE: William Lowther

BODY:


    WOMEN are biologically programmed to win the game when it comes to office
politics.

    For scientists claim they are physiologically far less likely than male
colleagues to suffer stress from conflict at work.

    Their resilience stems from prehistoric times when women stayed by the cave
fire while their men went out to hunt and fight for food.

    And at a Washington conference last week, the scientists decided these
different evolutionary paths have left men much less able to cope with
modern-day traumas.

    High levels of testosterone - which at one time would have heightened a
caveman's response to danger - are now a source of serious illness.

    While women are not embarrassed or humiliated by seeking reconciliation in
office disputes, men are frustrated at having to suppress the primitive instinct
to meet conflict with aggression or to run away.

    Denied these natural choices, men suffer massive fluctuations in hormones
which can lead to high blood pressure, blood clots and heart attacks.
Scientists even suggested that men especially prone to stress should have gene
therapy to reduce their testosterone levels.

    In London, Dr Dennis Friedman, medical director of the Charter Clinic,
Chelsea, agreed that part of the American theories made sense. Hormonal,
cultural and traditional influences all made men more likely to have fight or
flight reactions.

    He said: 'Men would, therefore, be more likely to suffer from stress than
women, who are characteristically more able to cope with several things at once
- running the home, having babies and going out to work.

    'Women are not immune from stress. But as a general rule women seem to be
able to cope rather better with problems than men do.

    'Aggression is very costly in terms of the body's functioning and women are
less aggressive than men.'

    But Dr Friedman found the idea of reducing men's testosterone level bizarre.

    'It might make the men more placid - but you could get all sorts of
undesirable side effects.'

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              437 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                            October 25, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 5

LENGTH: 338 words

HEADLINE: Why girls are born survivors;
MEN ARE THE WEAKER SEX WHEN IT COMES TO BATTLES AT WORK

BYLINE: William Lowther

BODY:


    WOMEN are biologically programmed to win the game when it comes to office
politics.

    For scientists claim they are physiologically far less likely than male
colleagues to suffer stress from conflict at work.

    Their resilience stems from prehistoric times when women stayed by the cave
fire while their men went out to hunt and fight for food.

    And at a Washington conference last week, the scientists decided these
different evolutionary paths have left men much less able to cope with
modern-day traumas.

    High levels of testosterone - which at one time would have heightened a
caveman's response to danger - are now a source of serious illness.

    While women are not embarrassed or humiliated by seeking reconciliation in
office disputes, men are frustrated at having to suppress the primitive instinct
to meet conflict with aggression or to run away.

    Denied these natural choices, men suffer massive fluctuations in hormones
which can lead to high blood pressure, blood clots and heart attacks.
Scientists even suggested that men especially prone to stress should have gene
therapy to reduce their testosterone levels.

    In London, Dr Dennis Friedman, medical director of the Charter Clinic,
Chelsea, agreed that part of the American theories made sense. Hormonal,
cultural and traditional influences all made men more likely to have fight or
flight reactions.

    He said: 'Men would, therefore, be more likely to suffer from stress than
women, who are characteristically more able to cope with several things at once
- running the home, having babies and going out to work.

    'Women are not immune from stress. But as a general rule women seem to be
able to cope rather better with problems than men do.

    'Aggression is very costly in terms of the body's functioning and women are
less aggressive than men.'

    But Dr Friedman found the idea of reducing men's testosterone level bizarre.

    'It might make the men more placid - but you could get all sorts of
undesirable side effects.'

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              438 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 13, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 2040 words

HEADLINE: Family clues to a healthy future;
STUDYING YOUR PARENTS' AND GRANDPARENTS' HISTORY CAN HELP PREDICT YOUR OWN
GENETIC WEEKNESSES

BYLINE: Sarah Stacey

BODY:


    EVERY week, experts at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children gather
to review the latest referrals to the genetics department. In a room lined with
medical textbooks, 12 doctors scrutinise patients' records and agree on a course
of action.

    These are clinical geneticists, who deal with patients rather than simply
doing research. Unusually among the medical establishment, they are determinedly
open with both colleagues and patients. 'We trade in information, so there has
to be a free flow - and that should include patients too,' Professor Marcus
Pembrey, the department head, believes.

    The doctors' concern for their patients is almost tangible. The senior
registrar reports 'a very tense situation' with a girl, 19 weeks pregnant, whose
boyfriend has just confessed that his family has an inherited mental disorder.
Everyone agrees that the couple needs time and careful counselling. They have an
appointment at 1.45pm that day; happily they can be told that only ten per cent
of children born with neurofibromatosis will have learning difficulties.

    Then they discuss a batch of women with a family history of genetic
disorders who have applied for DNA testing, to see if they are carriers of three
common genetic diseases: cystic fibrosis, which clogs the lungs; muscular
dystrophy, a wasting disease that affects boys only; and fragile X, increasingly
recognised as a cause of mental impairment.

    Many of the women are very young - the teenage sisters and cousins of
sufferers. Once a directly inherited condition is identified, extended family
screening and counselling are provided for those affected.

    The final case demands detective work. The mother of a baby who died of
respiratory failure, and who was worringly floppy at birth, is pregnant again.
The concensus is that there is a fairly high risk of recurrence. The doctors
suggest that both mother and foetus should have tests and that investigations
should be launched to locate the original paediatric records and to see if cells
from the dead baby have been frozen for analysis.

    Similar scenes are repeated at each of the 14 regional genetic centres
throughout the country, which can be contacted directly by people anxious about
their genetic inheritance.

    The genetics department at Great Ormond Street serves the northeast Thames
region, and though most patients are referred by their family doctors, anyone in
the catchment area concerned about their history can ring and will receive,
Professor Pembrey assures, 'a friendly reception from the hospital'.

    Despite the inevitable anxiety, the majority go away with the good news that
there is little risk. But what happens when a genetic defect is identified?

    Andrew Walker's greatest gift is his ability to show love and affection,
says his mother Lesley. But although Andrew is seven, he has not yet outgrown
the temper tantrums that can bring the local supermarket to an appalled
standstill.

    ANDREW suffers from fragile X, which affects his ability to understand the
world around him. At birth he was smaller than his twin sister, and while Claire
developed normally, Andrew was markedly slow. At nine months, his parents
stopped pretending that 'boys are always behind', but it took nearly two years
of tests, with the support of a determined consultant paediatrician, to
establish the confused little boy's real problem.

    Today, Andrew, who is severely affected and has an academic age of
two-and-a-half, is becoming more manageable. One of his biggest problems is
communication. Most words are just sounds that mean nothing to him, but there
was a breakthrough recently when he started to say 'bye-bye' as he leaves for a
special school. But Lesley questions what life is like for

    Andrew, imprisoned in his mind, and says she will never completely recover
from the sense of guilt she felt when she heard the diagnosis: 'I was the
carrier of the gene, I was the cause.'

    Five years ago, when Lesley founded the Fragile X Support Group, she knew of
only ten cases in the country; today it's believed that one child in 1,000
inherits the condition. The discovery of the fragile X gene in May last year has
revolutionised carrier testing.

    Although many cases are still undiagnosed - some doctors take the line: 'Why
do you want to know when there's no cure? - many can now be picked up by testing
a blood sample. Sufferers and their families should then be given the expert
support and resources they need. And, crucially, the possibility of prenatal
testing now allows prospective parents the choice Lesley was denied.

    Because knowledge of genetics is still so limited, many women are unaware
that they're at risk. Despite the desirability of early counselling, many are
first seen when they are already pregnant, and though DNA tests can now be
carried out at ten weeks, leaving plenty of time for a termination, the
emotional considerations are far from simple.

    Professor Pembrey tends to encourage GPs to suggest patients investigate
family health records. 'In the past, GPs quailed at the process, because if you
found something, there was nothing to be done. Now the solution is referral to a
genetic centre to sort out the problem.'

    Although you cannot change your genetic make-up, keeping a medical history
can warn you of risks and may facilitate early diagnosis and suitable treatment.

    Alan Havsteen-Mikkelsen was 50, and the father of five young children, when
he had a massive heart attack that destroyed 30 per cent of his heart muscle
function. At the time, he was a heavy smoker, drinker and meat-eater and, as the
head of a busy firm of architects, under relentless pressure.  But though his
lifestyle made his heart attack more likely, Professor Steve Humphries of
University College Hospital says that when a coronary patient is under 55, there
is a likelihood that genetic factors, as well as harmful habits such as smoking,
are to blame.

    The prime suspect in Alan's case was thought to be genetic tendency to high
cholesterol, which doctors say affects about one in 500 people.

    The good news is that Alan's children will not inevitably be affected, even
if they have inherited his vulnerability. It has become clear that a low-fat,
high-fibre diet, plus exercise, stress management, giving up smoking and
reducing alcohol consumption, have a strong preventive effect.  Alan is now a
passionate supporter of a healthy, holistic lifestyle and his doctors are
impressed with the progress he is making.

    It's now clear that between 4,000 and 5,000 disease conditions are
inherited. Currently, scientists are collaborating on the worldwide Human Genome
Project, to produce a genetic 'road map' of the human body. This should be
almost complete by the end of the century, if present disputes about the ethics
of patenting sections of DNA, where crucial genes are thought to lie, are
resolved.

    So far, the project has located the exact position of about 50 disease
genes, including haemophilia, sickle-cell anaemia, cystic fibrosis, muscular
dystrophy, and severe combined immunodeficiency (ADA syndrome). The major ones
outstanding now are the genes for the degenerative Huntington's chorea and
polycystic kidney disease.

    Although technology enables scientists to map genes more rapidly than ever,
academic knowledge outstrips practical application. DNA tests are available for
some 50 conditions but they are restricted to families known to be at risk - who
live with the knowledge that there is as yet no sure way to prevent genetic
illness and no cure.

    DESPITE this, future prospects are bright. Testing is already being carried
out on embryos after in vitro fertilisation. This pre-implantation screening is
still at research stage but a world first was achieved in March when a healthy
baby was born to a couple who each carry the cystic fibrosis gene. This has
paved the way, says Professor Robert Winston at Hammersmith Hospital, whose team
achieved the breakthrough, for similar screening for other single-gene defects.

    Where treatment is concerned, hopes lie with gene therapy, where defective
genes are replaced by healthy ones. Though still in its early stages, it's the
first step to a possible cure.

    () Good Housekeeping, 1992)

GRAPHIC: FAMILY CLUES CAN LEAD TO EARLY DETECTION OF POSSIBLE MEDICAL PROBLEMS,
SOME OF WHICH CAN BE TREATED BY GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              439 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 13, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1382 words

HEADLINE: Family clues to a healthy future;
STUDYING YOUR PARENTS' AND GRANDPARENTS' HISTORY CAN HELP PREDICT YOUR OWN
GENETIC WEEKNESSES

BYLINE: Sarah Stacey

BODY:


    EVERY week, experts at Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children gather
to review the latest referrals to the genetics department. In a room lined with
medical textbooks, 12 doctors scrutinise patients' records and agree on a course
of action.

    These are clinical geneticists, who deal with patients rather than simply
doing research. Unusually among the medical establishment, they are determinedly
open with both colleagues and patients. 'We trade in information, so there has
to be a free flow - and that should include patients too,' Professor Marcus
Pembrey, the department head, believes.

    The doctors' concern for their patients is almost tangible. The senior
registrar reports 'a very tense situation' with a girl, 19 weeks pregnant, whose
boyfriend has just confessed that his family has an inherited mental disorder.
Everyone agrees that the couple needs time and careful counselling. They have an
appointment at 1.45pm that day; happily they can be told that only ten per cent
of children born with neurofibromatosis will have learning difficulties.

    Then they discuss a batch of women with a family history of genetic
disorders who have applied for DNA testing, to see if they are carriers of three
common genetic diseases: cystic fibrosis, which clogs the lungs; muscular
dystrophy, a wasting disease that affects boys only; and fragile X, increasingly
recognised as a cause of mental impairment.

    Many of the women are very young - the teenage sisters and cousins of
sufferers. Once a directly inherited condition is identified, extended family
screening and counselling are provided for those affected.

    The final case demands detective work. The mother of a baby who died of
respiratory failure, and who was worringly floppy at birth, is pregnant again.
The concensus is that there is a fairly high risk of recurrence. The doctors
suggest that both mother and foetus should have tests and that investigations
should be launched to locate the original paediatric records and to see if cells
from the dead baby have been frozen for analysis.

    Similar scenes are repeated at each of the 14 regional genetic centres
throughout the country, which can be contacted directly by people anxious about
their genetic inheritance.

    The genetics department at Great Ormond Street serves the northeast Thames
region, and though most patients are referred by their family doctors, anyone in
the catchment area concerned about their history can ring and will receive,
Professor Pembrey assures, 'a friendly reception from the hospital'.

    Despite the inevitable anxiety, the majority go away with the good news that
there is little risk. But what happens when a genetic defect is identified?

    Andrew Walker's greatest gift is his ability to show love and affection,
says his mother Lesley. But although Andrew is seven, he has not yet outgrown
the temper tantrums that can bring the local supermarket to an appalled
standstill.

    ANDREW suffers from fragile X, which affects his ability to understand the
world around him. At birth he was smaller than his twin sister, and while Claire
developed normally, Andrew was markedly slow. At nine months, his parents
stopped pretending that 'boys are always behind', but it took nearly two years
of tests, with the support of a determined consultant paediatrician, to
establish the confused little boy's real problem.

    Today, Andrew, who is severely affected and has an academic age of
two-and-a-half, is becoming more manageable. One of his biggest problems is
communication. Most words are just sounds that mean nothing to him, but there
was a breakthrough recently when he started to say 'bye-bye' as he leaves for a
special school. But Lesley questions what life is like for

    Andrew, imprisoned in his mind, and says she will never completely recover
from the sense of guilt she felt when she heard the diagnosis: 'I was the
carrier of the gene, I was the cause.'

    Five years ago, when Lesley founded the Fragile X Support Group, she knew of
only ten cases in the country; today it's believed that one child in 1,000
inherits the condition. The discovery of the fragile X gene in May last year has
revolutionised carrier testing.

    Although many cases are still undiagnosed - some doctors take the line: 'Why
do you want to know when there's no cure? - many can now be picked up by testing
a blood sample. Sufferers and their families should then be given the expert
support and resources they need. And, crucially, the possibility of prenatal
testing now allows prospective parents the choice Lesley was denied.

    Because knowledge of genetics is still so limited, many women are unaware
that they're at risk. Despite the desirability of early counselling, many are
first seen when they are already pregnant, and though DNA tests can now be
carried out at ten weeks, leaving plenty of time for a termination, the
emotional considerations are far from simple.

    Professor Pembrey tends to encourage GPs to suggest patients investigate
family health records. 'In the past, GPs quailed at the process, because if you
found something, there was nothing to be done. Now the solution is referral to a
genetic centre to sort out the problem.'

    Although you cannot change your genetic make-up, keeping a medical history
can warn you of risks and may facilitate early diagnosis and suitable treatment.

    Alan Havsteen-Mikkelsen was 50, and the father of five young children, when
he had a massive heart attack that destroyed 30 per cent of his heart muscle
function. At the time, he was a heavy smoker, drinker and meat-eater and, as the
head of a busy firm of architects, under relentless pressure.  But though his
lifestyle made his heart attack more likely, Professor Steve Humphries of
University College Hospital says that when a coronary patient is under 55, there
is a likelihood that genetic factors, as well as harmful habits such as smoking,
are to blame.

    The prime suspect in Alan's case was thought to be genetic tendency to high
cholesterol, which doctors say affects about one in 500 people.

    The good news is that Alan's children will not inevitably be affected, even
if they have inherited his vulnerability. It has become clear that a low-fat,
high-fibre diet, plus exercise, stress management, giving up smoking and
reducing alcohol consumption, have a strong preventive effect.  Alan is now a
passionate supporter of a healthy, holistic lifestyle and his doctors are
impressed with the progress he is making.

    It's now clear that between 4,000 and 5,000 disease conditions are
inherited. Currently, scientists are collaborating on the worldwide Human Genome
Project, to produce a genetic 'road map' of the human body. This should be
almost complete by the end of the century, if present disputes about the ethics
of patenting sections of DNA, where crucial genes are thought to lie, are
resolved.

    So far, the project has located the exact position of about 50 disease
genes, including haemophilia, sickle-cell anaemia, cystic fibrosis, muscular
dystrophy, and severe combined immunodeficiency (ADA syndrome). The major ones
outstanding now are the genes for the degenerative Huntington's chorea and
polycystic kidney disease.

    Although technology enables scientists to map genes more rapidly than ever,
academic knowledge outstrips practical application. DNA tests are available for
some 50 conditions but they are restricted to families known to be at risk - who
live with the knowledge that there is as yet no sure way to prevent genetic
illness and no cure.

    DESPITE this, future prospects are bright. Testing is already being carried
out on embryos after in vitro fertilisation. This pre-implantation screening is
still at research stage but a world first was achieved in March when a healthy
baby was born to a couple who each carry the cystic fibrosis gene. This has
paved the way, says Professor Robert Winston at Hammersmith Hospital, whose team
achieved the breakthrough, for similar screening for other single-gene defects.

    Where treatment is concerned, hopes lie with gene therapy, where defective
genes are replaced by healthy ones. Though still in its early stages, it's the
first step to a possible cure.

    () Good Housekeeping, 1992)

GRAPHIC: FAMILY CLUES CAN LEAD TO EARLY DETECTION OF POSSIBLE MEDICAL PROBLEMS,
SOME OF WHICH CAN BE TREATED BY GENE THERAPY

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              440 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 13, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1134 words

HEADLINE: Countries fight to copyright cures

BYLINE: Richard Woodman

BODY:


    COUNTRIES are fighting to colonise our bodies in a new 'gold rush' to patent
the genes that control human life.

    In the race to be first, American scientists at the U.S. National Institutes
of Health have already filed mass patents covering more than 2,700 tiny pieces
of genetic material isolated from the brain, on the off-chance that some of the
genes may prove useful in fighting disease.

    Although this flies in the face of normal patent law, Britain has followed
suit, laying claim to more than 1,000 genetic fragments - from the brain, liver,
kidney, placenta and bone marrow.

    Other countries, while not seeking patents at such an early stage, are also
making impressive headway in mapping the 50,000 to 100,000 genes that determine
everything from the colour of our eyes to how long we live.

    The pace of research has been impressive ever since the first genetically
engineered treatment - human insulin - was created by America's gene-splicing
pioneer Herbert Boyer, in 1978. Now the prospects look even more exciting,
following America's decision to start experimental gene therapy.

    Fourteen patients with lung cancer are now waiting at the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, to receive a specially cloned gene designed to
suppress tumours.

    Another group of patients at risk of heart disease because of high
cholesterol levels is waiting at the University of Michigan to have a new gene
inserted into their livers to cut out excess fat clogging their arteries.

    Improved treatments for other illnesses with a genetic component, such as
schizophrenia, alcoholism and Alzheimer's disease, are likely to follow, as
scientists discover the genes involved.

    Ultimately, there is hope that doctors will be able to treat or prevent all
the 4,000 genetic diseases that affect two in three people in the course of a
lifetime. With prizes such as these in the offing, it is easy to understand why
the intense pressure to seek patent protection.

    Cloning, genetic engineering and gene therapy are now the buzzwords of
medicine. Those at the forefront will gain fame and fortune. Patents are always
highly prized because they give inventors - and their commercial backers - sole
rights to exploit the fruits of discovery for a number of years.

    They are also often fiercely contested, and several battles were fought on
both sides of the Atlantic, between Britain's Wellcome company and America's
Genentech, over TPA, a genetically engineered 'clotbuster' given to heart attack
patients. Genentech won in the U.S. and Wellcome in the UK.

    But what has really caused alarm is the American stampede to the patent
office with blanket claims to thousands of pieces of the genetic jigsaw - before
bothering to put the jigsaw together.

    This precipitated the resignation of James Watson, the Nobel Prize-winning
father of modern genetics, from the National Institutes of Health.  What worries
scientists is that if mass patenting becomes accepted, laboratories will stop
feeding information into the gene-mapping project's databanks.

    Dr Sarah Eccles, of the Medical Research Council, says: 'If people are
rushing around trying to patent things, there is going to be less cooperation
between groups. Mapping the human genome is such a big project it can't be done
by any one country.'

    Defending the American position, Dr Bernadine Healy, director of the NIH,
claims the patent applications were intended to ensure 'that the public benefits
from these recent discoveries through rapid development of health care
products'.

    Last month, however, the U.S. Patent Office rejected the NIH's novel patent
application. The scientists immediately appealed - dashing hopes of an end to
all the uncertainty.

    Ross Sibson, of the Medical Research Council, says: 'We would love to
withdraw our patent application.' But the U.S. appeal means the council must
maintain its application to protect its research.

    'They appear confident of the outcome,' Sibson says. 'With skilful

    lawyers and money, cases of this sort can be kept going for years.'

GRAPHIC:  How different countries are staking a claim on the genes that control
the body's functions

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              441 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                           October 13, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: Countries fight to copyright cures

BYLINE: Richard Woodman

BODY:


    COUNTRIES are fighting to colonise our bodies in a new 'gold rush' to patent
the genes that control human life.

    In the race to be first, American scientists at the U.S. National Institutes
of Health have already filed mass patents covering more than 2,700 tiny pieces
of genetic material isolated from the brain, on the off-chance that some of the
genes may prove useful in fighting disease.

    Although this flies in the face of normal patent law, Britain has followed
suit, laying claim to more than 1,000 genetic fragments - from the brain, liver,
kidney, placenta and bone marrow.

    Other countries, while not seeking patents at such an early stage, are also
making impressive headway in mapping the 50,000 to 100,000 genes that determine
everything from the colour of our eyes to how long we live.

    The pace of research has been impressive ever since the first genetically
engineered treatment - human insulin - was created by America's gene-splicing
pioneer Herbert Boyer, in 1978. Now the prospects look even more exciting,
following America's decision to start experimental gene therapy.

    Fourteen patients with lung cancer are now waiting at the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston, Texas, to receive a specially cloned gene designed to
suppress tumours.

    Another group of patients at risk of heart disease because of high
cholesterol levels is waiting at the University of Michigan to have a new gene
inserted into their livers to cut out excess fat clogging their arteries.

    Improved treatments for other illnesses with a genetic component, such as
schizophrenia, alcoholism and Alzheimer's disease, are likely to follow, as
scientists discover the genes involved.

    Ultimately, there is hope that doctors will be able to treat or prevent all
the 4,000 genetic diseases that affect two in three people in the course of a
lifetime. With prizes such as these in the offing, it is easy to understand why
the intense pressure to seek patent protection.

    Cloning, genetic engineering and gene therapy are now the buzzwords of
medicine. Those at the forefront will gain fame and fortune. Patents are always
highly prized because they give inventors - and their commercial backers - sole
rights to exploit the fruits of discovery for a number of years.

    They are also often fiercely contested, and several battles were fought on
both sides of the Atlantic, between Britain's Wellcome company and America's
Genentech, over TPA, a genetically engineered 'clotbuster' given to heart attack
patients. Genentech won in the U.S. and Wellcome in the UK.

    But what has really caused alarm is the American stampede to the patent
office with blanket claims to thousands of pieces of the genetic jigsaw - before
bothering to put the jigsaw together.

    This precipitated the resignation of James Watson, the Nobel Prize-winning
father of modern genetics, from the National Institutes of Health.  What worries
scientists is that if mass patenting becomes accepted, laboratories will stop
feeding information into the gene-mapping project's databanks.

    Dr Sarah Eccles, of the Medical Research Council, says: 'If people are
rushing around trying to patent things, there is going to be less cooperation
between groups. Mapping the human genome is such a big project it can't be done
by any one country.'

    Defending the American position, Dr Bernadine Healy, director of the NIH,
claims the patent applications were intended to ensure 'that the public benefits
from these recent discoveries through rapid development of health care
products'.

    Last month, however, the U.S. Patent Office rejected the NIH's novel patent
application. The scientists immediately appealed - dashing hopes of an end to
all the uncertainty.

    Ross Sibson, of the Medical Research Council, says: 'We would love to
withdraw our patent application.' But the U.S. appeal means the council must
maintain its application to protect its research.

    'They appear confident of the outcome,' Sibson says. 'With skilful

    lawyers and money, cases of this sort can be kept going for years.'

GRAPHIC:  How different countries are staking a claim on the genes that control
the body's functions

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              445 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 14, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 30

LENGTH: 894 words

HEADLINE: Death cries the French ignored;
TV MAIL/REVIEWS

BYLINE: Peter Paterson

BODY:


    Secret History: Drowning By Bullets (C4); Antenna: New Genes For Old (BBC2)

    THEY order things differently in France, as anyone stuck in the traffic jams
caused by the recent lorry blockades can tell you. On the surface, it is a
modern liberal democracy, but just underneath, the anarchic growl of the mob can
always be heard.

    Certainly, one has the impression that those who govern France have a
deep-seated fear of their own people: the Bastille must always be defended.  I
laughed out loud the other day when someone claimed on the radio that there was
more open government in France than in Britain.

    Whoever said that should have watched last night's Secret History, a rather
good documentary series now running on Channel 4. Last week it examined the
record of the Royal Air Force between the wars in its punitive bombing campaigns
against native tribes in various parts of the British Empire - a role some
people saw as no better than a war crime, but which also prepared the RAF for
its task in World War II.

    The point is that although attempts were made to cover up what was
happening, the authorities could not prevent it being debated in Parliament.

    However, when it was suggested that the French police killed 200 people in
the centre of Paris in October 1961, the affair was suppressed by the
Government, left unchallenged by the opposition, and swiftly forgotten.
Deficient though our system may be, often cowardly, and as reluctant as
authority always is to reveal the truth if it can avoid it, you know that such a
thing could not happen here.

    France at the time was engaged in a bloody war to hold on to its North
African colony, Algeria. The 150,000 or so Algerians living in slums and shanty
towns around Paris were viewed by the authorities as a potential Fifth Column,
and the Algerian liberation movement, the FLN, certainly depended on the
immigrants for most of its funds.

    The Algerian community also sheltered the terrorists who had assassinated 36
French policemen, and the Government imposed a night-time curfew in a bid to
combat the FLN. Secret History somewhat underplayed the cynicism and
recklessness of the FLN in calling on the Algerians to defy the curfew with a
gigantic demonstration on the streets of central Paris.

    Thousands were arrested, and in the weeks that followed, scores of bodies
were found floating in the Seine. No one knows, to this day, how many of the
Algerians were shot, drowned or otherwise disposed of: 200 deaths remains an
estimate.

    It was not just the actions of the police in allegedly revenging themselves
on the Algerians, or the de Gaulle government and its successors in refusing any
form of inquiry into the massacre, that is so disturbing. It is the utter lack
of interest by the French people themselves over what was done in their name
that suggests that their masters are perhaps quite right not to trust them.

    * IT OCCURRED to me last night, while watching Antenna's fascinating New
Genes For Old, about the work of Professor Bob Williamson and his team of
researchers at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, west London, that medical
discoveries can no longer be claimed as a beneficial side-effect of war.

    Unlike, say, penicillin, the technology behind gene therapy, which according
to Professor Williamson is going to become the major form of treatment for most
inherited diseases within 20 years, would be of no interest to those treating
the wounded on a battlefield.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              446 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             July 14, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 30

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: Death cries the French ignored;
TV MAIL/REVIEWS

BYLINE: Peter Paterson

BODY:


    Secret History: Drowning By Bullets (C4); Antenna: New Genes For Old (BBC2)

    THEY order things differently in France, as anyone stuck in the traffic jams
caused by the recent lorry blockades can tell you. On the surface, it is a
modern liberal democracy, but just underneath, the anarchic growl of the mob can
always be heard.

    Certainly, one has the impression that those who govern France have a
deep-seated fear of their own people: the Bastille must always be defended.  I
laughed out loud the other day when someone claimed on the radio that there was
more open government in France than in Britain.

    Whoever said that should have watched last night's Secret History, a rather
good documentary series now running on Channel 4. Last week it examined the
record of the Royal Air Force between the wars in its punitive bombing campaigns
against native tribes in various parts of the British Empire - a role some
people saw as no better than a war crime, but which also prepared the RAF for
its task in World War II.

    The point is that although attempts were made to cover up what was
happening, the authorities could not prevent it being debated in Parliament.

    However, when it was suggested that the French police killed 200 people in
the centre of Paris in October 1961, the affair was suppressed by the
Government, left unchallenged by the opposition, and swiftly forgotten.
Deficient though our system may be, often cowardly, and as reluctant as
authority always is to reveal the truth if it can avoid it, you know that such a
thing could not happen here.

    France at the time was engaged in a bloody war to hold on to its North
African colony, Algeria. The 150,000 or so Algerians living in slums and shanty
towns around Paris were viewed by the authorities as a potential Fifth Column,
and the Algerian liberation movement, the FLN, certainly depended on the
immigrants for most of its funds.

    The Algerian community also sheltered the terrorists who had assassinated 36
French policemen, and the Government imposed a night-time curfew in a bid to
combat the FLN. Secret History somewhat underplayed the cynicism and
recklessness of the FLN in calling on the Algerians to defy the curfew with a
gigantic demonstration on the streets of central Paris.

    Thousands were arrested, and in the weeks that followed, scores of bodies
were found floating in the Seine. No one knows, to this day, how many of the
Algerians were shot, drowned or otherwise disposed of: 200 deaths remains an
estimate.

    It was not just the actions of the police in allegedly revenging themselves
on the Algerians, or the de Gaulle government and its successors in refusing any
form of inquiry into the massacre, that is so disturbing. It is the utter lack
of interest by the French people themselves over what was done in their name
that suggests that their masters are perhaps quite right not to trust them.

    * IT OCCURRED to me last night, while watching Antenna's fascinating New
Genes For Old, about the work of Professor Bob Williamson and his team of
researchers at St Mary's Hospital, Paddington, west London, that medical
discoveries can no longer be claimed as a beneficial side-effect of war.

    Unlike, say, penicillin, the technology behind gene therapy, which according
to Professor Williamson is going to become the major form of treatment for most
inherited diseases within 20 years, would be of no interest to those treating
the wounded on a battlefield.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              448 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             June 23, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 1040 words

HEADLINE: THE POSITIVE POWER OF GENE THERAPY;
GENETIC MANIPULATION AS A FORCE FOR GOOD

BYLINE: Richard Woodman

BODY:


    GIORGIO is alive and well, playing like any other six-year-old, thanks to
the revolutionary power of genetic engineering.

    Far from creating a Frankenstein monster, Giorgio's doctors simply gave him
the normal genes he needs to fight infections just like everyone else.  And in
giving the Italian boy the chance of normal life, they raised the hopes of all
mankind that genetic manipulation will be a force for good rather than evil.

    As yesterday's British Medical Association report on genetic engineering
points out, there is tremendous scope for action. Genetic and part-genetic
diseases affect one in every 20 people by the age of 25, and as many as two in
three people in the course of a lifetime. Of the more than 4,000 known inherited
disorders, most lack fully effective therapies.

    So far the positions of only four per cent of the estimated 100,000 human
genes have been located, but scientists around the world are now engaged in the
ambitious Human Genome Project to map the rest. The project will take years and
cost billions, but it is clear already that it offers the chance to prevent or
cure terrible scourges such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
haemophilia. Treatment of some forms of heart disease, as well as cancer and
Aids, is also a possibility for the future.

    BUT a serious mistake - however unlikely - could prove catastrophic. As the
BMA report says, strict controls will be essential to prevent possible abuses
and erosion of civil liberties.

    Such worries, however, were far from the minds of Giorgio's parents when
their son failed to thrive because of a rare inherited disease crippling his
immune system, robbing him of protection against infections. Only one of the
100,000 genes was missing or defective - but the condition, called severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, meant he fell prey to repeated bouts of
pneumonia and lost weight. He had to be isolated inside a germ-free glass
cubicle.

    The missing gene meant his body did not produce the vital protein adenosine
deaminase (ADA). That spelled death for the infection-fighting white blood
cells. A bone marrow transplant stood little chance of success: none of his six
brothers and sisters was compatible for donation and although his mother could
have become a donor the odds were heavily against success.

    Giorgio's father, a construction worker, searched Europe for help.
Eventually he came to the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan where blood specialist
Dr Claudio Bordignon was preparing for the world's first permanent human gene
implant.

    The treatment, which began in March, involved extracting white blood cells
called lymphocytes which were then taken to the laboratory in preparation for
gene transfer. The cells were first mixed with a harmless virus, genetically
programmed to produce the vital ADA gene. The cells were then transferred to
culture bags and left to multiply up 1,000 times before being returned
intravenously.

    WE WERE desperate because we could not resign ourselves to the fact Giorgio
was going to die,' said his mother. When doctors suggested gene therapy we did
not hesitate. Anything was worth trying. Now our son is growing normally and we
hope he will be able to lead a normal life and go to school like any other
child.'

    It was the discovery in 1953 of the DNA double helix - the genetic blueprint
of life - by American biologist Jim Watson and British physicist Francis Crick
that opened the door to gene therapy and other major advances that should
dramatically improve life.  The prospect of a Brave New World in which the state
predetermines the IQ of all newborn babies is fortunately way beyond the bounds
of current day technology. Even if we wanted to, we still cannot play with our
genetic toolkit to make people either clever or happy, any more than we can
clone Margaret Thatcher.  Potential candidates for the earliest gene therapies
will be disorders caused by defects in a single gene rather than multiple genes.
Well-known examples are cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and haemophilia. In
general, doctors will remove cells from a patient, insert a healthy gene, and
return the cells to the body. American doctors in Michigan are already seeking
to treat victims of familial hypercholesterolemia, who are at high risk of heart
disease because they inherit sky-high cholesterol.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              449 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                             June 23, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 28

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: THE POSITIVE POWER OF GENE THERAPY;
GENETIC MANIPULATION AS A FORCE FOR GOOD

BYLINE: Richard Woodman

BODY:


    GIORGIO is alive and well, playing like any other six-year-old, thanks to
the revolutionary power of genetic engineering.

    Far from creating a Frankenstein monster, Giorgio's doctors simply gave him
the normal genes he needs to fight infections just like everyone else.  And in
giving the Italian boy the chance of normal life, they raised the hopes of all
mankind that genetic manipulation will be a force for good rather than evil.

    As yesterday's British Medical Association report on genetic engineering
points out, there is tremendous scope for action. Genetic and part-genetic
diseases affect one in every 20 people by the age of 25, and as many as two in
three people in the course of a lifetime. Of the more than 4,000 known inherited
disorders, most lack fully effective therapies.

    So far the positions of only four per cent of the estimated 100,000 human
genes have been located, but scientists around the world are now engaged in the
ambitious Human Genome Project to map the rest. The project will take years and
cost billions, but it is clear already that it offers the chance to prevent or
cure terrible scourges such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and
haemophilia. Treatment of some forms of heart disease, as well as cancer and
Aids, is also a possibility for the future.

    BUT a serious mistake - however unlikely - could prove catastrophic. As the
BMA report says, strict controls will be essential to prevent possible abuses
and erosion of civil liberties.

    Such worries, however, were far from the minds of Giorgio's parents when
their son failed to thrive because of a rare inherited disease crippling his
immune system, robbing him of protection against infections. Only one of the
100,000 genes was missing or defective - but the condition, called severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, meant he fell prey to repeated bouts of
pneumonia and lost weight. He had to be isolated inside a germ-free glass
cubicle.

    The missing gene meant his body did not produce the vital protein adenosine
deaminase (ADA). That spelled death for the infection-fighting white blood
cells. A bone marrow transplant stood little chance of success: none of his six
brothers and sisters was compatible for donation and although his mother could
have become a donor the odds were heavily against success.

    Giorgio's father, a construction worker, searched Europe for help.
Eventually he came to the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan where blood specialist
Dr Claudio Bordignon was preparing for the world's first permanent human gene
implant.

    The treatment, which began in March, involved extracting white blood cells
called lymphocytes which were then taken to the laboratory in preparation for
gene transfer. The cells were first mixed with a harmless virus, genetically
programmed to produce the vital ADA gene. The cells were then transferred to
culture bags and left to multiply up 1,000 times before being returned
intravenously.

    WE WERE desperate because we could not resign ourselves to the fact Giorgio
was going to die,' said his mother. When doctors suggested gene therapy we did
not hesitate. Anything was worth trying. Now our son is growing normally and we
hope he will be able to lead a normal life and go to school like any other
child.'

    It was the discovery in 1953 of the DNA double helix - the genetic blueprint
of life - by American biologist Jim Watson and British physicist Francis Crick
that opened the door to gene therapy and other major advances that should
dramatically improve life.  The prospect of a Brave New World in which the state
predetermines the IQ of all newborn babies is fortunately way beyond the bounds
of current day technology. Even if we wanted to, we still cannot play with our
genetic toolkit to make people either clever or happy, any more than we can
clone Margaret Thatcher.  Potential candidates for the earliest gene therapies
will be disorders caused by defects in a single gene rather than multiple genes.
Well-known examples are cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and haemophilia. In
general, doctors will remove cells from a patient, insert a healthy gene, and
return the cells to the body. American doctors in Michigan are already seeking
to treat victims of familial hypercholesterolemia, who are at high risk of heart
disease because they inherit sky-high cholesterol.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              453 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            April 21, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: IN SEARCH OF MODERN MIRACLES

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE search for wonder drugs involves big bucks. Pharmaceutical companies
spend millions trying to develop miracle cures for massive rewards.

    But the path to a breakthrough is littered with thousands of chemical
compounds that didn't work while the stampede to litigation when things go wrong
can jeopardise multi-million pound profits.

    Yet there is the prospect of significant advances by the end of this
century, which has already seen healthcare revolutionised by the development of
penicillin and other antiobiotics.

    The potential for gene therapy will be enormous as scientists learn how to
replace defective genes responsible for a range of diseases. At St Mary's
Hospital, Paddington, the first British project to get under way aimed at cystic
fibrosis sufferers was announced earlier this year.

    It is possible that by the year 2000 the first treatment for Alzheimer's
disease will be on the market. And a huge increase in numbers of elderly will
accelerate demand for solutions to the problem of dementia.

    Pharmaceutical industry analysts at the securities firm Shearson Lehman
Brothers describe dementia drugs as a 'goldmine waiting to be discovered'.  At
least four drugs are in the pipeline.

    The long-awaited contraceptive ring - which releases low doses of
progestogen into the vagina - may also finally get approval.

    But it should be remembered that the drug industry is 'failure-prone' -
testing of 10,000 chemical compounds will get one on the market at an estimated
development cost of £125million, according to the Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry.

    But there are exciting times ahead into the next century with a high chance
of development taking place in most therapeutic areas:

    * Anti-virals: A herpes vaccine is a couple of years away but new drugs are
in the pipeline to treat herpes and shingles. New drugs to combat the AIDS virus
will be available, though an AIDS vaccine is 'still several years away'.

    * Cardiovascular drugs: Treatment for stroke is the great white hope of this
category. Research into four classes of compounds, including free radical
scavengers, aims to limit damage from lack of oxygen in brain tissue. Only one
drug is currently marketed for prevention of a second stroke.

    * Central nervous system: New classes of drugs for disorders likely to
afflict the aged are being 'researched actively'. Tacrine has just been passed
for an intensive study of Alzheimer's in the U.S. while another two drugs are in
advanced development. 5-HT drugs are being investigated for potential in
reversing drug addiction, including tobacco.

    * Dermatology: Anti-fungals and vitamin-A derivatives have started to make
an impact on skin care; it is likely that anti-inflammatories will be
incorporated into dermatology, including cyclosporin-A, the anti-transplant
rejection drug that's already proving itself in severe psoriasis. The first
cosmeceutical should also emerge - a drug licensed for anti-ageing properties in
normal skin. - and make a fortune for its manufacturer.

    Asthma: At least one drug is close to being used in clinical trials but is
likely to take eight years before a major breakthrough.

    * Cancer: In the next two years more drugs will be coming on the market
which lessen toxic effects of existing therapies, enabling doctors to use more
powerful doses. Technologies such as anti-sense chemistry - the shutdown of
targeted genes - and gene therapy are in infancy but could play a major role by
the end of the decade.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              454 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            April 21, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 24

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: IN SEARCH OF MODERN MIRACLES

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE search for wonder drugs involves big bucks. Pharmaceutical companies
spend millions trying to develop miracle cures for massive rewards.

    But the path to a breakthrough is littered with thousands of chemical
compounds that didn't work while the stampede to litigation when things go wrong
can jeopardise multi-million pound profits.

    Yet there is the prospect of significant advances by the end of this
century, which has already seen healthcare revolutionised by the development of
penicillin and other antiobiotics.

    The potential for gene therapy will be enormous as scientists learn how to
replace defective genes responsible for a range of diseases. At St Mary's
Hospital, Paddington, the first British project to get under way aimed at cystic
fibrosis sufferers was announced earlier this year.

    It is possible that by the year 2000 the first treatment for Alzheimer's
disease will be on the market. And a huge increase in numbers of elderly will
accelerate demand for solutions to the problem of dementia.

    Pharmaceutical industry analysts at the securities firm Shearson Lehman
Brothers describe dementia drugs as a 'goldmine waiting to be discovered'.  At
least four drugs are in the pipeline.

    The long-awaited contraceptive ring - which releases low doses of
progestogen into the vagina - may also finally get approval.

    But it should be remembered that the drug industry is 'failure-prone' -
testing of 10,000 chemical compounds will get one on the market at an estimated
development cost of £125million, according to the Association of the British
Pharmaceutical Industry.

    But there are exciting times ahead into the next century with a high chance
of development taking place in most therapeutic areas:

    * Anti-virals: A herpes vaccine is a couple of years away but new drugs are
in the pipeline to treat herpes and shingles. New drugs to combat the AIDS virus
will be available, though an AIDS vaccine is 'still several years away'.

    * Cardiovascular drugs: Treatment for stroke is the great white hope of this
category. Research into four classes of compounds, including free radical
scavengers, aims to limit damage from lack of oxygen in brain tissue. Only one
drug is currently marketed for prevention of a second stroke.

    * Central nervous system: New classes of drugs for disorders likely to
afflict the aged are being 'researched actively'. Tacrine has just been passed
for an intensive study of Alzheimer's in the U.S. while another two drugs are in
advanced development. 5-HT drugs are being investigated for potential in
reversing drug addiction, including tobacco.

    * Dermatology: Anti-fungals and vitamin-A derivatives have started to make
an impact on skin care; it is likely that anti-inflammatories will be
incorporated into dermatology, including cyclosporin-A, the anti-transplant
rejection drug that's already proving itself in severe psoriasis. The first
cosmeceutical should also emerge - a drug licensed for anti-ageing properties in
normal skin. - and make a fortune for its manufacturer.

    Asthma: At least one drug is close to being used in clinical trials but is
likely to take eight years before a major breakthrough.

    * Cancer: In the next two years more drugs will be coming on the market
which lessen toxic effects of existing therapies, enabling doctors to use more
powerful doses. Technologies such as anti-sense chemistry - the shutdown of
targeted genes - and gene therapy are in infancy but could play a major role by
the end of the decade.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              455 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            :Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: INTO THE FUTURE;
BOY, 5, IN GENE TRIALS THAT MAY BANISH DISEASES

BYLINE: Lorraine Fraser

BODY:


    EUROPEAN doctors are making the world's first attempt to cure mankind's
worst diseases through gene therapy.

    They hope a medical experiment on a five-year-old boy could lead to the
successful treatment of inherited diseases - and eventually some cancers and
even AIDS.

    The child, suffering from an obscure illness, has undergone a revolutionary
gene transplant at a hospital in Italy. Now doctors and scientists are waiting
to see if the transplant, to repair the boy's immune system, works well.

    Details of the historic treatment at the San Raffael Hospital in Milan were
revealed yesterday to The Mail on Sunday. It has taken place in a country which
two years ago challenged the whole concept of gene transplants believing -
wrongly - that they could alter the entire genetic make up of a patient.

    But yesterday the boy's doctor said: ''Gene therapy is the medicine of the
future.'

    '

    There have been a handful of gene transplants before - but none like this.
For the Italian team hope they have made a breakthrough by putting a missing
infection-fighting gene right into the boy's bone marrow cells where it will
function for the rest of his life.

    '

    -

    The greatest breakthrough

    See Analysis on Page 8

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              456 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 1

LENGTH: 208 words

HEADLINE: INTO THE FUTURE;
BOY, 5, IN GENE TRIALS THAT MAY BANISH DISEASES

BYLINE: Lorraine Fraser

BODY:


    EUROPEAN doctors are making the world's first attempt to cure mankind's
worst diseases through gene therapy.

    They hope a medical experiment on a five-year-old boy could lead to the
successful treatment of inherited diseases - and eventually some cancers and
even AIDS.

    The child, suffering from an obscure illness, has undergone a revolutionary
gene transplant at a hospital in Italy. Now doctors and scientists are waiting
to see if the transplant, to repair the boy's immune system, works well.

    Details of the historic treatment at the San Raffael Hospital in Milan were
revealed yesterday to The Mail on Sunday. It has taken place in a country which
two years ago challenged the whole concept of gene transplants believing -
wrongly - that they could alter the entire genetic make up of a patient.

    But yesterday the boy's doctor said: ''Gene therapy is the medicine of the
future.'

    '

    There have been a handful of gene transplants before - but none like this.
For the Italian team hope they have made a breakthrough by putting a missing
infection-fighting gene right into the boy's bone marrow cells where it will
function for the rest of his life.

    '

    -

    The greatest breakthrough

    See Analysis on Page 8

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              457 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1520 words

HEADLINE: THE GREATEST BREAKTHROUGH;
How Giorgio, 5, is helping to pioneer the gene therapy that could wipe out
diseases

BYLINE: Lorraine Fraser

BODY:


    THIS small boy, called Giorgio, is pioneering the most dramatic breakthrough
in modern medicine.

    In an amazing experiment, European doctors have begun to give the
five-year-old a permanent gene transplant - for the first time in the world.
And if the revolutionary treatment is successful, all kinds of diseases which so
terribly threaten mankind - even as we approach the 21st Century - could be
wiped out forever.

    The life-saving therapy to give Giorgio immunity to infection, was begun
just a month ago and now he is recovering at his home in the south of Italy.

    Last night his doctor predicted: 'Gene transplants are the way of the
future. We hope against hope that Giorgio's treatment will work so that other
people can have gene therapy too.'

    Giorgio was less than a year old when doctors discovered he was suffering
from an inherited disease which gave him no protection against infections. He
was suffering two bouts of pneumonia a month and losing weight, having been born
without a crucial gene which makes the immune system function properly.

    His father, a construction worker, searched Europe for help while Giorgio
was shielded from the people he loved in a sterile glass isolation cubicle.

    Quest

    This olive-skinned child suffered so much psychological stress from this
strange confinement that he never even learned to speak. But finally, the
family's brave quest led them to the San Raffael Hospital in Milan where Doctor
Claudio Bordignon began treatment on March 9.

    Last night at the family's house Giorgio's mother said: 'Today my son is
fine. He has a little cough but he is allowed to play outdoors again.

    'When he was very ill it was as though I was dead. I cried all night and I
was afraid that the slightest infection would take him away from me.

    'Now he is really growing up and we hope he will live a normal life and go
to school like any other child'.

    Doctors have dubbed gene therapy the Fourth Revolution of medicine, destined
to bring benefits to the world as great as sanitation, anaesthetics and
antiobiotics.

    In the future it will provide cures for inherited diseases like cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and some forms of heart disease, as well as cancer
and AIDS.

    Medical teams at London's Great Ormond Street Hospital For Children are
planning a similar operation to Giorgio's - but that may be a year or two away.

    Today these British doctors - as well as others around the globe - are
waiting to see if Giorgio's treatment is a success.

    His desperate parents agreed to the gene transplant when they were told the
only other way to save Giorgio's life was a poorly matched bone marrow
transplant which he would only have a one in two chance of surviving.

    Although Giorgio has six brothers and sisters not one could stand in as a
compatible bone marrow donor. His mother could have become a donor, but with
only a slim chance of success.

    Healthy

    The gene missing from Giorgio's body creates the vital protein adenosine
deaminase (ADA). Without this protein, white blood cells die off, destroying the
immune system.

    Only 70 children in the world suffer from this ADA deficiency.  --

    The Italian doctors now know that if they can make Giorgio's immune system
produce only ten per cent of the normal amount of ADA, he will be perfectly
healthy.

    Over a series of weeks the team took white blood cells from his blood and
bone marrow. These were mixed in the laboratory with a harmless virus
genetically engineered to contain the vital ADA gene.

    The newly treated cells containing the ADA were then infused back into
Giorgio's arm during two l5-minute treatments first in March and then in April.
In the next few months that will happen four more times.

    By then, this small boy will have received hundreds of millions of treated
cells. Doctors say if all goes according to plan, he will have been cured in
what will be a modern miracle.

    Two young girls with the same illness have had gene transplants in America
but neither received the type of treatment that will completely cure their
illness. They will have to return for treatment for the rest of their lives.

    The important difference in Giorgio's case is that doctors are trying to put
the new gene right into his bone marrow cells to give him a lifeline source of
the vital ADA protein.

    Today the bearded and charming Dr Bordignon at Italy's biggest private - but
non profit making - hospital has a wry affection for his young patient.  Every
time the boy leaves the Milan hospital after his medical treatment he gives a
favourite toy to the doctor as a memento.

    'I have a box full of them now,' said Dr Bordignon with a smile.

GRAPHIC: (1) GENE GENIUS: Little Giorgio has begun therapy which could bring a
permanent cure for his inherited disease (2) PIONEER: Dr Bordignon (3) PLAYTIME:
Giorgio

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              458 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: THE GREATEST BREAKTHROUGH;
How Giorgio, 5, is helping to pioneer the gene therapy that could wipe out
diseases

BYLINE: Lorraine Fraser

BODY:


    THIS small boy, called Giorgio, is pioneering the most dramatic breakthrough
in modern medicine.

    In an amazing experiment, European doctors have begun to give the
five-year-old a permanent gene transplant - for the first time in the world.
And if the revolutionary treatment is successful, all kinds of diseases which so
terribly threaten mankind - even as we approach the 21st Century - could be
wiped out forever.

    The life-saving therapy to give Giorgio immunity to infection, was begun
just a month ago and now he is recovering at his home in the south of Italy.

    Last night his doctor predicted: 'Gene transplants are the way of the
future. We hope against hope that Giorgio's treatment will work so that other
people can have gene therapy too.'

    Giorgio was less than a year old when doctors discovered he was suffering
from an inherited disease which gave him no protection against infections. He
was suffering two bouts of pneumonia a month and losing weight, having been born
without a crucial gene which makes the immune system function properly.

    His father, a construction worker, searched Europe for help while Giorgio
was shielded from the people he loved in a sterile glass isolation cubicle.

    Quest

    This olive-skinned child suffered so much psychological stress from this
strange confinement that he never even learned to speak. But finally, the
family's brave quest led them to the San Raffael Hospital in Milan where Doctor
Claudio Bordignon began treatment on March 9.

    Last night at the family's house Giorgio's mother said: 'Today my son is
fine. He has a little cough but he is allowed to play outdoors again.

    'When he was very ill it was as though I was dead. I cried all night and I
was afraid that the slightest infection would take him away from me.

    'Now he is really growing up and we hope he will live a normal life and go
to school like any other child'.

    Doctors have dubbed gene therapy the Fourth Revolution of medicine, destined
to bring benefits to the world as great as sanitation, anaesthetics and
antiobiotics.

    In the future it will provide cures for inherited diseases like cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy and some forms of heart disease, as well as cancer
and AIDS.

    Medical teams at London's Great Ormond Street Hospital For Children are
planning a similar operation to Giorgio's - but that may be a year or two away.

    Today these British doctors - as well as others around the globe - are
waiting to see if Giorgio's treatment is a success.

    His desperate parents agreed to the gene transplant when they were told the
only other way to save Giorgio's life was a poorly matched bone marrow
transplant which he would only have a one in two chance of surviving.

    Although Giorgio has six brothers and sisters not one could stand in as a
compatible bone marrow donor. His mother could have become a donor, but with
only a slim chance of success.

    Healthy

    The gene missing from Giorgio's body creates the vital protein adenosine
deaminase (ADA). Without this protein, white blood cells die off, destroying the
immune system.

    Only 70 children in the world suffer from this ADA deficiency.  --

    The Italian doctors now know that if they can make Giorgio's immune system
produce only ten per cent of the normal amount of ADA, he will be perfectly
healthy.

    Over a series of weeks the team took white blood cells from his blood and
bone marrow. These were mixed in the laboratory with a harmless virus
genetically engineered to contain the vital ADA gene.

    The newly treated cells containing the ADA were then infused back into
Giorgio's arm during two l5-minute treatments first in March and then in April.
In the next few months that will happen four more times.

    By then, this small boy will have received hundreds of millions of treated
cells. Doctors say if all goes according to plan, he will have been cured in
what will be a modern miracle.

    Two young girls with the same illness have had gene transplants in America
but neither received the type of treatment that will completely cure their
illness. They will have to return for treatment for the rest of their lives.

    The important difference in Giorgio's case is that doctors are trying to put
the new gene right into his bone marrow cells to give him a lifeline source of
the vital ADA protein.

    Today the bearded and charming Dr Bordignon at Italy's biggest private - but
non profit making - hospital has a wry affection for his young patient.  Every
time the boy leaves the Milan hospital after his medical treatment he gives a
favourite toy to the doctor as a memento.

    'I have a box full of them now,' said Dr Bordignon with a smile.

GRAPHIC: (1) GENE GENIUS: Little Giorgio has begun therapy which could bring a
permanent cure for his inherited disease (2) PIONEER: Dr Bordignon (3) PLAYTIME:
Giorgio

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              459 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1160 words

HEADLINE: WORLD HUNT BY SCIENTISTS IN BID TO BEAT KILLER ILLNESS

BODY:


    ONE baby in 100 is born with some kind of genetic disease.

    Sometimes a gene is missing; sometimes it malfunctions.

    The best known are cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

    Then there are the millions of people with cancer, heart disease and AIDS
where gene therapy could, theoretically, work.

    Hundreds of research groups around the world are studying how to get
laboratory-made genes into the body and how to avoid side effects.

    Role

    Most of this is still years from being tried in humans but the first tests
in a small number of illnesses are about to begin.

    As the role of more human genes is discovered, the possibilities for therapy
will grow.

    CANCER: Doctors at Michigan University are to treat three patients with
terminal skin cancer by gene therapy.

    They want to infuse the cancers with a marker gene which they hope will
alter the surface of the cancer cells and make it easier for the patient's
immune system to spot and destroy the cells.

    Meanwhile, doctors in Washington have used new genes to alter the immune
cells of skin cancer patients, aiming to boost their ability to fight the
disease.

    Twelve adult patients have now been treated and the first results are
expected this summer.

    AIDS: Doctors in Seattle and San Diego have just been given the go-ahead to
genetically alter immune cells in AIDS patients.

    This is a first step towards finding out how devastated immune systems can
be repaired. Doctors want to put marker genes into selected cells to see how
they function.

    Blocks

    And at Ohio University scientists believe that work they have done in mice
could one day cure AIDS.

    They have added a gene to mouse immune cells which blocks the multiplication
of a mouse AIDS virus.

    If this could be done in human bone marrow cells, AIDS could be cured.

    HEART DISEASE: Doctors in Michigan have been told they can try to treat a
million-to-one form of heart disease with gene therapy.

    They will genetically alter liver cells of patients who inherit sky-high
cholesterol levels because they lack the gene which helps clear cholesterol from
the blood.

    'If this works, they could one day move on to treating other disorders of
fat metabolism which affect one in 500 people.

    CYSTIC FIBROSIS: Human trials concerning this disease, which affects 300
children a year, and other genetic illnesses are some way off.

    But scientists at London's Mary's Hospital have just decided to spend a £1
million bequest on making a 'mini chromosome' which can fit inside the cells
affected by cystic fibrosis.

    Vital

    Once there, it will produce the vital protein which is missing in these
children.

    US researchers into cystic fibrosis are working on ways of using a harmless
virus to put the gene into lung, pancreas and liver cells.

    An aerosol inhaler, for example, could bring the gene to the lungs.

    MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY: It may be possible one day to alter muscle cells to
replace the gene MS sufferers lack - although this is a long way off.

    Scientists might also use pockets of a patient's own genetically-altered
muscle or skin cells to provide sources of the proteins missing in other
conditions such as haemophilia or growth hormone deficiency.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              460 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                            Mail on Sunday (London)

                             April 19, 1992, Sunday

SECTION: Pg. 8

LENGTH: 544 words

HEADLINE: WORLD HUNT BY SCIENTISTS IN BID TO BEAT KILLER ILLNESS

BODY:


    ONE baby in 100 is born with some kind of genetic disease.

    Sometimes a gene is missing; sometimes it malfunctions.

    The best known are cystic fibrosis and muscular dystrophy.

    Then there are the millions of people with cancer, heart disease and AIDS
where gene therapy could, theoretically, work.

    Hundreds of research groups around the world are studying how to get
laboratory-made genes into the body and how to avoid side effects.

    Role

    Most of this is still years from being tried in humans but the first tests
in a small number of illnesses are about to begin.

    As the role of more human genes is discovered, the possibilities for therapy
will grow.

    CANCER: Doctors at Michigan University are to treat three patients with
terminal skin cancer by gene therapy.

    They want to infuse the cancers with a marker gene which they hope will
alter the surface of the cancer cells and make it easier for the patient's
immune system to spot and destroy the cells.

    Meanwhile, doctors in Washington have used new genes to alter the immune
cells of skin cancer patients, aiming to boost their ability to fight the
disease.

    Twelve adult patients have now been treated and the first results are
expected this summer.

    AIDS: Doctors in Seattle and San Diego have just been given the go-ahead to
genetically alter immune cells in AIDS patients.

    This is a first step towards finding out how devastated immune systems can
be repaired. Doctors want to put marker genes into selected cells to see how
they function.

    Blocks

    And at Ohio University scientists believe that work they have done in mice
could one day cure AIDS.

    They have added a gene to mouse immune cells which blocks the multiplication
of a mouse AIDS virus.

    If this could be done in human bone marrow cells, AIDS could be cured.

    HEART DISEASE: Doctors in Michigan have been told they can try to treat a
million-to-one form of heart disease with gene therapy.

    They will genetically alter liver cells of patients who inherit sky-high
cholesterol levels because they lack the gene which helps clear cholesterol from
the blood.

    'If this works, they could one day move on to treating other disorders of
fat metabolism which affect one in 500 people.

    CYSTIC FIBROSIS: Human trials concerning this disease, which affects 300
children a year, and other genetic illnesses are some way off.

    But scientists at London's Mary's Hospital have just decided to spend a £1
million bequest on making a 'mini chromosome' which can fit inside the cells
affected by cystic fibrosis.

    Vital

    Once there, it will produce the vital protein which is missing in these
children.

    US researchers into cystic fibrosis are working on ways of using a harmless
virus to put the gene into lung, pancreas and liver cells.

    An aerosol inhaler, for example, could bring the gene to the lungs.

    MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY: It may be possible one day to alter muscle cells to
replace the gene MS sufferers lack - although this is a long way off.

    Scientists might also use pockets of a patient's own genetically-altered
muscle or skin cells to provide sources of the proteins missing in other
conditions such as haemophilia or growth hormone deficiency.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              466 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            March 10, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 974 words

HEADLINE: CURE IN SIGHT FOR VICTIMS OF ASTHMA

BODY:


    BRITISH scientists are closing in on the gene responsible for asthma - one
of the commonest chronic diseases, it was revealed this week.

    They have narrowed the search to just 100 genes - each person has more than
50,000 - and believe one is responsible for asthma, eczema and hay fever.
(Other researchers claim there may be more.)

    Their painstaking work should lead to its identification in months, but
asthma sufferers still have to wait years before the discovery could lead to a
cure. Locating the gene can be compared to researchers starting off with a map
of London and discovering clues that lead them first to Knighstbridge, and then
into Harrods. The last, tantalisingly close stage is to track down the exact
department which is home to the gene.

    After that, the real work starts. Within two years, it is estimated,
scientists will be able to reproduce the defective gene. This is crucial to the
process of finding out how the gene actually triggers asthma.

    Once that process is understood, it will help researchers develop drugs to
act more effectively against the disease, perhaps by intervening in the chain
reaction involved in asthma attacks and aborting them before they begin.

    Asthma sufferers, about one in 20 adults and one in 10 children, can expect
to see results on the pharmacy shelves in about 15 years.

    In the case of asthma, discovering the defective gene should help scientists
develop new drugs. In other disorders such a discovery would lead to gene
therapy in which an attempt is made to manipulate the defective genetic process
itself.

    The first attempt in Britain to develop gene therapy for a specific
disorder, cystic fibrosis, got underway last month at St Mary's Hospital Medical
School, London.

    Yet the indisputable leaders in the field are the Americans who 18 months
ago successfully treated two young children suffering from ADA-deficiency, a
rare enzyme disorder that strips the body of the ability to fight infection.

    Their technique employed a virus as a piggyback agent to implant new genes
into the white blood cells - the treatment lasts as long as the lifetime of the
cells so needs frequent 'topping up'.

    In the next few weeks the first permanent gene therapy will be tried against
hypercholesterolemia - an inherited condition in which the body fails to rid
itself of a build-up of cholesterol that can lead to a heart attack and early
death.

    A defective gene prevents the liver from producing a protein that absorbs
harmful cholesterol, so University of Michigan doctors plan to replace it. A
small part of the liver will be removed in three patients, an enzyme added via a
harmless virus, and then the corrected liver cells will be injected into a vein
leading to the liver where it is hoped they will implant and grow normally.

    A huge international effort costing £2billion over the next 15 years is
dedicated to mapping the location of every human gene. About five per cent have
been pinpointed so far, providing valuable clues about the diseases they may
trigger.

    They include those responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, motonic
dystrophy (reported in the last fortnight) and some Alzheimer's cases.

    Despite the impressive rate of gene discoveries, scientists are only just
beginning to devise techniques to manipulate defective genes. The immensity of
the task makes it unlikely that gene therapy will be on offer routinely at your
local hospital for any condition before the year 2000. The National Asthma
Campaign, which partly funded the research, said finding the gene should help
some but not all asthma sufferers.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              467 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            March 10, 1992, Tuesday

SECTION: Pg. 21

LENGTH: 608 words

HEADLINE: CURE IN SIGHT FOR VICTIMS OF ASTHMA

BODY:


    BRITISH scientists are closing in on the gene responsible for asthma - one
of the commonest chronic diseases, it was revealed this week.

    They have narrowed the search to just 100 genes - each person has more than
50,000 - and believe one is responsible for asthma, eczema and hay fever.
(Other researchers claim there may be more.)

    Their painstaking work should lead to its identification in months, but
asthma sufferers still have to wait years before the discovery could lead to a
cure. Locating the gene can be compared to researchers starting off with a map
of London and discovering clues that lead them first to Knighstbridge, and then
into Harrods. The last, tantalisingly close stage is to track down the exact
department which is home to the gene.

    After that, the real work starts. Within two years, it is estimated,
scientists will be able to reproduce the defective gene. This is crucial to the
process of finding out how the gene actually triggers asthma.

    Once that process is understood, it will help researchers develop drugs to
act more effectively against the disease, perhaps by intervening in the chain
reaction involved in asthma attacks and aborting them before they begin.

    Asthma sufferers, about one in 20 adults and one in 10 children, can expect
to see results on the pharmacy shelves in about 15 years.

    In the case of asthma, discovering the defective gene should help scientists
develop new drugs. In other disorders such a discovery would lead to gene
therapy in which an attempt is made to manipulate the defective genetic process
itself.

    The first attempt in Britain to develop gene therapy for a specific
disorder, cystic fibrosis, got underway last month at St Mary's Hospital Medical
School, London.

    Yet the indisputable leaders in the field are the Americans who 18 months
ago successfully treated two young children suffering from ADA-deficiency, a
rare enzyme disorder that strips the body of the ability to fight infection.

    Their technique employed a virus as a piggyback agent to implant new genes
into the white blood cells - the treatment lasts as long as the lifetime of the
cells so needs frequent 'topping up'.

    In the next few weeks the first permanent gene therapy will be tried against
hypercholesterolemia - an inherited condition in which the body fails to rid
itself of a build-up of cholesterol that can lead to a heart attack and early
death.

    A defective gene prevents the liver from producing a protein that absorbs
harmful cholesterol, so University of Michigan doctors plan to replace it. A
small part of the liver will be removed in three patients, an enzyme added via a
harmless virus, and then the corrected liver cells will be injected into a vein
leading to the liver where it is hoped they will implant and grow normally.

    A huge international effort costing £2billion over the next 15 years is
dedicated to mapping the location of every human gene. About five per cent have
been pinpointed so far, providing valuable clues about the diseases they may
trigger.

    They include those responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, motonic
dystrophy (reported in the last fortnight) and some Alzheimer's cases.

    Despite the impressive rate of gene discoveries, scientists are only just
beginning to devise techniques to manipulate defective genes. The immensity of
the task makes it unlikely that gene therapy will be on offer routinely at your
local hospital for any condition before the year 2000. The National Asthma
Campaign, which partly funded the research, said finding the gene should help
some but not all asthma sufferers.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              470 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 7, 1992, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC WAR ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE first gene therapy programme in Britain was launched yesterday.

    It raises hopes of better treatment and the 'ultimate cure' of cystic
fibrosis, a disease affecting thousands of youngsters.

    The new research into the most commonly inherited of disorders is being
backed by a £1million bequest from a hotel magnate.

    It is the first gene therapy research programme to be announced since the
technique was given the go-ahead by a specially-convened government committee.

    Britain has more than 2million carriers of the defective gene that can lead
to their children being born with cystic fibrosis, causing chronic breathing
problems. About 6,000 victims in this country suffer from the disorder.

    Scientists at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London, headed by Professor
Bob Williamson, will be looking at ways in which the defective gene could be
replaced in sufferers.

    It has been thought that an inhaled method might be used to correct the
deficiency in the lungs. The team will be developing two new and radical
approaches for gene therapy to treat the disease which are complementary to
research recently announced in America and could prove safer.

    The project has been made possible by a £1million gift to the Cystic
Fibrosis Research Trust by trustees of the estate of the late Leopold Muller.
The founder of the De Vere Hotels Group died in 1988 leaving almost his entire
£15million fortune to charity.

    A drug used to prevent rejection in organ transplant surgery has had an
unexpected benefit for chronic asthma sufferers.

    The drug - Cyclosporin A - produces a 'marked improvement' in the sufferers,
many of whom have had attacks for more than 25 years, doctors say in The Lancet
medical journal.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993


                              471 of 517 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1992 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
                              Daily Mail (London)

                            February 7, 1992, Friday

SECTION: Pg. 2

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC WAR ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: Jenny Hope

BODY:


    THE first gene therapy programme in Britain was launched yesterday.

    It raises hopes of better treatment and the 'ultimate cure' of cystic
fibrosis, a disease affecting thousands of youngsters.

    The new research into the most commonly inherited of disorders is being
backed by a £1million bequest from a hotel magnate.

    It is the first gene therapy research programme to be announced since the
technique was given the go-ahead by a specially-convened government committee.

    Britain has more than 2million carriers of the defective gene that can lead
to their children being born with cystic fibrosis, causing chronic breathing
problems. About 6,000 victims in this country suffer from the disorder.

    Scientists at St Mary's Hospital Medical School, London, headed by Professor
Bob Williamson, will be looking at ways in which the defective gene could be
replaced in sufferers.

    It has been thought that an inhaled method might be used to correct the
deficiency in the lungs. The team will be developing two new and radical
approaches for gene therapy to treat the disease which are complementary to
research recently announced in America and could prove safer.

    The project has been made possible by a £1million gift to the Cystic
Fibrosis Research Trust by trustees of the estate of the late Leopold Muller.
The founder of the De Vere Hotels Group died in 1988 leaving almost his entire
£15million fortune to charity.

    A drug used to prevent rejection in organ transplant surgery has had an
unexpected benefit for chronic asthma sufferers.

    The drug - Cyclosporin A - produces a 'marked improvement' in the sufferers,
many of whom have had attacks for more than 25 years, doctors say in The Lancet
medical journal.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1993
