
                              13 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            October 26, 2010 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: G2: Television: Last night's TV: Enemies have hacked into MI5's
computers. Just as well Spooks had a spare bomb

BYLINE: Sam Wollaston

BODY:

   You may be interested to hear what happens when someone experiences
technological difficulties here at the Guardian. A frozen screen, lost file,
that kind of thing. So you call the IT department. And one of the nice people
will ask some questions in order to diagnose the problem, then they'll say
they're going to take control of the computer remotely from wherever they are
(the basement I imagine, like in The IT Crowd). It's quite weird, seeing your
cursor moving around the screen without you doing anything. Like some one's
taken over your mind.

   Not interesting? The same where you are? I only mention it because something
similar happens in this episode of Spooks (BBC1). But it's not the MI5 IT
department moving the cursor around Harry and the team's screens. Nor are they
searching for a three-quarters finished but totally unsaved television review.
This is a Chinese-Russian alliance of cyber-hackers and it's after classified
information: state secrets, information about troop movements, that kind of
thing. The enemy is intent on causing maximum damage.

   So, desperately trying to keep the MI5/my workplace parallel alive, it's as
if the IT departments of the Times and the Independent have successfully hacked
into our system and now control Guardian computers. They're undermining our
integrity by typing gibberish interspersed with rude words, then sending it off
to our printers. (What do you mean you've long thought that was already
happening? Cheeky.) And they've locked down the building so we can't get out to
tell the world what's going on. Look up at the second floor: that's me at the
window, holding up a piece of paper. "DON'T BELIEVE OUR LIES" it says.

   Here the two paths - ours and MI5's - diverge. Because what we don't have
lying around the office at Kings Place is an old bomb that can be recommissioned
and used to blast our way out (well, security editor Richard Norton-Taylor
probably does, but he's not in today, and his drawer's locked). The Spooks dudes
do though, and are able to escape their prison, then locate and capture the
enemy. And the west is saved from defeat in the cyber war.

   It wasn't going well up to that point. The Taliban had already hacked into
allied networks, figured out how to make US drones perform U-turns in mid-air
and attack the bases they'd just left (you'll soon be able to read about it on
WikiLeaks). This was due to discrepancies in the American and British operating
systems - they'd upgraded to Windows 7, we were still on 3.1. But if you can do
this from a cave in the Afghan mountains, imagine what a collaboration between
China and Russia could have achieved. The security of the free world was looking
seriously compromised. But in the end, even in these hi-tech times, what won the
day was a good dollop of old-fashioned British pluck. Hurrah!

   I don't do Spooks religiously any more. These days I just drop in from time
to time, usually to find that someone I used to like is no longer there, most
probably neutralised (bayonet protocol, data five, as Harry says when he's
authorising a kill). Plus it's increasingly unclear whose side Lucas is on. And
the whole thing is even more bonkers than it was before. It doesn't really
matter though; it's still bloody good fun, a buttock-clenching roller-coaster.
The music's so good too. If you had it for your ringtone would your life
immediately become more exciting and glamorous? Only one way to find out.

   Horizon: Miracle Cure? A Decade of the Human Genome (BBC2) has a different,
deeper and more real kind of urgency to it. The documentary assesses how much
progress has been made in finding treatments for genetic diseases since the
decoding of the human genome 10 years ago. But it's given a whole lot of extra
personal potency because the three people doing the investigating have genetic
disorders themselves. So it's not just a case of: "Tell us about this
interesting research you're doing." It's more along the lines of: "Any idea when
you may have figured out how to diffuse this ticking time bomb I've got round my
neck?" Especially for Sophie, who has cystic fibrosis and whose lungs will pack
up in the not-too-distant future. She does a brilliant job, finding out about
mutated genes and how it will be possible to insert healthy genes into cells,
how gene therapy is already being used to treat other condictions. And all the
time inside she must be shouting - gasping - get a bloody move on.

   Captions:

   Richard Armitage as Lucas North and Fiona Glascott as Daniella Ortiz in
Spooks

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2010


                              35 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              May 28, 2010 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 473 words

HEADLINE: Bone marrow link to psychiatric illness: Scientists say transplant
cured disorder in mice Study expected to prompt research into therapies

BYLINE: Ian Sample Science correspondent

BODY:

   Scientists in the US claim to have used a bone marrow transplant to cure
mental illness in a study that could have profound implications for patients
with psychiatric problems.

   Bone marrow transplants are routinely used to treat leukaemia and other
life-threatening diseases, but have never been used to treat mental health
problems.

   The team, led by a Nobel prizewinning geneticist, found that experimental
transplants in mice cured them of a disorder in which they groom themselves so
excessively they develop bare patches of skin. The condition is similar to a
disorder in which people pull their hair out, called trichotillomania.

   "A lot of people are going to find it amazing," said Mario Capecchi, at the
University of Utah, who won the Nobel prize for medicine in 2007 for his work on
mouse genetics. "That's the surprise: bone marrow can correct a behavioural
defect."

   The team said its work was the first to reveal a direct link between a
psychiatric disorder and faulty immune cells, which grow in bone marrow before
moving to the brain to protect nerve cells from damage.

   Capecchi said the condition the animals develop was comparable to
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Other illnesses including depression,
schizophrenia and autism might also be linked to problems with the immune
system, he added.

   The cost and health risks associated with bone marrow transplants are such
that they would never be used to treat mental health problems in people, but the
findings will inspire research into immune-based therapies for psychiatric
disorders, according to scientists.

   In the study Capecchi's team bred mice that carried a mutation in a gene
called Hoxb8, which causes faulty immune cells to grow in the bone marrow. Mice
that carry the defective gene groom themselves too often and for too long.

   In the US journal Cell, the team describe how transplanting healthy bone
marrow into the mice cured them. In later operations the scientists induced the
disorder in healthy mice. "We're showing there is a direct relationship between
a psychiatric disorder and the immune system, specifically cells named microglia
that are derived from bone marrow," he said.

   There are two kinds of microglial cells in the brain. Around 60% form in the
brain, while 40% originate in bone marrow.

   "This is immensely important and incredibly exciting," said Douglas
Blackwood, professor of psychiatric genetics at Edinburgh University.

   But Paul Salkovskis, clinical director of the Maudsley Hospital Centre for
Anxiety Disorders and Trauma in south London, said: "Excessive grooming in mice
is not a good model for obsessive-compulsive disorder in humans, a condition
that can be treated effectively with cognitive behavioural therapy."

   Captions:

   40%

   The percentage of microglial cells that originate in bone marrow.

   Sixty per cent of the cells are formed in the brain

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2010


                              36 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2010 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             May 20, 2010 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN OBITUARIES PAGES; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Sir Cecil Clothier: Controversial first chairman of the
Police Complaints Authority

BYLINE: James Morton

BODY:

   The lawyer Sir Cecil Clothier, who has died aged 90, promoted the cause of
justice not only through the courts, but also as an ombudsman and leader of
public bodies and inquiries. Such posts can be beds of nails in themselves, as
he found when, in 1985, he became the first chairman of the Police Complaints
Authority. He was under constant attack, with votes of no confidence from the
police as well as complaints from other quarters that he was not taking
sufficient action against miscreant officers. He bore the criticisms with
equanimity - as he did throughout his time in public life. A fellow barrister
described him as a man of transparent integrity.

   "Spike" Clothier was born in Liverpool. A devout Catholic, he was educated at
Stonyhurst college, Lancashire, and then Lincoln College, Oxford, from which he
graduated as a bachelor of civil law. During the second world war, he served in
the 51st (Highland) Infantry Division and then joined the army staff in
Washington.

   In 1950 he was called to the bar and joined the Inner Temple. In 1965 he
became the recorder of Blackpool. That year, too, he took silk, and, when the
courts were reorganised, Clothier became a crown court judge, serving until
1978. He was a judge of appeal in the Isle of Man for six years from 1972.

   While on the bench, he was a legal assessor to the General Medical and Dental
councils and a member of the Royal Commission on National Health (1976-78). At
the bar, he advised ICI in its long, and largely successful, battle with those
who had suffered the side effects of the heart drug Eraldin. The following year,
1979, he became parliamentary commissioner for administration and health service
commissioner for England, Wales and Scotland, a post he held until 1984.

   In this ombudsman post, Clothier reported on the wrongful conviction of John
Preece, who had served nine years of a life sentence for murder. The fact that
the dead woman and Preece shared the same blood group had not been brought to
the notice of the court, and Clothier did not believe that it was the
responsibility of prisoners to bring forward their complaints. Preece was
released in 1981.

   That year Clothier upheld a complaint by a prisoner after prison officers had
destroyed a model ship he was making. They thought he had stolen the wood. He
had not, and was given an apology and compensation of £5.58 - while the
investigation would have cost around £10,000. Of his time as commissioner,
Clothier said: "(It is) so worthwhile to give the citizen a leg up against what
must seem to him to be the impenetrable vastness of Whitehall."

   However, he was criticised for reducing his quarterly published volume of
reports to a selection, arguing that they had become long and bulky and no one
was reading them.

   His four-year tenure as the chairman of the Police Complaints Authority was
marked by allegations that he favoured the police, an example of which was said
to be his failure in 1987 to recommend a single disciplinary charge against
1,363 officers who had, as he admitted, used excessive force to break up a hippy
peace convoy near Stonehenge.

   He also incurred the wrath of civil libertarians through his failure to
condemn the police over a student demonstration in Manchester in 1985, which led
to no fewer than 100 complaints about their tactics. He excused officers from
naming colleagues who might have stepped beyond the acceptable line of duty:
"Failure to denounce one's friends and relations has never been a subject for
discipline in any civilised body of people." When, in 1989, he received a
unanimous vote of no confidence by the Police Federation rank-and-file officers,
he reflected: "I would be a lot more worried if they passed a vote of
confidence. It might suggest that some of the accusations that we work hand in
glove with the police are true."

   He then became a member of the Senior Salaries Review Body (1989-95), and was
vice-president of the Interception of Communications Tribunal (1986-96) and
chairman of the Committee on Ethics of Gene Therapy (1990-92).

   At the age of 74, he was appointed to head the inquiry into how the nurse
Beverley Allitt, later diagnosed as an untreatable psychopath, could have been
able to kill four children and attack nine others at Grantham and Kesteven
hospital, Lincolnshire. He defended his decision to hold the inquiry in private,
saying that people told the most monstrous lies under oath: "If you really want
to know what people are thinking in an extremely delicate matter, you need to
see them in circumstances when they do not feel threatened." When he reported in
1994, some were unhappy that his criticisms had no national implications.

   Clothier married Mary Bush in 1943, and they had two daughters and a son.
Mary died in 1984. In 1992 he married Diana Stevenson. She survives him, as do
his children.

   James Morton

   Cecil "Spike" Montacute Clothier, lawyer and public servant, born 28 August
1919; died 8 May 2010

   Captions:

   Clothier believed that people told the most monstrous lies under oath

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2010


                              56 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                          September 17, 2009 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 230 words

HEADLINE: National: Colour blindness breakthrough

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Two squirrel monkeys that were colour-blind from birth have had their vision
restored after receiving gene therapy.

   The experiment paves the way for the treatment of a range of genetic eye
disorders in humans, including some that cause full or partial blindness in
millions of people worldwide.

   Sam and Dalton, two male squirrel monkeys, were able to see the world in full
colour five months after being treated, doctors said. The animals were born
without an ability to see the colour red.

   The therapy targets specialised "cone" cells in the eye which allow animals -
including humans - to see in colour.

   Genetic damage to cone cells, which causes colour blindness, is the most
common type of gene disorder seen in humans. The condition mostly affects men,
around 5% of whom are unable to distinguish between red and green hues.

   "Although colour blindness is only moderately life-altering, we've shown we
can cure a cone disease in a primate, and that it can be done very safely," said
William Hauswirth at the University of Florida. "That's extremely encouraging
for the development of therapies for human cone (diseases) that are really
blinding."

   Researchers treated the monkeys by injecting them with a virus that had been
modified to carry a corrective gene.

   The researchers have begun clinical trials to test the gene therapy as a
treatment for a rare form of childhood blindness.

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2009


                              64 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             August 4, 2009 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: G2: Health: Of mice and medicine Some recent advances

BYLINE: Alok Jha

BODY:

   Breast cancer

   A commonly used blood pressure drug seems to reverse the effect of a gene
that has been implicated in up to a fifth of all breast cancers. Recent
experiments on mice found that tumours where the AGTR1 gene was overactive
shrank by nearly

   a third when a drug called Losartan was administered.

   Stem cells

   Experiments on mice have been critical in finding new sources (ie
alternatives to embryos) of stem cells, both for experiments and medical
applications. When scientists discovered a new type of stem cell that can be
made by re-programming skin cells, they needed to know whether it behaved like
genuine stem cells. Experiments on mice have been used to demonstrate that they
do - most recently these new stem cells were used to successfully clone mice.

   Blindness

   A drug made from mouse anti- bodies has been found to slow the progression of
a form of age-related macular degeneration, a major cause of blindness. In the
disease, excessive amounts of blood vessels grow at the back

   of the eye, which then leak and cause damage to healthy

   tissue. The drug Lucentis inhibits a chemical messenger

   required for the eye to grow new blood vessels.

   Gene therapy

   Mice have been used to develop the next generation of medical treatments.
Using hollow nanometre-sized particles

   of silver to deliver DNA into cells of mice, scientists have

   managed to reverse some of the symptoms of haemophilia. Gene therapy such as
this can compensate for the effects of diseases caused by mutated DNA by
delivering a "correct" copy of the genetic material to a site in the body.

   Autism

   In June, scientists found further evidence that more than one gene is
involved in people with genetic-based autism. They found two genes in mice that,
when mutated, caused autism-like symptoms. The genes interacted to affect brain
growth and sociability. AJ

   Sources: understandinganimalresearch.org.uk pro-test.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2009


                              73 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2009 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             May 23, 2009 Saturday

SECTION: GUARDIAN REVIEW PAGES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: Saturday Review: Et cetera: Steven Poole's non-fiction choice: When
Science Goes Wrong, by Simon LeVay (Monday Books, £7.99)

BYLINE: Steven Poole

BODY:

   A neurosurgeon injects foetal tissue into the cranium of a man suffering from
Parkinson's disease: after the man dies, the autopsy finds hair and teeth in his
brain. A vulcanologist leads his team to observe a grumbling volcano which blows
up in their faces; anthrax escapes from a Soviet bioweapons facility; gene
therapists ignore protocol and kill a volunteer subject; a Texas forensic lab
serially fingers the wrong people; a programmer's oversight leads to the loss of
the Mars Climate Orbiter.

   The book might more accurately have been called When Scientists Go Wrong ,
since much of the pleasure in each of LeVay's expertly narrated chapters (the
author is himself a neuroscientist) is in watching science go right, as
subsequent empirical investigations throw light on what went wrong in the first
place. LeVay interviews as many of the surviving protagonists as possible: some
are regretful, others defiant, and many curiously misremember key facts (he has
a beautifully understated way of pointing this out). The soberly argued upshot
is that disasters will inevitably happen: "There may be an irreducible core of
risk in science that cannot be eliminated without eliminat ing science's
rewards." Throughout, he displays a decided verve for both storytelling and
hardcore explication. I was particularly pleased to learn that a reactor
meltdown is referred to in the biz by the euphemism "nuclear excursion".

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2009


                              88 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           November 22, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: GUARDIAN REVIEW PAGES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: Saturday Review: NON FICTION: Bred in the genes: Hilary Rose finds
hope and caution in a thoughtful survey of DNA-based medicine: Blood Matters: A
Journey Along the Genetic Frontier by Masha Gessen 321pp, Granta, £18.99

BYLINE: Hilary Rose

BODY:

   Masha Gessen has chosen a shrewd title for her book. It simultaneously
invokes the old language of blood, family, kinship and biological connectedness,
and the new language of genetics in which the formidable power of DNA sequencing
intensifies our understanding of what it means to face a serious and
life-threatening risk. Blood, in the old sense of being the daughter of a mother
who died at 41 from breast cancer, runs alongside the awareness of a
21st-century woman who knows that a genetic test might tell whether her own life
is at risk. Does she want to know? And are there effective therapies? Can her
embodied identity as a woman cope with radical mastectomy?

   Her international journey through genetics laboratories is one of
questioning, double checking the predictive power of the genetic diagnosis
advice, trying to weigh up the choices of doing nothing while keeping her body
under close surveillance, or having the double mastectomy and/or the removal of
her womb. There is a chilling moment when the one adviser who does agree that
surveillance can be effective expresses strong doubts whether any insurance
company would cover treatment. (Hang on to the NHS, dear readers; we may still
have to fight postcode care, but it is not our health insurance company that
dictates the medical treatment we must have.)

   In such tough situations we all have to find how to make such a decision.
What works for Gessen - but, I would guess, not for many - is an econometric
model of risk and value of life constructed by an economist with her input. For
Gessen this confirms the advice of the clinicians, and she opts for a double
mastectomy.

   One regret is that she has not explored the increasingly rich social science
literature in the same way that she covers genetics; this would have enabled her
to compare her experience and her decision-making with those of many others. And
in the process she would have enriched her book.

   Thus in some ways the book belongs to the genre of cancer narratives of those
who have fought and survived, and those who have fought and lost. While these
are often intensely moving to read, what makes Gessen's book different is that
she has used her considerable research skills as a journalist to set out what
human genetics can and can't do. Early on she discusses the increased
probability of risk through her own ethnic identity as an Ashkenazi Jew. She
reports the horror of friends at the DNA re-racialisation of the Jews. She
visits Israel, where she finds that the connections between genealogy, genetics
and Jewish identity inspire little anxiety. Then, just when she seems to be
embracing this all too uncritically, she pauses and reflects. It is precisely
this quality of thoughtful reflection that distinguishes the book. Only in her
extended account of the country doctor who saves Mormon children whose
inbreeding has led to crippling or lethal genetic disorders does her gentle
scepticism weaken. It is not that she doesn't mention the setbacks and the
partial recoveries, but the hope is strong - and who with any feeling for such
children and their families wouldn't hope?

   It's true that over-egging the potential health benefits of genetic research
has been a constant problem, from the launch of the human genome project and the
unqualified claims of what gene therapy could do: solve cancer, heart disease,
even homelessness. (Some may find this last suggestion rather hard to believe;
it was not made by a tabloid newspaper, but by an editorial in the leading US
journal Science.)

   The arrival of stem cell research, with its promise to innovate regenerative
medicine, has led to a new wave of hope. But after the relatively modest
successes of gene therapy derived from the human genome project, it would
probably be wisest to blend this hope with a strong dose of caution. Gessen's
unsparing account of people with Huntington's disease demonstrates the gulf that
lies between DNA disease diagnostics and the delivery of any effective gene, or
any other, therapy. It is now 20 years since the much-celebrated isolation of
the sequences through which Huntington's is transmitted, but still there is no
effective therapy in sight.

   However, Gessen ends on a note of hope, telling how a friend with two
children with a lethal genetic disorder learned that a designer baby/saviour
sibling might save them. Neither she nor the mother felt any ethical qualms.
While I find myself profoundly troubled by the ethics of using a baby as means,
not as an end, in all honesty I don't actually know what I would have done if I
had been faced with such a situation. These are new ethical problems, and the
people who confront them are, as the anthropologist Rayna Rapp observes, "moral
pioneers".

   Hilary Rose is editor, with Steven Rose, of Alas Poor Darwin: Arguments
Against Evolutionary Psychology (Vintage). To order Blood Matters for £17.99
with free UK p&p call Guardian book service on 0870 836 0875 or go to
guardian.co.uk/bookshop

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2008


                              90 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                          November 19, 2008 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN LEADER PAGES; Pg. 39

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Reply: Letters and Emails: Clash of rights over medical research and
privacy

BYLINE: Dan O'Connor

BODY:

   * The proposal to permit researchers access to NHS patients' medical records
should be strongly rejected by the government. The grotesque violation of
patient privacy alone would be enough to give terminal pause, but there are
further reasons for concern.

   What would it feel like to be contacted by, say, cancer researchers who think
that you would be a useful subject for their clinical trial? What distress might
be caused? Will the researchers be obliged to explain why you are a useful
subject? And if so, will they be obliged to advise you to seek further medical
advice? What steps will be taken by large research labs who have no personal
connections with the patients they identify as useful to ensure that those
patients do not confuse research with treatment for a condition they may or may
not have?

   Furthermore, questions are raised about the nature of the information being
made available to researchers. If, for example, it is genetic information that
is being used to identify useful subjects, the issue becomes family privacy:
what obligations are then placed upon the patient? Do you have to tell your
sister that you've been contacted to be part of a gene therapy trial? A final
issue of justice must be addressed too: will private patients be exempt from
this proposal? Are your records somehow more confidential if you pay for
treatment?

   Strong patient-physician confidentiality is the cornerstone of the medical
relationship and this proposal would undermine trust in that confidentiality.

   Dan O'Connor

   Postdoctoral fellow in bioethics and public policy, Johns Hopkins University

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2008


                             111 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            August 7, 2008 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: NHS hospitals to forge £2bn research link-up with university

BYLINE: John Carvel, Social affairs editor

BODY:

   Four NHS hospitals and a university last night disclosed plans for a £2bn
business partnership to create the largest biomedical research organisation in
Europe.

   The venture - to be called UCL Partners - seeks to establish London as an
intellectual powerhouse for the invention of new drugs and treatments. It is
being set up by University College London, its sister hospital UCLH, Great
Ormond Street hospital for children, Moorfields eye hospital and the Royal Free
Hampstead.

   The five organisations have a com bined turnover of about £2bn. They treat
more than 1.5 million patients a year and employ more than 3,500 scientists,
senior researchers and consultants. In a statement last night, the partners
said: "By pooling resources and expertise we will be able to produce more
world-class research in key areas, including cancer and heart disease, and
deliver the benefits more rapidly to patients."

   The move followed a recommendation from Lord Darzi, the health minister, for
the creation of academic health science centres to speed the transmission of new
ideas from the laboratory bench to the hospital ward.

   There was widespread concern in the medical establishment that Britain would
not be able to compete in a global research market without stronger
collaboration between academic institutions and healthcare providers. The
competition includes long-established partnerships between universities and
hospitals in the US, which demonstrated how patients' health could benefit if
doctors had access to the latest scientific innovations. The 16 hospitals that
came at the top of medical league tables in 2005 were all academic health
science partnerships.

   The UCL partnership will become operational next month, focusing initially on
10 areas of research in which London can aspire to world-class expertise. The
priori ties will be the nervous system, children's health, heart disease,
transplantation, immunology, ophthalmology, deafness and hearing impairment,
dental and oral disease, cancer and women's health.

   Malcolm Grant, president and provost of UCL, said: "We have chosen to
concentrate on these areas because in all of them we are already leading the way
in the UK or Europe. Our goal is to build on that reputation and become
genuinely world-class in as many of those areas as possible." Moorfields and
UCL's institute for ophthalmology are developing a revolutionary gene therapy
treatment for inherited blindness.

   Neil Goodwin, the partnership's project director, said: "This is about London
positioning itself internationally. Other research centres are emerging in
Dubai, Singapore and Shanghai. They have superlative research facilities and
large catchment areas of patients, which is attractive to pharmaceutical
companies conducting clinical trials."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2008


                             119 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: FTSE gets a leg-up from merger mania

BYLINE: Nick Fletcher

BODY:

   A bout of merger mania helped lift the market yesterday despite an uncertain
reaction on Wall Street to the bailout of the US mortgage lenders Freddie Mac
and Fannie Mae.

   Alliance & Leicester agreed to be taken over, while the miner Kazakhmys and
the oil group Imperial Energy received bid approaches. Shares in ITV continued
their recent volatility, jumping 12% on takeover speculation.

   The broadcaster, which fell to a record low on Friday on fears of an
advertising slump, recovered 4.6p to 42.9p to top the FTSE 100 leaderboard.
Investors were initially enthused by comments from John de Mol, boss of the
Netherlands-based programme producer Endemol, suggesting he might be interested
in bidding for ITV. Then came talk that several parties had approached ITV with
a view to buying BSkyB's 17.9% stake, which it has been told to reduce by UK
regulators. Possible predators are said to include Five-owner RTL, Italy's
Mediaset and entertainment group Saban. ITV's shares were also lifted by Morgan
Stanley raising its recommendation from underweight to equal weight

   But not everyone was positive. ITV's own broker, UBS, repeated its sell
advice and 28p target. On the bid talk, UBS said: "In our view, Endemol would
not be able to finance a bid and Mediaset has dismissed suggestions it is
interested in ITV. The biggest problem for Sky in trying to find a potential
buyer for its stake is the lack of financial visibility given ITV's
exceptionally high operational gearing and the risk of significant advertising
downgrades."

   Kaupthing was also dismissive: "We question whether there is anybody really
brave enough to buy ITV at this point given the outlook and valuation. Rumours
of Endemol interest are hard to take seriously," it said.

   Back with the real bids, Alliance & Leicester jumped 115.75p to 335p as
Spain's Banco Santander agreed to buy the business for £1.3bn. The news gave a
lift to the banking sector, with Lloyds TSB - once tipped as a possible buyer of
A&L - adding 6.75p to 282.25p, and HBOS rising 5.5p to 272p ahead of the closing
of its cash call this week.

   Kazakhmys closed 88p higher at £15.15 as it confirmed merger talks, thought
to be with Russia's Metalloinvest, while Imperial Energy jumped 138p to 910p
after revealing an approach. Sources said this had come from India's ONGC.

   Back with the speculative, the betting group Ladbrokes added 9.75p to 238.75p
on talk of stakebuilding, with the Irish entrepreneurs and racehorse owners JP
McManus, John Magnier and Dermot Desmond the names mentioned.

   The sports retailer JJB leapt 5p to 81p as traders hoped for news of a
possible management buyout at about 150p.

   Overall, leading shares started on a bright note, with the FTSE 100 up more
than 110 points as investors reacted positively to the US government's support
for the two struggling mortgage lenders and the agreement by the Budweiser
brewer Anheuser Busch to accept InBev's £26bn bid. But as credit crunch and
housing worries resurfaced, shares in Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae fell, dragging
down Wall Street. By the close, the FTSE 100 was up only 38.8 points at 5300.4.
The FTSE 250 fared better, 106.6 points higher at 8445.7.

   The information group Thomson Reuters was the biggest faller in the FTSE 100,
down 40p to £12.45 as UBS cut its recommendation from neutral to sell. The bank
said the ending of Thomson's recent $500m (£250m) buyback removed support for
shares.

   Reed Elsevie r lost 7p to 534.5p and Pearson 5.5p to 582.5p as Deutsche Bank
issued negative notes on the publishers. It cut Pearson from hold to sell,
saying it believed earnings would stagnate in 2009 and 2010 due to a weak
outlook for its education business. As for Reed, the bank moved from buy to
hold. It believes proceeds from the planned sale of Reed's magazine business
could disappoint, as could the performance of its recent US acquisition
ChoicePoint. "A 'UK company buys US company which then misses numbers' story is
never well received," said Deutsche.

   But the packaging group Rexam rose 23p to 365.5p in response to an upgrade
from neutral to buy by Goldman Sachs. The bank said: "With the share price
having fallen 13% in the last month, we believe this is a good entry point."

   Lower down the market, Tanfield , the struggling access platform and electric
car group, fell 2p to 10p as it revealed Goldman Sachs had sold its 7.83% stake.

   The gene therapy group Oxford BioMedica lost a further 13% to 6.5p in the
wake of last week's disappointing clinical trial news on its cancer treatment
TroVax. But diagnostic testing specialist Immunodiagnostic Systems added 2p to
248.5p after it reported a 73% increase in full-year profits to £3.79m, and
Proximagen Neuroscience rose 9p to 107.5p on news of a licensing agreement with
US group Upsher-Smith Laboratories.

   The agreement covers Proximagen's treatment for Parkinson's disease and
involves the company receiving upfront and milestone payments of £117m, plus
royalties on global sales.

   nick.fletcher@guardian.co.uk

   Market Forces Live at:

   blogs.guardian.co.uk/markets >=

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                             120 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: FTSE gets a leg-up from merger mania

BYLINE: Nick Fletcher

BODY:

   A bout of merger mania helped lift the market yesterday despite an uncertain
reaction on Wall Street to the bailout of the US mortgage lenders Freddie Mac
and Fannie Mae.

   Alliance & Leicester agreed to be taken over, while the miner Kazakhmys and
the oil group Imperial Energy received bid approaches. Shares in ITV continued
their recent volatility, jumping 12% on takeover speculation.

   The broadcaster, which fell to a record low on Friday on fears of an
advertising slump, recovered 4.6p to 42.9p to top the FTSE 100 leaderboard.
Investors were initially enthused by comments from John de Mol, boss of the
Netherlands-based programme producer Endemol, suggesting he might be interested
in bidding for ITV. Then came talk that several parties had approached ITV with
a view to buying BSkyB's 17.9% stake, which it has been told to reduce by UK
regulators. Possible predators are said to include Five-owner RTL, Italy's
Mediaset and entertainment group Saban. ITV's shares were also lifted by Morgan
Stanley raising its recommendation from underweight to equal weight

   But not everyone was positive. ITV's own broker, UBS, repeated its sell
advice and 28p target. On the bid talk, UBS said: "In our view, Endemol would
not be able to finance a bid and Mediaset has dismissed suggestions it is
interested in ITV. The biggest problem for Sky in trying to find a potential
buyer for its stake is the lack of financial visibility given ITV's
exceptionally high operational gearing and the risk of significant advertising
downgrades."

   Kaupthing was also dismissive: "We question whether there is anybody really
brave enough to buy ITV at this point given the outlook and valuation. Rumours
of Endemol interest are hard to take seriously," it said.

   Back with the real bids, Alliance & Leicester jumped 115.75p to 335p as
Spain's Banco Santander agreed to buy the business for £1.3bn. The news gave a
lift to the banking sector, with Lloyds TSB - once tipped as a possible buyer of
A&L - adding 6.75p to 282.25p, and HBOS rising 5.5p to 272p ahead of the closing
of its cash call this week.

   Kazakhmys closed 88p higher at £15.15 as it confirmed merger talks, thought
to be with Russia's Metalloinvest, while Imperial Energy jumped 138p to 910p
after revealing an approach. Sources said this had come from India's ONGC.

   Back with the speculative, the betting group Ladbrokes added 9.75p to 238.75p
on talk of stakebuilding, with the Irish entrepreneurs and racehorse owners JP
McManus, John Magnier and Dermot Desmond the names mentioned.

   The sports retailer JJB leapt 5p to 81p as traders hoped for news of a
possible management buyout at about 150p.

   Overall, leading shares started on a bright note, with the FTSE 100 up more
than 110 points as investors reacted positively to the US government's support
for the two struggling mortgage lenders and the agreement by the Budweiser
brewer Anheuser Busch to accept InBev's £26bn bid. But as credit crunch and
housing worries resurfaced, shares in Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae fell, dragging
down Wall Street. By the close, the FTSE 100 was up only 38.8 points at 5300.4.
The FTSE 250 fared better, 106.6 points higher at 8445.7.

   The information group Thomson Reuters was the biggest faller in the FTSE 100,
down 40p to £12.45 as UBS cut its recommendation from neutral to sell. The bank
said the ending of Thomson's recent $500m (£250m) buyback removed support for
shares.

   Reed Elsevie r lost 7p to 534.5p and Pearson 5.5p to 582.5p as Deutsche Bank
issued negative notes on the publishers. It cut Pearson from hold to sell,
saying it believed earnings would stagnate in 2009 and 2010 due to a weak
outlook for its education business. As for Reed, the bank moved from buy to
hold. It believes proceeds from the planned sale of Reed's magazine business
could disappoint, as could the performance of its recent US acquisition
ChoicePoint. "A 'UK company buys US company which then misses numbers' story is
never well received," said Deutsche.

   But the packaging group Rexam rose 23p to 365.5p in response to an upgrade
from neutral to buy by Goldman Sachs. The bank said: "With the share price
having fallen 13% in the last month, we believe this is a good entry point."

   Lower down the market, Tanfield , the struggling access platform and electric
car group, fell 2p to 10p as it revealed Goldman Sachs had sold its 7.83% stake.

   The gene therapy group Oxford BioMedica lost a further 13% to 6.5p in the
wake of last week's disappointing clinical trial news on its cancer treatment
TroVax. But diagnostic testing specialist Immunodiagnostic Systems added 2p to
248.5p after it reported a 73% increase in full-year profits to £3.79m, and
Proximagen Neuroscience rose 9p to 107.5p on news of a licensing agreement with
US group Upsher-Smith Laboratories.

   The agreement covers Proximagen's treatment for Parkinson's disease and
involves the company receiving upfront and milestone payments of £117m, plus
royalties on global sales.

   nick.fletcher@guardian.co.uk

   Market Forces Live at:

   blogs.guardian.co.uk/markets >=

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2008


                             131 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 800 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Goldman gives Shire injection of optimism

BYLINE: Nick Fletcher

BODY:

   The pharmaceuticals group Shire has fallen sharply this year on concerns
about the sales prospects of one of its key drugs, Vyvanse.

   But yesterday Goldman Sachs analysts said fears about the drug - a treatment
for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder - have been overdone and pointed
out that the market seemed to be overlooking Shire's other prospects.

   "Prescription share gains for Vyvanse have fallen short of consensus
expectations, leading to 23% sector underperformance," Goldman said. "However,
we expect market share gains to accelerate in the second half of 2008 following
the launch of Vyvanse in adults. Moreover, the focus on Vyvanse has obscured the
sizeable and growing contribution of HGT (human genetic therapies) which will
contribute more than 40% of the group's estimated earnings in 2012."

   Goldman has upgraded from neutral to buy with a £10.15 price target. Deutsche
Bank and Charles Stanley also made positive noises about the company, and
Shire's shares ended the day 45.5p higher at 842.5p.

   With the crude price continuing to rise despite Gordon Brown's meeting with
Saudi Arabia and the subsequent promise to pump more oil, energy companies were
also heading higher. BP closed 10.25p up at 574.75p, Royal Dutch Shell B shares
climbed 36p to £19.46 and Tullow Oil rose 32p to 985p. The Saudi move was
outweighed by concerns about growing tension between Israel and Iran, and
attacks on oil facilities

   in Nigeria.

   All this helped the FTSE 100 climb 46.4 points to 5667.2, despite another
dismal day for banks, builders and property groups.

   HBOS fell below its 275p rights issue price, closing 12p lower at 270.25p
after negative notes from Cazenove and UBS. Under the FSA's new rules, short
sellers had to disclose their positions in companies undergoing cash calls. In
the case of HBOS, short positions of about 4% were revealed, with the biggest
position taken by the US hedge fund Harbinger Capital. It was a different story
with Bradford & Bingley , where nearly 15% was shorted. B&B shares fell 2.5p to
66p, but after the market closed came news that financier Clive Cowdrey and City
investors had made a proposal to take control of the beleaguered bank.

   A downbeat note from analysts at HSBC pushed down property shares. "We are
projecting over 30% share price falls for Liberty International and Hammerson ,"
the bank said. "We downgrade Land Securities to underweight from neutral on a
target price reduced to £11.95 from £15."

   Land Securities dropped 64p to £12.75, Liberty 23.5p to 881p and Hammerson
13.5p to 902.5p. Others in the sector were also under pressure, with Quintain
Estates 22.75p lower at 227.25p.

   Housebuilders lost more ground after yesterday's official house price figures
showed a 13% slump in sales in May. Taylor Wimpey was down 5p at 64.75p, Barratt
Developments dropped 4p to 83.75p, while Persimmon fell 15.75p to 355p.
Persimmon has just lost its place in the FTSE 100, but one of yesterday's new
arrivals, the technology and engineering firm Invensys , got off to a good
start, up 17p to 298.25p and becoming the top riser in the leading index.

   The sugar group Tate & Lyle has also been relegated to the FTSE 250 but
yesterday its shares rose 18.25p to 392.5p on news that its US rival Corn
Products International had been bought for $4.8bn (£2.4bn). Analysts said the
news highlighted Tate's value as a corn-processing business.

   Still with the mid-caps, Aggreko , which provides emergency power supplies,
jumped 64.5p to 709p after it issued a strong trading update. Investec moved
from hold to buy and set a 780p target price.

   But the retailer Debenhams , which fell 9% on Friday, lost another 1.75p to
42.25p. Analysts are concerned about its current trading, its £1bn of debt and
reports that it is extending payment terms with its suppliers to 96 days.

   Lower down the market, the broking group Blue Oar Securities lost 2p to 11.5p
after forecasting that it would make a £1.1m loss in the first half after a poor
performance from its corporate finance business.

   Coffeeheaven , which operates coffee bars in eastern Europe, dipped 1.75p to
41.25p despite continuing takeover speculation. Whitbread , up 5p to £12.04, has
been tipped as a possible bidder, and yesterday traders were suggesting other
predators may also be circling. Panmure Gordon recently put a 67p-a-share
valuation on the business.

   Traders heard talk that Mike Norris, chief executive of Micap, was spotted
recently with four corporate advisers from KBC Peel Hunt boarding a flight to
France. In April, Micap, flat yesterday at 0.675p, announced a restructuring to
focus on the food ingredients market. Much was made at the time of the company's
disposal plans and now there are whispers of potential deals.

   nick.fletcher@guardian.co.uk

   Market Forces Live at:

   blogs.guardian.co.uk/markets >=

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2008


                             137 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             April 29, 2008 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN MAGAZINE SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: Science Course: Humans: A breath of fresh air: The human lung's
intricate, tree-like design enables oxygen fro the atmosphere to enter the
bloodstream, allowing us to breathe.

BYLINE: Laura Spinney

BODY:

   >=Philip Skeates, whose story was told in this paper back in February, was a
man at the mercy of his airways. He suffered from a condition called sleep
apnoea, which meant that he would periodically stop breathing during the night,
causing him to wake up without properly regaining consciousness, and leaving him
exhausted and grumpy in the daytime. When doctors finally diagnosed the
condition, he was only sleeping on average for 14 minutes a night.

   Until the 1980s, doctors lacked the tools for investigating the quality of
someone's sleep without disturbing that sleep, and sleep apnoea generally went
undiagnosed, to the extent that Martyn Partridge, professor of respiratory
medicine at Imperial College London, describes better understanding of the
condition as the "most significant change in my professional career".

   Sleep apnoea is thought to affect around 4% of the population - mainly men -
and it usually goes hand-in-hand with snoring (though many more people snore
than have sleep apnoea). It happens when a person's upper airway is obstructed -
perhaps because they have a large tongue or tonsils, or because they are obese.
When they sleep, that airway narrowing is exacerbated by a loss of muscle tone.

   Doctors diagnose sleep apnoea based on an investigation of the patient's
sleep, which involves monitoring, among other things, their heart rate, muscle
tone and the airflow through their nose and mouth - sometimes in their own home,
sometimes in a sleep laboratory. "The treatment is to put them on a CPAP
(continuous positive airway pressure) machine," says Partridge. "It's like a
little reverse hoover. It blows air under a small positive pressure that
splints, or keeps open, the upper airways."

   The principle function of the human lung is to transport oxygen from the
atmosphere into the bloodstream, and to expel carbon dioxide in the opposite
direction. It does so by means of an intricate, tree-like design that maximises
the surface area of the airways available for gas exchange. While it's long been
known that the lungs provide an efficient means of getting substances into the
bloodstream, scientists have only recently exploited that knowledge to deliver
drugs for the treatment of diseases other than respiratory diseases.

   Lung function

   Oliver Jensen of Nottingham University works on computer-simulated models of
lung function - from airflow through the smallest airways or bronchioles, to the
traffic of molecules across airway walls. Such models are beginning to be used
by pharmaceutical companies, he says, to refine the delivery of drugs by
inhalation and ensure that patients consistently receive the right dose. "The
inhaler has to be very efficient," says Jensen. "You don't want all the drug to
end up at the back of the mouth."

   The approach is already bearing fruit. In 2006, the American Food and Drug
Administration approved the first insulin for diabetes that could be inhaled,
signalling the end of tiresome injections - at least for some diabetic patients.
Inhaled drugs for other diseases are likely to follow.

   The last decade has seen great advances in the understanding of the genetics
of lung disease. It's now clear that asthma is the result of a genetic
predisposition - probably a number of mutations - combined with exposure to
environmental stimuli. "If you don't have the predisposition, you can encounter
any amount of house dust mite or pollen and you won't have asthma," says Ian
Hall of the University Hospital of Nottingham, "But if you do have it, those
stimuli can trigger the condition."

   The airways of the human lungs are covered in a thin film of liquid, which is
maintained through a balance of fluid secretion and absorption by the cells
lining them. That balance is critical to the lungs' healthy functioning, but in
people with cystic fibrosis (CF), a single gene mutation causes it to break
down. The result is that the mucus lining dries out and can't be coughed off,
leaving the patient vulnerable to opportunistic infections.

   Knowing the gene mutation that causes CF has allowed scientists to unpick the
molecular mechanism of the disease. Early hopes for correcting it by gene
therapy haven't materialised, mainly because replacing the faulty gene doesn't
help if the tissue has already been damaged, says Hall. Nevertheless, there have
been dramatic improvements in the life expectancy of CF patients over the last
30 years, in large part due to better patient management: timely treatment of
infections, better nutritional advice and encouraging patients to live an active
lifestyle.

   "When I was a trainee people with CF died when they, were doing their
A-levels," says Partridge, "Now they're dying in their mid-30s."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008


                             146 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 101 words

HEADLINE: National: Gene therapy used to treat blindness

BODY:

   A man with a rare form of blindness navigated a maze after receiving gene
therapy to improve his eyesight. Eighteen-year-old Steven Howarth, from Bolton,
was one of three volunteers with childhood blindness to take part in the world's
first clinical trial of the treatment. Doctors said the technique was a "huge
advance" that could transform treatment for more than 100 inherited forms of
blindness, affecting 30,000 people in Britain. Two other patients, who also had
Leber's congenital amaurosis, which leaves most patients completely blind by
their late 20s, have yet to show significant improvements.

   10 >=

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             147 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             April 28, 2008 Monday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 413 words

HEADLINE: Maze walk marks 'huge advance' in gene therapy for blindness:
Volunteer, 18, amazes doctors in clinical trial Hope for patients seen as having
no chance of cure

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:

   An 18-year-old man with a rare form of blindness has amazed doctors by
navigating a maze after receiving gene therapy to improve his eyesight. Steven
Howarth, from Bolton, was among three volunteers with childhood blindness to
take part in the world's first clinical trial of the treatment, led by doctors
in London.

   Each of the patients inherited a condition called Leber's congenital
amaurosis, which affects one in 80,000 people in Britain. The condition is
caused by a faulty gene which gradually destroys the retina, leaving most
patients completely blind by their late 20s.

   Doctors said the technique represented a "huge advance" and gave hope to
thousands of people with so far incurable forms of blindness. If the therapy is
effective in other patients, it could revolutionise treatment for more than 100
inherited forms of blindness, affecting 30,000 people in Britain alone.

   During a two-hour operation, surgeons from University College London and
Moorfields eye hospital injected a harmless virus containing a healthy copy of
the RPE65 gene under each patient's retina. The virus ferries the healthy gene
into nearby cells, which then begin working normally. While Howarth's vision got
better after the operation, the other two patients, whose disease was more
advanced, have yet to show any significant improvement.

   The results of the study, published in the New England Journal of Medicine
yesterday, coincide with a similar trial led by Jean Bennett at the University
of Pennsylvania. All three patients in her trial showed modest improvements in
eyesight after receiving the gene injections.

   "This really paves the way for developing a treatment for people who have so
far had no prospect of a cure," said Robin Ali, an ophthalmologist at UCL, who
is lead ing the British team. "If everything goes well, it's possible that
within two to three years it might be approved for use in the clinic."

   The patients' condition particularly affects their peripheral and night-time
vision. In a test before and after treatment, Howarth was asked to walk through
a "maze" which recreated a dimly lit street.

   "The first time he tried, he was constantly bumping into things and was
disoriented but eventually managed to go through the maze. But six months after
treatment, he walked straight through as fast as a normal person," said Ali.

   Tests showed Howarth was now able to see in lighting conditions 100 times
dimmer than before.

   Video

   See footage of the experiment guardian.co.uk/video

   >=

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2008


                             156 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            April 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 125 words

HEADLINE: Financial: Up at Oxford

BODY:

   Oxford Biomedica, the Aim-listed biopharmaceutical firm, saw its shares rise
nearly 6% to 23.25p after encouraging news in the development of its gene
therapy treatment for Parkinson's disease. The aim of its ProSavin treatment is
to introduce genes responsible for dopamine production into cells that populate
the area of the brain that is dopamine deficient. Analysts at Panmure Gordon
noted that a second patient has been "dosed" on ProSavin . "The importance of
the second patient being dosed is that it comes a full month after the first
patient, which implies that no issues were raised on safety," Panmure said,
adding that the company remains "well capitalised". It repeated its buy
recommendation on Oxford Biomedica and its 69p price target.

CORRECTION-DATE: April 23, 2008 Wednesday

CORRECTION:

   Oxford BioMedica is listed on the FTSE main market, not on the AIM market as
we said in an article headed Up at Oxford, page 32, April 19.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2008


                             158 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             April 18, 2008 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: Magnets can guide anti-cancer drugs to tumours, say scientists

BYLINE: Alok Jha, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Cancer treatments can be delivered straight to tumour cells using tiny
magnets, saving healthy cells from their toxic side-effects, researchers said
yesterday.

   The new drug delivery method is expected to begin human trials within two
years, and could dramatically improve the experience of chemotherapy.

   In experiments on mice, researchers filled immune cells with iron particles
and were able to guide them in large numbers around the body towards tumour
cells.

   They said the immune cells could be modified to deliver standard chemotherapy
drugs or even emerging treatments such as gene therapy, and could also be used
to treat other diseases. This would make sure drugs were focused in the places
they were needed in the body, reducing the dose needed and the side-effects.

   Chemotherapy usually involves flooding the body with toxic drugs that kill
rapidly dividing cells more effectively than healthy cells. Gene therapy, on the
other hand, is aimed at delivering DNA to tumours which then produces toxic
proteins that kill cancerous cells.

   Scientists from the universities of Sheffield, Keele and Nottingham used
monocytes, white blood cells that attack cancers, to carry therapeutic genes
into tumours. In addition, the monocytes were filled with iron particles.

   "Monocytes go around the body engulfing foreign particles - that's their job,
and they'll engulf the (iron) particles very readily," said Claire Lewis, of the
University of Sheffield. "When you reintroduce them into the body, they will
circulate naturally in the bloodstream. You can pull a lot more of them up into
the tumour by creating a magnetic field around the tumour."

   The next step in the experiments, described in the latest edition of the
journal Gene Therapy, is to use MRI techniques to create a magnetic field around
deep tumours in the liver, kidneys or brain, "so that we can target these
therapeutic cells to areas that are normally quite resistant and are fatal for
the patient," Lewis said.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2008


                             167 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved

                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 14, 2008 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 466 words

HEADLINE: National: Science: Gene therapy success raises hope of Huntington's
treatment

BYLINE: James Randerson, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Scientists are a step closer to curing a severe inherited brain-wasting
disease using gene therapy. The illness is in the same family as Huntington's
disease, raising hopes that a similar approach could also be effective in that
case.

   The treatment involves injecting a modified form of the HIV virus into the
affected region of the brain. The virus infects cells and delivers a gene that
can fix the genetic fault that causes the symptoms.

   So far, the feat has only been achieved in mice, but Japanese researchers
said the ani mals' symptoms of uncoordinated movement "markedly improved". It
raises the possibility of a gene therapy for humans.

   The team are targeting a rare inherited neurodegenerative condition,
spinocerebellar ataxia. It can manifest in various forms but it leads to
uncoordinated movement and speech as well as problems with vision and
swallowing. Symptoms typically begin in late childhood or early adult life and
they become progressively worse, leading to death. There is no cure.

   "It's like being drunk without having the pleasant effects and it's extremely
disabling and slowly gets worse," said Professor Patrick Chinnery, an expert in
neurogenetics at Newcastle University. "These people eventually aren't able to
feed themselves, wash themselves and they end up in a wheelchair. All we can
offer them in the clinic is a diagnosis, advice about the chances of it
happening again in the family and supportive care."

   The disease is one of a family of inherited neurodegenerative conditions
including Huntington's which could all be susceptible to the same approach.
These diseases affect around one in 5,000 of the UK population. Each disease is
caused by mutations to different genes, but the type of genetic stutter that
causes them is the same.

   Hirokazu Hirai at Gunma University in Japan and his team constructed
genetically modified HIV viruses which were disabled and so could not cause
disease. Into these they added a gene which makes a protein called CRAG, which
is present naturally in cells in the brain. CRAG is able to destroy the abnormal
repeats that cause spinocerebellar ataxia. Mice with the disease had the
modified viruses injected into their brain and their uncoordinated walking
almost disappeared. The development is reported in the journal of the European
Molecular Biology Organisation.

   Other gene therapy approaches have been tried, but finding a safe way to
deliver genes is a headache that would have to be solved for a human version of
the treatment to be viable.

   "There are concerns that the gene gets inserted in different parts of the
human genome and could potentially disrupt normal healthy genes and cause
problems. The biggest concern is that it might disrupt and switch off a gene
that suppresses cancer," said Chinnery.

   guardian.co.uk/science >=

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2008


                             172 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           February 16, 2008 Saturday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: National: Live longer, live better: futurologists pick top challenges
of next 50 years: American Association for the Advancement of Science: Experts
see huge advances in health and technology Sun could provide all of Earth's
energy needs

BYLINE: Alok Jha, Boston

BODY:

   Reversing the effects of ageing, reprogramming genes to prevent diseases and
producing clean energy are some of the biggest challenges for the next 50 years,
according to a group of leading experts.

   The pace of advances in technology means the rate of progress will be 30
times faster in the next half century, futurologists believe - and that opens up
the prospect of innovation in many fields.

   Better understanding of our genes could lead to more personalised medicines
and longer, healthier lives; communication technology should get faster and
cheaper; and we will hopefully find more sustainable ways of living in our
environment.

   The 18-stong team of scientists, entrepreneurs and thinkers was convened by
the US National Academy of Engineering (NAE) to identify problems for technology
in the 21st century that, if solved, would change the world. The group included
biologist Craig Venter, inventor Dean Kamen, Google co-founder Larry Page and
Harvard University professor of international development Calestous Juma. The
experts presented their report and list of challenges yesterday at the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) annual meeting in Boston.

   The NAE group focused on four areas for their engineering grand challenges:
sustainability, health, vulnerability, and joy of living. "As the population
grows and its needs and desires expand, the problem of sustaining civilisation's
continuing advancement, while still improving the quality of life, looms more
immediate," they wrote in their report. "Old and new threats to personal and
public health demand more effective and more readily available treatments.
Vulnerabilities to pandemic diseases, terrorist violence, and natural disasters
require serious searches for new methods of protection and prevention."

   The provision of clean energy was a priority. They identified sunshine as a
"tantalizing source of environmentally friendly power, bathing the Earth with
more energy each hour than the planet's population consumes in a year". But
capturing that power, converting it into something use ful and storing it poses
a challenge. "We only need to capture one part in 10,000 of the sunlight that
falls on the Earth to meet 100% of our energy needs," futurologist Ray Kurzweil,
a member of the NAE group, told the AAAS. "This will become feasible with
nanoengineered solar panels and nanoengineered fuel cells."

   Alongside clean energy comes clean water, which is in short supply. New
technologies for desalinating sea water may be helpful, but small-scale
technologies for local water purification may be even more effective for
personal needs."

   Personalised medicines are another challenge. The recent sequencing of the
human genome and a better understanding of how the body works offer scientists a
way to identify the things that determine the health of an individual.

   "An important way of exploiting such information would be the development of
methods that allow doctors to forecast the benefits and side effects of
potential treatments or cures," they wrote.

   Genetic technology allows scientists to switch off selected strands of DNA
and new techniques in gene therapy enable them to modify the behaviour of genes.
"Within one to two decades, we will be in a position to stop and reverse the
progression of disease and ageing, resulting in dramatic gains in health and
longevity," said Kurzweil.

   The NAE report also hailed the potential of advanced computer intelligence
that it said would enable automated diagnosis and prescriptions for treatment.

   Kurzweil went further on artificial intelligence. "Once non-biological
intelligence matches the range and subtlety of human intelligence, it will
necessarily soar past it because of the continuing acceleration of
information-based technologies, as well as the ability of machines to instantly
share their knowledge."

   He added: "Intelligent nanorobots will be deeply integrated in the
environment, our bodies and our brains, providing vastly extended longevity,
full-immersion virtual reality incorporating all of the senses . . . and
enhanced human intelligence."

   The experts said none of the challenges would be met without the economic and
political will. "Despite environmental regulations, cheaper polluting
technologies often remain preferred over more expensive, clean technologies,"
they wrote.

   The group did not rank the challenges, though members of the public can vote
on which they think is most important, at engineeringchallenges.org/.

   guardian.co.uk/science

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                             175 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2008 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            February 15, 2008 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 384 words

HEADLINE: We may never find vaccine for Aids, says Nobel winner

BYLINE: Alok Jha

BODY:

   An Aids vaccine might never be found, claims one of the world's leading
experts on the disease. David Baltimore, a Nobel laureate, said the complexity
of the disease means scientists are no closer to a vaccine today than when they
discovered the link to HIV more than 25 years ago.

   Baltimore, a biologist at the California Institute of Technology, was awarded
the Nobel prize for medicine in 1975 for discovering an enzyme that was later
discovered to be the key reproductive mechanism used by the virus known as HIV.

   As president of the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
Baltimore used the opening address of the organisation's annual meeting in
Boston, in the US, yesterday to highlight the "sad topic" of the search for the
Aids vaccine.

   When HIV was linked to Aids in the early 1980s scientists were convinced a
vaccine would be around the corner. Baltimore said: "We've been working on that
vaccine since then and we are no closer to a vaccine now than we were then."

   He led a panel of experts in 1986 which concluded that, given the complexity
of the problem, an Aids vaccine was at least 10 years away. "I still think an
Aids vaccine is 10 years away," he said.

   He added: "You are quite within bounds to ask, if it's been 10 years away for
20 years, does that mean it's really never going to happen? There are people
saying it will never happen."

   The latest disappointment came last year, after a trial of a promising
vaccine by the pharmaceutical company Merck was halted when some recipients were
left more prone to HIV.

   Baltimore's own work involves using a combination of gene therapy, stem cells
and immunology. "HIV has found ways to totally fool the immune system so we've
got to do one better than nature because nature just doesn't work in this
circumstance." But he cautioned that there was still a lot to do. "I don't want
to pretend that we have found the route to a new vaccine."

   In his address Baltimore also attacked George Bush's record on science.
"There has been an attempt to suppress government scientists from speaking out,
there has been control of what scientists can go to scientific meetings and give
talks - something totally unknown to us in previous years. That kind of attempt
to control scientific information will, I hope, end with the Bush
administration."

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2008


                             181 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                          December 19, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 346 words

HEADLINE: National: Child gets leukaemia after gene therapy

BYLINE: Sarah Boseley, Health editor

BODY:

   A three-year-old boy has developed leukaemia as a result of gene therapy,
Great Ormond Street children's hospital in London said yesterday.

   The boy, who was born without an immune system, was given gene therapy as a
baby to save his life.

   Children with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency, a rare condition
that affects only males and is sometimes referred to as "baby in the bubble
syndrome", die within their first year without treatment.

   The unidentified child is the first in the UK, but the fifth in Europe, to
get leukaemia as a result of the treatment. Four out of 11 boys on similar gene
therapy in Paris developed the disease and one died.

   Doctors at Great Ormond Street knew of the risk of leukaemia when the boy
started their gene therapy trial in 2005. But Professor Bobby Gaspar, a
consultant immunologist working on the programme, said the benefits for such
children outweighed the risks. The only other option is a bone marrow
transplant, and unless a relative is a perfect match, they have to undergo
chemotherapy which kills up to 20% of such babies.

   Gaspar said: "We knew that this would be a possible side-effect . . . We have
been very careful in counselling our families before they enter the programme.
These risks had to be balanced against the risks of conventional treatment which
contain significant hazards."

   The doctors believe a vector - a modified virus introduced to the bone marrow
cells to deliver a working copy of the defective gene - is the cause of the
problem. They are unable to control where it ends up, and believe that if it
lands next to an oncogene (a cancer gene) it can switch it on, causing cancer.
They are planning another trial using a vector that has been modified so that
even if it lands next to an oncogene it will not switch it on.

   Professor Martin Gore, chairman of the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, said
he had sympathy for the child and his family, and for the nurses, doctors and
researchers at Great Ormond Street, who were "utterly dedicated" to helping
children with life-threatening diseases.

   guardian.co.uk/science

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2007


                             193 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            November 30, 2007 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Scientists find gene key to giving mice young-looking skin: Study
raises hope of faster recovery from injuries: Team warns long-term use might
trigger cancer

BYLINE: James Randerson

BODY:

   Scientists have found a way to reverse the aging process in skin, restoring
thinning tissue to a thicker, more youthful state in two weeks.

   The advance, which works by manipulating a master control gene in cells that
changes the level of activity of other genes, has so far been demonstrated only
in mice. Researchers say that if it can be translated to people it might help
older people recover more quickly from injury or boost organ function during
illness.

   But they played down suggestions that the technique could be used as a
"fountain of youth", as the targeted gene also plays a role in the immune system
and cancer. They fear that manipulating it could have longer-term and
potentially disastrous side effects. "You might get a longer life span, but at
the expense of something else," said Howard Chang, assistant professor of
dermatology at Stanford University in California, who led the study. "Here we
show that ageing in mouse skin can be reversed by blocking a single gene . . .
we found a pretty striking reversal to that of the young skin."

   The discovery adds weight to the notion that the ageing process is more than
simply the accumulation of life's knocks. Previous studies have shown ageing is
a genetically programmed process that can be slowed in mammals by a
calorie-restricted diet or exercise. In more invasive studies young mice had
their circulatory systems surgically connected to older animals. The result was
that the aging organs of the older animals were rejuvenated.

   "Ageing is not just a result of wear and tear, but is also the consequence of
a continually active genetic program that might be blocked for improving human
health," said Chang. "The finding that aged skin can be 'rejuvenated' by a
genetic intervention late in life implies that the ageing program is plastic,
and therefore can be potentially manipulated to decrease the deleterious effects
of aging."

   His team identified genes involved in the ageing process by looking for those
which were expressed at different levels in young and old animals. They also did
the same exercise for human genes, to try to ensure that the finding would be
relevant to people. This exercise threw up 14 candidates, of which the strongest
was a master control gene called NF-kappa-B. It controls other target genes
involved in the immune system, inflammation and cell death.

   The team blocked the action of NF-kappa-B in skin cells in two-year-old mice.
After two weeks they examined the genes active in the animals' skin and found
that the genetic profile was very similar to the skin of newborn mice: it was
thicker, and more cells appeared to be dividing.

   The team cannot be sure that NF-kappa-B has the same effect in humans. But
the human version lies in a part of our genome that has been shown in previous
studies to be associated with human longevity. The results are published in the
journal Genes and Development.

   A similar short-term intervention to switch off NF-kappa-B might be possible
to speed up recovery from injury, but the team warns that altering it for longer
periods might have unexpected consequences. Because it controls genes in many
locations with various functions the researchers worry it could lead to cancer.

   Nina Goad, for the British Association of Dermatologists, welcomed the
research. "This research looks very interesting. Targeting of gene therapy to
skin is still very difficult, but this may provide some new avenues of research
that will be of value to wound healing following skin trauma, or disfiguring
skin cancer surgery. However, the researchers' caveats about the unforeseen
consequences of manipulating genes that play a role in many cells are most
important and add a strong element of caution."

   guardian.co.uk/science >=

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2007


                             204 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            October 9, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN LEADER PAGES; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: Leading article: In praise of... Sir Martin Evans

BODY:

   Three men won this year's Nobel prize in medicine and it would be wrong to
completely overlook two-thirds of the team. There is Oliver Smithies, and then
Mario Capecchi - the Italian-born scientist whose mother was sent to Dachau,
forcing the young boy to live on the streets or in orphanages.

   Such drama cannot be found in Sir Martin Evans's life, thankfully. But
perhaps it exists in his work, because his discovery of embryonic stem cells has
given scientists the key to treating a range of genetic conditions, from
muscular dystrophy to diabetes. His finding allows these human diseases to be
replicated in mice (called "knockout mice"), which means they can be studied in
much greater detail. Stem-cell research is not universally popular, of course.
George Bush blocked public funding of such research, and anti-vivisectionists
note that it has led to an explosion in animal testing. So far it is a field
whose researchers can more easily point to potential benefits rather than actual
achieve ments. But what benefits they are: Sir Martin has used gene therapy to
make huge advances in treating cystic fibrosis. It is becoming ever more unusual
for brilliant scientists to remain in the UK, rather than decamp for the
resources of American universities. Yet the Gloucestershire-born scientist has
stayed, and continues to work from his Cardiff campus. Britain punches above its
weight in Nobel awards - especially in the sciences. Winners should be hailed,
and youngsters taught about the difference they make.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2007


                             206 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            October 4, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: National: Science: Cold virus may be used in fight against cancer:
Research suggests fewer treatment side-effects: Trials in humans planned for 18
months' time

BYLINE: James Randerson, Science correspondent

BODY:

   British scientists who have genetically engineered a virus which normally
causes heavy colds so that it attacks cancer believe it could yield a new way to
fight the disease.

   Cancer researchers think engineered viruses will have advantages over many
existing types of chemotherapy because they will be more targeted to attacking
tumours and so cause fewer side effects. At the moment, most chemotherapies harm
both cancerous and non-cancerous cells, leading to hair loss and nausea.

   The modified adenovirus exploits what Lawrence Young, who is leading the
research project at the University of Birmingham, calls the cancer cell's
"achilles heel". "It's a little molecular switch (on the cell's surface)," he
said. "If you switch it on it does two things - it induces the cells to die, but
it also provokes the body's immune response to destroy the cancer. So it is a
double whammy."

   The team are not sure why the switch is there or why it has the killing
effect, but experiments in rodents suggest that their genetically modified virus
is effective at starting the death of the cancer.

   "Because viruses have evolved to deliver genes to cells we can manipulate
them so they don't do anything harmful to you but can actually deliver
manipulated genes and proteins to cancer cells," he said. The team, which
presented its work at the National Cancer Research Institute Conference in
Birmingham yesterday, hopes to begin trials on patients in 18 months' time.

   The switch - a molecule called CD40 - is present on other non-cancerous cells
in the immune system, but when the virus binds to it there, it does not have the
same effect. Initial safety trials in humans will probably involve 10 liver
cancer patients and 10 ovarian cancer patients, but CD40 is also present on lung
cancer, skin cancer, bladder cancer and cervical cancer cells.

   There are few effective treatments for liver cancer and in ovarian cancer the
tumour cells frequently acquire genetic changes which make them immune to
chemotherapy drugs. Another advantage of the virus approach is that it can
partially reverse this effect as well, so it may be most effective in
combination with chemotherapy drugs.

   Several research groups around the world are pursuing viruses as cancer
treatments. Only two have made it to market, in China, but there are doubts
about the quality of research underpinning the products. Some researchers are
even researching the cancer-killing potential of viruses which are fatal in
other species - for example the virus that causes myxomatosis in rabbits - but
are normally harmless for humans.

   Many experimental treatments exploit the fact that cancer cells are less able
to defend themselves than healthy cells.

   "(Viruses) find tumour cells are a good place to grow because they have
deficiencies in their innate immune systems," said Leonard Seymour, a professor
of gene therapy at Oxford University. His team is looking at ways to give the
viruses a "stealth" coat made up of polymers which means they are not destroyed
by the immune system and can move around in the blood.

   guardian.co.uk/science >=

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2007


                             232 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             June 12, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1316 words

HEADLINE: G2: Wellbeing: You can't get it right every time: We all like to think
that medicine is an exact science. But Atul Gawande, an American surgeon whose
bestselling book inspired the hit TV series Grey's Anatomy, has news for you. He
speaks to John Crace

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:

   Atul Gawande cannot forget the first time he sliced someone open. "I was in
my final year at medical school," he says, "and the surgeon in the operating
room just handed me the knife on the spur of the moment and said, 'You start.'
The knife was still warm from the autoclave (sterilising machine) and I started
cutting down the line he had drawn for the hernia incision. The skin was much
tougher and more rubbery than I expected and my first cut barely went through,
so I had to make a second. It wasn't frightening or nauseating in any way, but I
did have a surreal sense that I was committing a violation. It felt an odd claim
to make, that cutting someone open could make them better."

   More than 10 years and roughly 4,000 operations later, Gawande has never lost
sight of surgery's narrow divide between the sacred and the profane. Even now,
before every procedure - no matter how routine - he runs through a checklist of
the top three things that could go wrong and mentally prepares for these
eventualities. And yet still things go wrong. "Each year I do about 400
operations and have about a 97% success rate," he says. "This means that 12 of
my patients - two of whom will probably be dead - leave the theatre worse off
than when they came in.

   "Most of the time, they are patients whom I think I've done all I possibly
could for, so I can accept it. But there are always the others. Six months ago,
I was performing a thyroid operation on a teacher my age and damaged a nerve
that led to her vocal cords. This woman can no longer talk and has had to give
up work. The only way I can live with myself is to try to do all I can for her
and understand what I did wrong and do better next time. Being sorry is not
enough."

   Gawande is a general surgeon at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston
and assistant professor at Harvard Medical School. And he still makes mistakes.
It's this uncomfortable wound that he has opened up, first in Complications -
his bestselling book that was shortlisted for the National Book prize in the US
and became the inspiration for the TV series Grey's Anatomy - and now in his
follow-up, Better.

   "What I'm interested in is failure," he says, "as it's the one area of
medicine with which the professionals are often reluctant to engage because the
stakes we are playing for are so high. We can fail by putting a decimal point in
the wrong place and by not asking the right questions. If you ask any doctor
when he or she last made a misdiagnosis, the truthful answer would always be in
the last month. We get things wrong and we try to put them right. And, of
course, we can fail with a slip of the hand. I once performed an emergency
trachaeotomy in which I did everything wrong. I had the wrong knife, the wrong
lights and I made the wrong incision. There was blood everywhere and the patient
would have died if a colleague hadn't stepped in to help. It was horrific."

   If his call for willingness to ruthlessly examine what goes wrong and why is
not always shared by other doctors, then neither will be the second part of his
prescription for demystifying failure. Mention league tables to most doctors and
they start spitting blood, but Gawande is adamant that there is a value in open
accountability. "You have to be careful you are comparing like with like," he
says, by way of a caveat, "because otherwise the data can be meaningless. For
instance, death rates for cardiac surgeons can vary hugely, depending on the age
of their patients and the difficulty of the procedures they are undertaking. But
we shouldn't allow this to disguise the fact that some surgeons and some
hospitals get better results than others. And unless we are prepared to admit
this, we'll never improve the overall success rates."

   As an example, Gawande cites both the case of the paediatric team at a
hospital in Cleveland, Ohio, who virtually single-handedly raised the average
life expectancy of cystic fibrosis patients from three years old in 1957 to 33
in 2003, simply by providing aggressive preventive treatment before sufferers
became visibly sick from it. You could argue that such successes are largely a
matter of money, but Gawande disagrees. "We spend huge amounts of cash on
healthcare in the US," he says, "and not all of it is very effective. Infection
rates in hospitals are proof of this. Some hospitals have spent a small fortune
on portable $5,000 hand-washing machines (superbugs are as rife in America as
they are in Britain), but their infection rates have remained as high as before.

   "The one hospital in the US that has managed to reduce infection to almost
zero did so not by spending money but by analysing procedures. They asked
doctors and nurses how they used the system and found that the alcohol gel
dispensers were in the wrong place, the gowns they needed for the 3pm ward
rounds were in the wrong place and that it was better to have a single
stethoscope designated for each patient's sole use than for a doctor to carry
his own from patient to patient."

   Gawande goes on to argue that though we traditionally associate significant
improvements in healthcare with the big breakthroughs in science - such as
transplant surgery and gene therapies - much the biggest gains are likely to
come from the close attention to the detail of failure. Rather than shrugging
their shoulders and boasting that a 98% success rate for any given procedure is
a stunning success, doctors really ought to be looking at why the procedure does
not work in the other 2% of cases.

   Here it all gets tricky, though, because the public's attitude towards
failure has become far less tolerant over the past two decades. Any hint of
failure or incompetence is usually met with a lawsuit for malpractice and US
surgeons pay insurance premiums of between $30,000 and $300,000 per year in case
of just such an eventuality. In a way, this is just as it should be, because
doctors should be held accountable for their actions. But Gawande believes there
is a mismatch between the public's perception of what is possible and what
actually is. "People don't truly understand the risks," he says. "Back in the
1960s, about one in 30 babies would die in childbirth; now we've got it down to
less than one in 500 and people expect their baby to be born alive. When it
isn't, they assume the doctor has messed up when he hasn't necessarily. That's
why we have seen such an increase in caesarean sections: doctors just don't want
to take the chance."

   The downside of risk-averse medicine is that we may not have the bottle to
see a treatment through. "Back in the 1950s, kidney disease used to be a
killer," Gawande says, "and there was a medical team in the US that was
pioneering transplant surgery. Their first 30 patients died. Imagine that. You
or I might have stopped at 10, thinking it just wasn't going to work. After 20
deaths, even members of the team began to wonder if they were murderers. But
then they got it right, Joe Murray won a Nobel prize and we now have an everyday
operation that has saved many thousands of lives."

   The trick, Gawande insists, is to never lose sight of the fact that surgery
is an imperfect science and that there will inevitably be times when you can
only "peek and shriek". "You just have to be the type of person who believes
that action is generally better than inaction in times of uncertainty," he says.
"There are times when you are operating that everything feels just right and
it's as though you're conducting a symphony. But even then you can't always
trust that feeling.

   "I had one patient for whom I was convinced I had done great work by removing
an adrenal tumour, but he still hadn't left the intensive therapy unit six
months later. Somehow, he caught an infection and just wasn't strong enough to
recover. Our best guess is that someone on the operating team didn't wash their
hands properly. And, you know what? It could have been me" *

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2007


                             237 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              June 5, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: Rats show gene cure can help in impotence

BYLINE: James Randerson

BODY:

   Scientists are a step closer to curing erectile dysfunction with gene therapy
following prostate or bladder surgery. The technique, which involves stimulating
the growth of a crucial nerve during surgery, has been successfully tested in
rats. The next stage will be safety trials in human patients.

   Men undergoing bladder surgery or removal of a prostate tumour frequently
suffer damage to a nerve crucial in controlling erection. This can take months
or weeks to heal, if at all, and drug treatments for erectile dysfunction such
as Viagra are not effective. Prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men.

   Now Joseph Glorioso at the University of Pittsburgh school of medicine and
his colleagues have shown that in rats at least, the problem can be solved by
treating the nerve with genes for nerve growth factors. These prompt rapid
repair and so lead to recovery of sexual function. "The treatment is provided
right where it is needed," said Dr Glorioso. The genes are delivered in a
modified herpes virus which cannot replicate itself.

   After four weeks, the rats that received the growth factors showed
significant recovery of the nerve and erectile function. The team reported their
research at the annual meeting of the American Society of Gene Therapy, and is
setting up a trial treating humans.

   The Sexual Dysfunction Association estimates that one in 10 men in the UK -
around 2.3 million - have recurring erection problems at some point in their
life. A quarter of these are caused by psychological conditions, but around 75%
are due to a variety of physical causes including cardiovascular disease and
diabetes.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2007


                             239 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              May 29, 2007 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: GUARDIAN EDUCATION PAGES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1627 words

HEADLINE: Education: Interview Christopher Higgins: Notes from a small
university: Durham's new vice-chancellor tells Matt Keating about his plans to
turn it into the 'Princeton of Europe'

BYLINE: Matt Keating

BODY:

   Professor Chris Higgins started his new job last month as vice-chancellor of
Durham University with a bold declaration: Durham has the potential to become
the "Princeton of Europe". That sounds like a boxer's pre-fight verbal left
hook, considering the power and reach of the US ivy league big hitter.

   Princeton is ranked 10th in the world; Durham 132nd. Princeton has 29 Nobel
prizes; Durham has none. Princeton has a £6.33bn endowment; Durham has less than
1% of that. Princeton has a 1:10 ratio of academic staff to students; Durham's
is 1:25.

   Higgins, a leading molecular biologist and geneticist, has some explaining to
do. "The reason I say that we are like Princeton is that Oxford and Cambridge
often compare themselves to Harvard and Berkeley: big, city-based, high-powered
universities with very big medical schools," says the 51-year-old. "That is not
Durham - it is small and 'boutiquey' and does what it does on a small scale. But
it does it really well."

   He concedes that, in the money stakes, the UK's third-oldest university -
whose chancellor is the writer Bill Bryson - is unlikely to compete with the
Princetons of this world. "But I put the argument the other way round: haven't
we done brilliantly considering we don't have such endowments?" he says.

   Durham is an unsung hero, says Higgins, its 16th place in the Guardian's new
UK university guide belying the reality on the ground. The English department is
often ranked higher than that of either Oxford or Cambridge, he says. Durham
also gets more "citations per science paper" than those two and, last year, four
of its academic staff were elected to the board of the British Academy, "which
is a phenomenal achievement for a small university".

   It is Durham's size - just 17,000 students - which makes it less well known,
Higgins says. A lack of vainglory has also kept its profile low. "People are
quite comfortable here. They get on with what they are doing, do it well, and do
not make a song and dance about it," he says.

   The university is home to a world-renowned cosmology research group led by
Carlos Frenk, while in physics it has "one of the leading theoretical depart
ments in Europe, and probably the world". Would a Nobel prize or two help raise
the profile? "Obviously, if you can get the big gongs, that hits the headlines,"
he says. "But a Nobel prize means that one person has done really well - it
doesn't tell you about the whole institution."

   Higgins may be the ambassador that Durham needs. His connections with the
university are deep. Durham is his alma mater - he did his first degree and his
PhD in botany here. One of his daughters graduated from the university in 2005,
and his father is a former head of mathematics.

   Higgins was born in Cambridge in 1955; his father was at the time a fellow of
Trinity College. The family home was as musical as it was academic. His mother
taught cello, his father's first love was music, and his parents gave him and
his three younger brothers lots of encouragement. "We played in groups, with
each other, at local festivals and so on. Music was always part of what we did."

   A violinist, Higgins spent his Saturdays between the ages of 14 and 17
studying at the Royal College of Music, London, and considered pursuing music
professionally. "I was hard working, intelligent and had done well," he says.
"But I wasn't truly talented and gifted. At that stage, you don't often
recognise that yourself, and you have to be shown."

   Instead he opted for a career in science. Despite spending more time in the
music department than the botany department at Durham, he gained a first in
1976. He stayed and completed his PhD in peptides - strings of protein - in
1979. "A lot of people think that botany is just cataloguing plants and looking
at them through a microscope," he says. "But when you study a plant cell, it is
almost no different from a microbial cell or mammalian cell."

   Small molecules

   Higgins's goal was to understand how small molecules, such as nutrients, get
in and out of cells in plants. But to do this, he had to leave the world of
botany. "The only option at the time was molecular biology, studying micro
organisms," he says.

   Among those leading the emerging field in the late 1970s were Giovanna and
Bruce Ames at the University of California, Berkeley. Higgins spent two years
working on salmonella with the couple and a group of 40 postdoctoral fellows and
PhD students. It was an exciting time, he says, being there in the early days of
molecular biology, learning DNA sequencing from the "original handwritten
protocols" of pioneering geneticists Allan Maxam and Walter Gilbert.

   He moved back to the UK to take up a lectureship at Dundee. "They wanted
someone to establish molecular genetics there, and I had an opportunity to be at
the birth of what turned out to be one of the best departments in the country."

   Establishing world-class institutions is what Higgins does: "I like to
understand how things work, whatever they may be, not just on a scientific level
but at an organisational level." In 1989, he led the establishment of new
research laboratories for what is now Cancer Research UK at the institute of
molecular medicine in Oxford. And, in 1998, he was recruited by the Medical
Research Council to revive the clinical science centre, its stillborn research
institute, which was "in a mess".

   "First, it was trying to do something very different - to bring basic science
with healthcare benefits - and that is very difficult to do," he says. "Second,
there were political problems with the reconfiguration of London's hospitals.
That caused the first director to resign."

   The biggest challenge, however, was bridging the culture gap between medics
and scientists. "There are many doctors who are interested not in understanding
new research developments, but in treatment," he says, "while a lot of other
scientists are interested in understanding for its own sake, rather than
applying it to something useful. To do research that benefits healthcare, you
need both."

   He built a partnership between the centre, Imperial College (where he was
also head of division in the faculty of medicine), and hospitals such as
Hammersmith. But he realised that, to function properly, the venture also needed
the input of big industry, such as GE Healthcare and GlaxoSmithKline. "I was
forming all these partnerships and making the whole bigger and more effective
than the sum of these parts," he says.

   Higgins is concerned about academic institutions patenting scientific
discoveries, particularly genes, to raise revenue. "First, that is not their
business; second, the chances of succeeding are very small because even the big
places such as MIT or Stanford don't always get their maintainance sum; and
third, it can impede research itself if they are not careful. In this country,
we are paid by the government to generate knowledge, not money."

   Higgins discovered and named the ABC family of transporters in cells,
including the protein that causes resistance in cancer cells to chemotherapy,
and the cystic fibrosis protein. He and his team were the first to carry out
clinical trials for gene therapy for cystic fibrosis in the UK, which "hopefully
will provide treatment for future generations".

   Cell adaptability

   But the application of his work on P-glycoprotein, the protein that causes
resistance to chemotherapy, has been less successful. That is due in part, he
says, to a lack of funding, but also to cell adaptability. "The research has
unfortunately told us that many of the obvious ways aren't going to work," he
says. "Also, cells are cleverer than we are in one sense. It is evolution.
Trying to get rid of drug resistance will be a never-ending battle, as cells
will find other ways of becoming resistant."

   More than 25 years of research has taught him that there are rarely eureka
moments. "It is the long haul," he says. "In 1981, I sequenced the first
ABC-transporter genes, and it was only in 2007, the week I started at Durham,
that a paper I did was published in Nature that pretty much said how these
proteins worked. My magnum goal is complete."

   His next goal is to make more people aware of Durham's ability to excel not
only in research but in teaching. "Almost all the departments here are among the
top three or four in country for their subject," he says. "We get some of the
best students, and if you look at their A-level grades, they are up there with
those students attending Oxford and Cambridge."

   Durham has a reputation for being full of public-school Oxbridge rejects, but
Higgins, who himself was rejected from both rivals at undergraduate level, says
this is undeserved. "There are a large number of students who have the grades
but who come here because they didn't want to go to either Oxford or Cambridge,"
Higgins says. "Wider participation and the Queen's campus in Stockton have
increased our diverse student base."

   Will he be able to raise his alma mater's national and international profile?
If he can get medics and scientists to work together, maybe he can achieve the
miracle of transforming Durham into a university with the power and reach of
Princeton.

   Curriculum vitae

   Age 51

   Job Vice-chancellor, Durham University

   Before that director of the Medical Research Council's clinical science
centre and head of division at Imperial College's faculty of medicine; Nuffield
professor of clinical biochemistry at Oxford University; professor of molecular
genetics at Dundee University; postdoctoral fellow at University of California,
Berkeley

   Likes Constructive argument, Wagner

   Dislikes Woolly thinking, marketing that tells untruths and 'wrapping on food
that uses all sorts of fancy terminology to try to hide the fact that the
contents are likely to kill you'

   Married with three daughters

CORRECTION-DATE: May 30, 2007 Wednesday

CORRECTION:

   Durham University is not the UK's third-oldest university as we said in an
interview with its vice-chancellor, Chris Higgins (Notes from a small
university, page 11, Education, May 29). That title belongs to the University of
St Andrews, founded in 1413. Durham was established in 1832. In a side panel we
said that Higgins is married with three daughters. In fact he has a partner, not
wife, and five daughters.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2007


                             241 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              May 21, 2007 Monday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 344 words

HEADLINE: G2: Shortcuts: The one-man mission to make us love estate agents: The
Mirror: not normally linked with happy retirement

BYLINE: Stuart Jeffries

BODY:

   A re you a homeowner aged between 60 and 95? Do you want to unlock cash from
your home? Would you like to spend the resulting substantial lump sum on - oooh,
I don't know - a new bathroom suite or a world cruise with an "escort" called
Juan? Of course you would! Then why not contact Mirrorsure Retirement Solutions
(go to www.mirrorsure.co.uk/equityrelease) so it can release your equity like a
cooped-up dog who wants to douse the nearest lamppost? Or would you sooner put
your eyes out with knitting needles?

   Some of these questions, at least, were asked of Mirror readers when they
opened their papers recently and a flyer for Mirrorsure dropped on to their
laps. Older readers with well-developed senses of irony may recall an earlier
occasion when an organisation with the word "Mirror" in the title sought to help
people with their retirement. The result was that as much as £400m was diverted
from the Mirror Group pension fund as unauthorised loans to Robert Maxwell's
private companies and - oh yes - hundreds of employees looking forward to
financial ease in their declining years were thereby thrown into poverty.

   Not that we're suggesting that Mirrorsure is going to take your money and
spend it on its own projects, nor that it will funnel large wads of Mirror
readers' hard-earned to a villain whose body will be found in mysterious
circumstances off the Canaries, or anything like that.

   It's just that Mirrorsure sounds about as improbable an idea as the Angus
Steak House taking over Gordon Ramsay's Michelin-starred restaurant at
Claridge's, George Monbiot becoming chief press officer at EasyJet, Kate Moss
Topshop being renamed Helena Bonham Carter Topshop, the new gene therapy for
baldness that was announced last week really working, or Tranmere Rovers doing
the double.

   But of course we would be wrong in even thinking such unworthy thoughts.
After all, Bill Giles OBE vouches for Mirrorsure on the flyer and he is a former
BBC senior weather forecaster who knows what the future holds. Unlike, say,
Michael Fish. Bill's word is good enough for us.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2007


                             242 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              May 18, 2007 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN LEADER PAGES; Pg. 43

LENGTH: 74 words

HEADLINE: Reply Letters and emails: Blithe spirit

BYLINE: Paul Anderson

BODY:

   *Why does the Guardian persist in treating male-pattern baldness as a disease
(Gene therapy holds out hope for baldness cure, May 17)? It's just one of those
things that goes with getting older. To assume we slapheads would welcome a
"cure" for baldness is akin to assuming that black people would welcome a "cure"
for dark skin or that gays would welcome a "cure" for homosexuality. Say it
loud: we're bald and we're proud.

   Paul Anderson

   Ipswich

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2007


                             245 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             May 17, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 554 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy holds out hope for baldness cure

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Skin cells have been primed to regrow hair follicles for the first time,
leading scientists to claim a breakthrough in the quest for a cure for baldness.

   Researchers hope that a treatment for hair loss may be within sight after
healthy hair-producing follicles were regenerated in adult skin in mice.

   The team made the breakthrough by awakening a sequence of dormant genes,
which triggered a flood of stem cells into patches of hairless skin. To the
researchers' surprise, the stem cells were able to form hair follicles.

   The findings overturned scientists' belief that mammals are born with a set
number of hair follicles and are unable to grow new ones.

   While newts and salamanders are known to be capable of regenerating entire
limbs, researchers believed mammals had a much more restricted ability to regrow
body tissues. The researchers discovered the effect during experiments into the
healing mechanisms of the animals. When thin sheets of skin were taken from the
rodents, the researchers found that not only did the skin heal, but it reformed
with new hair follicles.

   Tests revealed that a set of genes, which are switched off shortly after the
embryo stage of development, had been re-awakened, causing stem cells to rush to
the site of the wound and generate new follicles.

   Further studies showed that injecting a protein called Wnt onto the patch of
skin doubled the number of hair follicles that formed. By blockling Wnt proteins
in the animals, the researchers were able to stop the growth of new hair
follicles.

   George Cotsarelis, a dermatologist at the University of Pennsylvania who led
the study said: "We've found that we can influence wound healing with Wnts or
other proteins that allow the skin to heal in a way that has less scarring and
includes all the normal structures of skin, such as hair follicles and oil
glands, rather than just a scar." The research is reported in the journal
Nature.

   The scientists claim the findings have broader implications than a cure for
male-pattern baldness, suggesting it raises the possibility of treatments for
other follicle-related disorders, such as acne, scalp conditions and excessive
hair growth. The researchers are now licensing the technology through a American
company called Follica Inc.

   "Up to now we thought that the number of hair follicles we have is set before
we were born and can only go downhill from there," said Denis Headon, a
developmental biologist at Manchester University. "This work shows that new hair
follicles are made in adult skin, at least when it is healing a wound. The
researchers also found a way to artificially soup up this natural process,
causing mice to grow twice as many new hairs by giving the skin a specific
molecular signal. The implication is that it might be simpler than we thought to
make new hair follicles as a treatment for hair loss."

   Desmond Tobin, director of the medical biosciences research group at the
University of Bradford, said: "It was long thought that hair follicle
development, under physiological conditions, was limited to early developmental
process.

   "Now Cotsarelis' team have convincingly shown that under the conditions
peculiar to the wound-healing environment, the highly complex hair follicle can
be created anew from apparently unremarkable cells of the healing epidermis and
its underlying dermis."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2007


                             251 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             May 2, 2007 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 467 words

HEADLINE: National: Science: Gene therapy aimed at restoring sight for 30,000
people

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:

   British scientists are to launch the world's first clinical trials of a
controversial gene therapy to cure childhood blindness.

   Researchers will test the treatment on volunteers with a rare inherited form
of blindness, in which a single defective gene causes the retina to degenerate
and eventually stop working as the child grows up.

   The condition, called Leber's congenital amaurosis, affects one in 80,000 in
Britain. Children born with the defective gene are often completely blind by
their 20s. If the trials are a success, it could revolutionise the treatment of
more than 100 inherited forms of blindness that affect up to 30,000 people in
Britain.

   Patients taking part in the trial will be injected with a virus modified to
carry a correct version of the faulty gene.

   Once inside the eye, the virus ferries the healthy gene into the cells that
make up the retina, halting and even reversing the damage caused.

   The phase 1 trials are designed to assess the safety and efficacy of the
treatment in 12 patients and will be carried out by the Institute of
Ophthalmology at University College London and nearby Moorfields Eye Hospital.
The safety of the treatment will be under particular scrutiny, following a gene
therapy trial four years ago in which two children being treated for a rare
immune disorder called Scid (severe combined immunodeficiency) developed
leukaemia. Their cancers arose when a virus used to deliver healthy genes
accidentally led to tumour-promoting genes.

   Trials of the latest gene therapy in dogs have proved the treatment can
improve and preserve vision enough for nearly blind animals to negotiate mazes.

   "If this trial is successful it paves the way for the application of this
technology in the treatment of many forms of inherited retinal degeneration and
perhaps some of the more common disorders of the eye too," said Robin Ali, an
ophthalmologist at UCL, who is leading the team.

   The researchers will know whether the treatment has worked in a few months.

   "It will be many months before we have the full picture. We anticipate the
best outcome in younger patients, as we will be treating the disease in the
early stages of its development," said Tony Moore, a leading retinal specialist
on the team.

   Alastair Kent, director of the Genetic Interest Group, a national alliance of
more than 120 charities that support children, families and individuals affected
by genetic disorders, said: "To hear of such quick progress in a gene therapy
treatment is fantastic. We hope this success will lead to more funding of gene
therapy research into rare conditions that currently have no cure or treatment."

   Andrew George, an immunologist at Imperial College London, said: "There is
hope that once gene therapy is developed in the eye, scientists could move on to
more complex organs."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             265 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 27, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN COMMENT AND DEBATE PAGES ; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 635 words

HEADLINE: Comment & Debate: A matter of life and death: To condemn the study of
complex genetic issues as eugenics is to wriggle out of an essential debate

BYLINE: Steve Jones

BODY:

   The past, it seems, is no longer another country. Anyone with an ancestor who
behaved in a manner not in accord with today's moral climate inherits a stain of
guilt and must grovel before the court of history: b ad news for descendants of
slavers, but worse for anyone interested in human inheritance. The Great Beast
of the Genes is Sir Francis Galton. With his 1869 book Hereditary Genius, Galton
has a claim to be the founder of human genetics; but it is clear his ideas about
selective breeding were used as an excuse for evil in many parts of the world
(though not particularly in Britain).

   Now the E word he invented - eugenics - is being bandied about again, with
the same sense of horror as slavery. I am president of the Galton Institute, the
lineal descendant of the Eugenics Education Society founded a century ago. The
thoughtless labelling of a complex issue is everywhere. We have, for example,
been dragged into a spat between some Oxford students and one of our members.
The students disapprove of his work on human migration (generously, they "are
not expecting the professor to be sacked straight away") and complain of his
association with the Galton Institute and its "research on eugenics".

   But what does that mean? Our stated aim is to promote public understanding of
human heredity and informed debate about the ethical issues. Like genetics
itself, the institute has moved on from the simplistic views of its
predecessors.

   Guardian blogs are buzzing with neo-Galtonism, and in last weekend's Observer
came the bizarre statement that even studies on the inheritance of human height
have "a dark reputation" because of "links with eugenics". Geneticists roll
their eyes at such stuff, but beneath the aerated opinions serious questions
remain. What is their science up to - and would Galton approve?

   Gene therapy has at last begun to work, and a few children who would once
have died are now living happy lives. Many more survive for reasons that have
nothing to do with molecular biology. I start my course for first years at UCL
by pointing out to students that at the time of Romeo and Juliet two-thirds of
them would have been dead, and at David Copperfield's publication half would
have perished - but a British baby born, like them, in 1988 had a 99% chance of
making it to 18 (although I add that their DNA will get them in the end in the
form of heart disease, diabetes and other heritable killers of the west).

   The figures mean that many who once died for genetic reasons - inborn failure
to resist disease, or to exit at sufficient speed when pursued by a bear -
survive and pass on their genes. Does that matter? Most people would say no; but
it is hard to deny that there will be effects on the biological future. Is there
nothing to discuss?

   Twenty lectures later, I turn to the other side of the eugenical coin.
Consider, I say, the fate of unborn males and females. Boys are more likely to
suffer diseases such as muscular dystrophy. Parents with an affected son are
reluctant to repeat the experience and long ago might have asked for termination
of a male foetus. Then came a test, but it was far from precise, and some still
made that demand. Today the damaged foetus can be identified - but should we act
on that information? And what about IVF, where it is easy to identify eggs that
will become male? Should the technology be made available (or outlawed) in
India, where abortion has in places led to a ratio of 120 males to 100 females?
To condemn such issues as "eugenics" is to wriggle out of an essential
discussion.

   This year, though, I abandoned the lecture when I realised the only question
I face is: "Will this be in the exam?"

   Steve Jones is professor of genetics at UCL. His book Coral: a Pessimist in
Paradise has just been published by LittleBrown j.s.jones@ucl.ac.uk

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2007


                             266 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 19, 2007 Monday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 254 words

HEADLINE: National: HIV experiment offers hope in cystic fibrosis battle

BYLINE: Alok Jha, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Scientists are planning to use a modified version of HIV in the battle to
treat cystic fibrosis. If the experiments are successful, researchers hope to
use the virus one day to cure babies of the condition while they are still
developing in the womb.

   Cystic fibrosis, a debilitating disease that clogs the lungs with mucus, is
the most common life-threatening inherited disease in the UK, affecting more
than 7,500 people, and there is currently no cure. Researchers at University
College London have been working on ways to treat it by replacing a faulty gene.
Their work involves developing vectors - viruses that can successfully carry the
correct version of a gene into the diseased body cells.

   Suzie Buckley, the geneticist at UCL who developed the new HIV vector, will
present her research at the British Society for Gene Therapy conference which
begins today in Warwick. The vector, which uses a disabled version of HIV to
prevent it from causing any disease itself, has already been shown to deliver
genetic material efficiently to the lungs of adult mice.

   Another disease which looks ready to benefit from gene therapy techniques is
severe combined immunodeficiency, a condition in which babies are born without
an immune system. Bobby Gaspar, of Great Ormond Street hospital in London, who
will also present his latest work at the meeting in Warwick, has used a genetic
approach to treating the disease. Dr Gaspar has treated 13 children so far, all
of whom, he said, are now living normal lives.

   guardian.co.uk/genes >=

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2007


                             267 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 13, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN NEWSPRINT SUPPLEMENT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1099 words

HEADLINE: Education: Postgraduate courses: Science research takes a hit: Stephen
Hoare reports on the fallout after a surprise government slash in funding to
fill a budget black hole

BYLINE: Stephen Hoare

BODY:

   The government has more than doubled research spending on cutting-edge
science in the last decade. Last year universities received £2.8bn channelled
through the Higher Education Funding Council for England and the eight DTI
funded research councils, which allocate grants to the highest quality research
proposals on the basis of competitive bid and peer review.

   This level of funding has kept the UK at the international forefront of
science, with universities carrying out important work on gene therapy,
nanotechnology, cell research, sustainable agriculture and climate change.

   So it came as a shock to university research departments when last month the
government lopped £100m off next year's science research budget - £68m of which
is allocated by the research councils. The cut - made to cover a DTI budget
black hole created by propping up the defunct British car maker Rover and future
liabilities of British Nuclear Fuels - is equivalent to losing 1,000 PhD
students. Much of the money has already been committed by the research councils
to funding long-term post-doctoral projects, and councils meet in the next few
weeks to debate the agonising decisions about which projects to axe and how many
studentships have to go. Heads of the research councils are furious at what they
see is a government U-turn.

   "In 2004 the government set a 10-year framework for increasing investment in
science and innovation," says Julia Goodfellow, head of the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). "This cutback - even if it turns
out to be a one-off - sends completely the wrong message to higher education
institutions and companies investing in technology. The UK is now second only to
the US in molecular and cell research. Cuts mean we are going to lose people
with those skills."

   The council is losing a relatively modest £7m out of a total budget of £350m.
As a result, it is cutting back on its own research facilities and will put a
freeze on the number of studentships it can fund. Currently, BBSRC is funding
2,000 postgraduate students. Goodfellow says: "Our own funding cut doesn't sound
much. But a lot of our research is multi-disciplinary with projects crossing
academic boundaries between biological science and medicine, maths or chemistry.
University research projects will be affected across the board."

   Ursula Martin, vice-principal for science and engineering at Queen Mary
College London, is very concerned. "The scientific community and the long-term
needs of science have been looked after under the David Sainsbury regime. But
removing the ring-fencing from the science budget has damaged trust in the
relationship."

   The uncertainty may delay key scientific projects across the UK. "The
Particle Physics and Astronomy ResearchCouncil sent a letter round telling
everyone about the cuts," says Martin. "It means across the country universities
will have to delay projects and this could have an enormous impact on the
retention of smart young people on studentships. If their research is delayed
they'll be off to the States." There is no risk to the UK's participation in
long-term projects like the Vista telescope in Chile or CERN's large hadron
collider project.

   The Engineeering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC), with a much
bigger budget of around £700m, will have £29m less to spend next year on funding
important research. Dr Randal Richards interim chief executive of the EPSRC
says: "This is disappointing following the recent publication of EPSRC's
strategic plan which seeks to promote research and training of the highest
quality in the UK." The number of studentships we fund will have to come down."

   Like other research councils, EPSRC funds cross-disciplinary research. An
across-the-board cut in science funding will endanger the continuity of
important research. "Companies will not be encouraged to locate their R&D
facilities in the UK if they perceive the climate for innovation to be less than
dynamic," says Richards.

   Currently, EPSRC is funding one in three research projects that apply. In
future, applying for research funding could get a lot more competitive.

   So what factors will give a postgraduate's funding application the edge? When
analysing projects approved by the research councils, common threads emerge.
Research is concentrated in new technologies that enhance national
competitiveness, generate wealth and contribute to quality of life. EPSRC is
committed to knowledge transfer partnerships between universities and the
private sector.

   Manufacturing technology in Scotland, for example, is being boosted by the
£4.2m EPSRC-funded Scottish Manufacturing Institute at Herriot Watt University
designed to apply research in photonics (laser sensors), microsystems assembly
and digital tools for manufacture.

   EPSRC also places a high value on cutting-edge, cross-disciplinary research.
It is funding a collaborative venture between Edinburgh and Heriott Watt
University on mathematical analysis and partial differential equations used in
financial modelling.

   The science budget cuts will also affect multi-disciplinary projects
involving the arts and humanities. The Arts and Humanities Research Council
(AHRC) is funding state-of-the-art conservation techniques to interpret or
conserve historical artefacts. It is an area where scientists and historians
work side by side.

   Tony McEnery, director of research for AHRC, says: "A good example of how we
spend our £100m annual funding is the project at Vindolanda, Hadrian's Wall,
where scientists and historians are learning how to conserve and interpret a
cache of fragile wax tablets that has been unearthed."

   Funding around 1,500 postgrad studentships a year, AHRC faces cuts of £5.6m.
But McEnery says the research council funding is only half the picture. Hefce's
research assessment exercise (Rae), the formula used to allocate funds to the
best-performing university research departments, can plug a gap left by the
research councils.

   McEnery says the quality research (QR) funding generated by the Rae releases
academics to set up research projects. In effect it is pump-priming. The Rae is
changing from the familiar five star ranking to a simpler system based on the
impact of research known as metrics.

   Metrics will make it easier for new universities to compete on a level
playing field with some of the older established and more research-focused
Russell Group universities. McEnery explains: "QR income frees academics to come
up with cutting- edge project proposals which might over time receive research
council funding. It is making solo research easier."

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2007


                             271 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           February 22, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN SPORT PAGES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 66 words

HEADLINE: Drugs in sport: Recommendations

BODY:

   1 More research into emerging technologies such as gene therapies

   2 An independent body to test, investigate and prosecute doping offences,
separate from UK Sport

   3 Review of experience of countries that have criminalised doping

   4 Wada should adopt a minimum four-year ban in all proven incidents

   5 UK should pilot a doping passport to record an athlete's physiological
profile over his or her career

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2007


                             280 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            January 23, 2007 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN OBITUARIES PAGES; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Roland Levinsky: Leading immunologist focused on finding
cures for children

BYLINE: Andrew Copp, David Goldblatt and Christine Kinnon

BODY:

   As dean of London's Institute of Child Health (ICH) from 1990 to 1999, Roland
Levinsky, who has died aged 63 in an accident involving a power cable, turned
the ICH into one of the foremost children's research organisations in the world.
He completely reorganised its academic structure, abolished nearly all
committees and recruited many young clinical and non-clinical scientists, whose
research interests ranged from genetics to public health, but who all shared a
desire to apply top-quality science to the diagnosis and treatment of children's
disease.

   Roland, the Hugh Greenwood professor of immunology at ICH (1985-2002), leaves
a legacy of highly trained and motivated medical research scientists worldwide,
many of whom hold university chairs. Under his leadership the ICH rose through
the UK universities research assessment exercise to achieve the highest rating
possible in 2001.

   Roland encouraged a relationship between the Institute of Child Health and
University College London (UCL), which culminated in a merger in 1996, when many
of the London postgraduate research institutes joined with the large medical
school-based universities. His talents were widely recognised throughout UCL,
and this led to his appointment in 1999 as vice provost for biomedicine and head
of the graduate school. As vice provost he negotiated the funding for a new
cancer research institute and chaired a steering committee to establish good
practice guidelines in postgraduate education.

   Roland's own research interests as an immunologist included bone marrow
transplantation, stem cell biology, the molecular basis of immunodeficiency
diseases and gene therapy - areas linked by his underlying motivation,
developing cures for children with life-threatening immunodeficiency diseases.
In 1979 he performed the first successful bone marrow transplants in children at
Great Ormond Street hospital, London.

   Roland understood the power that could be unleashed by the late 1970s
molecular biology and genetics revolutions. Together with colleagues, including
Professor Christine Kinnon, of the ICH, he initiated international
collaborations that ultimately led to the discovery of the genetic basis of
several primary immunodeficiency diseases.

   Roland was among the first scientists in Britain to obtain funding for gene
therapy research, which has subsequently resulted in successful clinical trials
at Great Ormond Street hospital in treating lethal immunodeficiency conditions.
He played a large part in the organisation of immunodeficiency healthcare in
Britain and was one of the founding members of the Academy of Medical Sciences
and the European Society of Immunodeficiency.

   He was born in Bloemfontein, South Africa, to a prominent leftwing Jewish
family and educated at the nearby Grey College, one of the top South African
schools for boys at the time, where he was noted to be "effortlessly bright". He
moved with his family to Britain in 1959, when he was 16 years old. He completed
his schooling at William Ellis school, in Camden, north London, where he was
among those warned by the headmaster that the holding of leftwing views could
"jeopardise their chances of getting decent scientific jobs in industry or the
civil service". At 6ft 6in tall, he was also a gifted sportsman and played
junior Wimbledon.

   He attended UCL medical school, where, under the influence of the renowned
anatomist JZ Young, he took his first steps in research, studying vision in the
octopus, while completing an intercalated BSc before qualifying as a doctor in
1968. He trained in paediatrics in Birmingham and at UC hospital, before moving
to Great Ormond Street in 1973 for his higher training. During this period, he
undertook research focusing on the immunology of renal disease, which laid the
foundation for his lifelong focus on the immune system in children. He
subsequently became senior lecturer and honorary consultant immunologist at
Great Ormond Street, under the guidance of Professor John Soothill, succeeding
him in the Hugh Greenwood chair in 1985.

   He left London in 2002 to become vice-chancellor of Plymouth University, with
a vision for a first-class university for the south-west, with strong research
underpinning excellent teaching to benefit the economy of the region. He
modernised and centralised a fragmented campus; the fruits of these changes are
only now beginning to emerge. They include the Peninsula Arts organisation,
coordinating cultural events, a graduate school and facilities for students.
Under his leadership, the university has flourished; by last year it had leapt
33 places to 40th in the Guardian's ranking of universities.

   Roland was an enthusiastic sailor, perhaps inspired by a spell as ship's
surgeon on the SS Oriana in the early 1970s. He was a master mariner, who
commanded his own yacht, the Meridian of Beaulieu, in which he competed in a
transatlantic race during his sabbatical in 1996. He was also a skilled potter,
delighting friends with gifts fired in his own kiln. He will be widely missed
for his wisdom, friendship, humour and kindess; he was a giant in every sense.
His wife Beth and children Nicola, Josh and Sarah survive him.

   Roland Jacob Levinsky, immunologist and administrator, born October 16 1943;
died January 1 2007

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2007


                             282 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            January 12, 2007 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 852 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Miners help Footsie shrug off rate rise

BYLINE: Marianne Barriaux

BODY:

   On a day that would make the heads of even the most sturdy spin, the FTSE 100
went on a rollercoaster ride as it opened up, plummeted down and climbed back up
again to reach an even higher level than it had achieved in morning trading.

   The index of leading shares closed up 69.4 points at 6230.1. The shock
decision to raise interest rates by a quarter point to 5.25% at midday caused a
brief scare, and it fell 60 points, before beginning to recover an hour and a
half later.

   The miners outweighed the impact of the rate decision, with BHP Billiton
topping the list of FTSE 100 risers. Shares in the world's largest miner rose
43.5p to 930p. Xstrata was up 91p to £23.99, Rio Tinto rose 100p to £26.49, and
Kazakhmys edged up 40p to £10.53.

   Rolls-Royce also did well following a deal with Singapore Airlines to
maintain the Trent 800 engines on the airline's 58 Boeing 777s. Merrill Lynch
raised its price target for the group from 530p to 565p, saying it was "in the
right market". Analysts said the group could gain from the growth in wide-body
deliveries, such as the Boeing 787 and the Airbus A380, in the next decade.
Rolls-Royce has a share of about 32% in that market. Its shares rose 13.75p to
468.75p.

   AstraZeneca increased 42p to £28.36 after it announced a global collaboration
with the US pharmaceuticals group Bristol-Myers Squibb to develop and
commercialise the latter's two diabetes drugs. One of these, Saxagliptin, is in
Phase 3 clinical trials and - if successful - should file for regulatory
approval in the first half of 2008. The other, Dapagliflozin, is in Phase 2b
development.

   AstraZeneca's late-stage pipeline has been looking increasingly empty after a
series of Phase 3 drugs were unsuccessful. This should replenish the pipeline to
a certain extent. The deal's financials were also considered favourable to both
parties.

   Despite the relatively small impact of the interest rate decision, some
stocks, including property and building companies, still took a hit. Land
Securities was high on the list of FTSE 100 fallers, down 38p to £21.65.
Persimmon dropped 15p to £14.57, Liberty International was down 11p to £13.35,
and British Land was off 7p at £15.73.

   On the FTSE 250, others followed. St Modwen shed 20.5p to 551p, Redrow was
down 22p to 668.5p, followed by Bovis Homes , which slid 28p to £10.56.

   Some of the banking stocks also saw an impact from the rate rise. Northern
Rock shed 16p to £11.58, and HBOS fell 11p to £11.45.

   In addition, a series of disappointing trading statements weighed on the FTSE
100. Alliance Boots headed the list of FTSE 100 fallers following its update.
The group, created from the £8bn merger of Boots and Alliance Unichem last
summer, posted a 1.5% rise in underlying UK retail sales in the last three
months of 2006 - a figure that disappointed analysts as sales had been 4.5%
ahead for the half year. Shares in the company fell 22.5p to 811p.

   J Sainsbury fell 4.25p to 410.25p despite a 5% rise in third-quarter
underlying sales excluding fuel and a record Christmas. But investors were
unexcited about the figures, which matched City expectations but no more than
that.

   In the FTSE 250, Spectris topped the list of risers as it said sales for the
year increased by about 6%, and operating margins improved. Profit before tax is
expected to be ahead of most analysts' estimates. Shares in the company, which
makes electronic controls, soared 62p to 808.5p.

   Taylor Nelson Sofres , a market research firm, came a close second when it
said it had made good progress in restructuring its troubled US custom division
since it issued a profit warning in July. Its shares rose 15.5p to 221p. But
some analysts said the details were too sketchy. Panmure Gordon said adjusted
operating profit was expected to be in line with expectations, but added there
was "little solid detail on what is happening at US custom".

   Meanwhile, two companies saw their stock slide on the back of sizeable share
placings. Savills , the upmarket property company, fell 5p to 642p as 25.9m
shares were sold on behalf of CB Richard Ellis Group, representing just over 19%
of the company, for about £161m. The group said it had bought a portion of
those, or 2.6% of the share capital, for £21.8m.

   PartyGaming , meanwhile, topped the list of FTSE 250 losers as it edged down
1.5p to 32.25p following the placing of 160m shares, worth almost £50m, and
representing a stake of 4.1% in the group. The shares are understood to have
been sold by a founder of the online gaming company.

   And finally, in the smaller cap arena, Ark Therapeutics , the biotechnology
company, rose 13.25p to 132p as it announced it had had a positive meeting with
the US food and drug administration regarding its Trinam gene therapy that
prevents the blood vessels blocking in kidney dialysis patients who have had
vascular surgery.

   The therapy is at the end of Phase 2 trials, and the FDA has given the green
light for it to progress to Phase 3, the last stage of drug development. In
addition, the US watchdog has signalled that the company will only need to
undergo one Phase 3 trial.

   marianne.barriaux@guardian.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2007


                             288 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2007 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           January 11, 2007 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 731 words

HEADLINE: Common cold virus may be new weapon to fight cancer: Human trials
begin this year: Scientists say move is 'exciting'

BYLINE: Alok Jha, Science correspondent

BODY:

   British scientists are preparing to launch trials of a radical new way to
fight cancer, which kills tumours by infecting them with viruses like the common
cold.

   If successful, virus therapy could eventually form a third pillar alongside
radiotherapy and chemotherapy in the standard arsenal against cancer, while
avoiding some of the debilitating side-effects.

   Leonard Seymour, a professor of gene therapy at Oxford University, who has
been working on the virus therapy with colleagues in London and the US, will
lead the trials later this year. Cancer Research UK said yesterday that it was
excited by the potential of Prof Seymour's pioneering techniques.

   One of the country's leading geneticists, Prof Seymour has been working with
viruses that kill cancer cells directly, while avoiding harm to healthy tissue.
"In principle, you've got something which could be many times more effective
than regular chemotherapy," he said.

   Cancer-killing viruses exploit the fact that cancer cells suppress the body's
local immune system. "If a cancer doesn't do that, the immune system wipes it
out. If you can get a virus into a tumour, viruses find them a very good place
to be because there's no immune system to stop them replicating. You can regard
it as the cancer's Achilles' heel."

   Only a small amount of the virus needs to get to the cancer. "They replicate,
you get a million copies in each cell and the cell bursts and they infect the
tumour cells adjacent and repeat the process," said Prof Seymour.

   Preliminary research on mice shows that the viruses work well on tumours
resistant to standard cancer drugs. "It's an interesting possibility that they
may have an advantage in killing drug-resistant tumours, which could be quite
different to anything we've had before."

   Researchers have known for some time that viruses can kill tumour cells and
some aspects of the work have already been published in scientific journals.
American scientists have previously injected viruses directly into tumours but
this technique will not work if the cancer is inaccessible or has spread
throughout the body.

   Prof Seymour's innovative solution is to mask the virus from the body's
immune system, effectively allowing the viruses to do what chemotherapy drugs do
- spread through the blood and reach tumours wherever they are. The big hurdle
has always been to find a way to deliver viruses to tumours via the bloodstream
without the body's immune system destroying them on the way.

   "What we've done is make chemical modifications to the virus to put a polymer
coat around it - it's a stealth virus when you inject it," he said.

   After the stealth virus infects the tumour, it replicates, but the copies do
not have the chemical modifications. If they escape from the tumour, the copies
will be quickly recognised and mopped up by the body's immune system.

   The therapy would be especially useful for secondary cancers, called
metastases, which sometimes spread around the body after the first tumour
appears. "There's an awful statistic of patients in the west . . . with
malignant cancers; 75% of them go on to die from metastases," said Prof Seymour.

   Two viruses are likely to be examined in the first clinical trials:
adenovirus, which normally causes a cold-like illness, and vaccinia, which
causes cowpox and is also used in the vaccine against smallpox. For safety
reasons, both will be disabled to make them less pathogenic in the trial, but
Prof Seymour said he eventually hopes to use natural viruses.

   The first trials will use uncoated adenovirus and vaccinia and will be
delivered locally to liver tumours, in order to establish whether the treatment
is safe in humans and what dose of virus will be needed. Several more years of
trials will be needed, eventually also on the polymer-coated viruses, before the
therapy can be considered for use in the NHS. Though the approach will be
examined at first for cancers that do not respond to conventional treatments,
Prof Seymour hopes that one day it might be applied to all cancers.

   Richard Sullivan, Cancer Research UK's director of clinical programmes, said:
"We are pleased to be supporting this new and important research. Whilst this
approach is still at an early stage of development it has exciting potential,
particularly for the treatment of cancer which has spread, a notoriously
difficult stage of the disease to treat."

   guardian.co.uk/science

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2007


                             302 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            December 5, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 622 words

HEADLINE: G2: Digested read

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:

   Title Next

   Author Michael Crichton

   Publisher HarperCollins

   Price £17.99

   The bounty hunter looked on helplessly as the geek killed himself with liquid
nitrogen.

   "I guess we'll never know what happened to the embryos," Dolly groaned.

   "Luckily for us, no one will remember they had nothing to do with the story
by the time they've finished this book," the bounty hunter replied.

   Alex Burnet called her father, Frank, to the witness box. "UCLA never told me
my cancer was in remission because they wanted to exploit my cells," he said.

   "Can you say that more scientifically so that everyone will realise this is
serious fiction?" the judge asked.

   "My body manufactures cyto- kine, which is useful in treating T-cell
lymphoblastic leukaemia, and UCLA thinks it owns my genes -"

   "That'll do," the judge yawned. "I find in favour of UCLA."

   "What have you got for me?" Jack Watson barked. Rick Diehl sweated nervously.
His company, Biogen Research, needed some good results to attract Watson's
backing. "There's this gene . . ."

   BREAKING NEWS: SCIENTISTS ISOLATE MASTER GENE.

   Josh Winkler narrowed his eyes. Because every chapter started with a
portentous short sentence. Now that the point had been laboured by including a
page that looked like a news report, surely everyone would realise just how
close we were to a nightmare world where gene therapy was the norm. His brother,
Eric, picked up a Biogen canister. "No," yelled Josh. Too late.

   Deep in the Sumatran jungle, Hagar heard an orang-utan shout, " Espece de
con. Geen Lichten ."

   Marty had more things to worry about than a bilingual ape. Now that the woman
had requested an exhumation to identify an obscure gene, people were bound to
find out he had sold the legs. Still, he thought, the chances were this was
another dead end and he would never have to explain why.

   "Eric's no longer a drug addict," Josh's mother squeaked.

   "Yee-hah," said Josh. "We've discovered a gene therapy for addiction."

   "Yee-hah," said Rick, "Biogen is saved."

   BREAKING NEWS: TRANSGENIC PETS ON THE HORIZON.

   Henry Kendall couldn't believe what he was doing as he drove to the lab. He
walked to the chimp's cage. "Hello Dave," he said.

   "Hello, Dad," the chimp replied.

   "You're coming home with me."

   "I don't care if you've been unfaithful with a chimp," Harry's wife, Lynne,
said defiantly. "Dave is part of the family and he can go to school with Jamie
and no one will realise he's very hairy and likes to hang around in trees."

   Eric was dying of old age. "Gene therapy can be unpredictable," he pointed
out needlessly.

   For no good reason, a bitchy parrot with a PhD in semiotics decided to make
an appearance.

   "The name's Gerard," squawked the parrot. "Deconstruct that if you can."

   "Someone's broken in and destroyed our genes," Rick cried.

   "That's a job for the bounty hunter," said the bounty hunter.

   "Gee," said Lynne. "Dave bit someone at school. How cute!"

   Frank Burnet had done well to keep a low profile in such a ludicrous plot.
"If we can't get Frank, I'll nick his daughter's genes," the bounty hunter
thought to himself.

   For the first time in 350 pages, Alex remembered she vaguely knew the
Kendalls. She would hide out there.

   "Got you," said the bounty hunter.

   "Got you," Dave grunted, biting off the bounty hunter's ear.

   "Get you," Gerard grinned, cuffing the bounty hunter with his wing.

   "I'm finished," Rick wept.

   "You can keep your genes after all," said the judge.

   "Sod that," Frank laughed, "I'm selling them to Jack."

   "I hate morality tales," Jack gasped as he died of cancer.

   Author's note: I am very clever and want you to know that I've read a lot of
books about gene therapy and it's a dangerous science.

   Bibliography: See above.

   The digested read, digested: Author isolates the gene for self- delusion and
self-importance.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2006


                             324 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            October 27, 2006 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: Science: Gene to aid diabetic sex function

BYLINE: Ian Sample, New Orleans

BODY:

   Scientists have conducted successful tests of a gene therapy designed to
improve sexual function in men with diabetes.

   The experimental treatment temporarily repairs damage caused by the disease
that leads to erectile dysfunction in 70% of diabetic men, many of whom do not
benefit from drugs such as Viagra.

   Tests on rats bred to develop a diabetes-like condition showed the gene
therapy boosted their ability to achieve erections. If the treatment is proved
to be safe to use in humans, it could be available in five years, according to
scientist Jesse Mills of the University of Colorado health sciences centre in
Denver. Diabetes damages male sexual function by destroying endolthelial cells
that line the inner walls of blood vessels. One function of the cells is to
release nitric oxide, a chemical signal that makes the muscles around blood
vessels relax, allowing more blood to flow to the genitals.

   "Sildenafil or Viagra only works in 40% to 60% of men with diabetes, so half
are not benefiting from these drugs," Dr Mills told the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine conference in New Orleans.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2006


                             326 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           October 18, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 626 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy raises hope for Parkinson's sufferers: Virus treatment
found to boost all patients tested: US study may pave way to less invasive
procedure

BYLINE: Alok Jha, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Scientists have shown that the first gene-based therapy developed for
Parkinson's disease substantially alleviates the symptoms of the condition
without the need to leave any devices in the body.

   The experimental treatment, carried out recently for the first time in humans
by American scientists, involved infusing the brain for 100 minutes with a
harmless virus that switched on a gene controlling the production of dopamine, a
neurotransmitter chemical.

   Parkinson's disease is caused by the loss of dopamine-producing cells in the
part of the brain that controls movement. Symptoms include shaking and muscle
weakness. One in 500 people suffers from the disease and around 10,000 people
are diagnosed in the UK every year, mostly over the age of 50.

   The results of the phase one clinical trial of the gene therapy, developed by
the American biotech company Neurologix, found all 12 patients showed a clinical
improvement of 25% as calculated on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale
(UPDRS) - a measure devised by doctors to track the long-term progress of
Parkinson's patients. Nine of the 12 showed an average improvement of 37%, and
five of those improved between 40% and 65%.

   Phase one trials are designed to show that a new therapy is safe. A few
patients are usually given different doses. Before it can be used widely the
treatment must undergo two further stages of tests in volving larger groups of
patients over several years.

   Current treatments for Parkinson's disease include directly replacing the
lost dopamine, or inserting electrodes into the brain to stimulate it to produce
it (deep brain stimulation). The electrodes stay in permanently, powered by an
implanted pacemaker. "The next stage is to try and either empower the cells that
are there to produce their own dopamine, or to put in cells that will produce
dopamine themselves," said Kieran Breen, director of research at the Parkinson's
Disease Society.

   Matthew During of Neurologix used patients at the New York-Presbyterian
Hospital with advanced Parkinson's disease who were not responding to any
current treatments. Each patient received an infusion of the non-pathogenic
adeno-- associated virus via a catheter inserted into the subthalamic nucleus, a
part of the deep brain known to function abnormally in Parkinson's patients. The
virus, which was designed to switch on a gene involved in making dopamine, was
only exposed to half of each patient's brain

   The results were presented yesterday at the Annual Meeting of the Society of
Neuroscience in Atlanta.

   The patients reported no side effects a year after the therapy, and all
showed improved UPDRS scores on the side of their body that correlated to the
treated part of their brain. The untreated side of the brain showed no
improvement.

   "This gene therapy trial is particularly unique and the clinical data
unusually promising because the treatment was con fined to just one side of the
brain," said Dr During. In the next stage the company plans to infuse the
treatment into both sides of the brain.

   He added that the research aimed to work out whether it was possible to reset
a specific group of overactive cells.

   "The interim UPDRS scores are highly promising and, if they are borne out
with additional data, would be comparable to results seen with deep brain
stimulation. Unlike deep brain stimulation, however, our gene therapy approach
is much simpler, can be carried out entirely under local anaesthesia, and avoids
leaving any devices in the body," he said.

   Dr Breen said the work being done by Neurologix was important to get past the
current regime of just giving Parkinson's patients doses of dopamine. "We need
to move on to the next stage which is to modify the function of the nerve
cells."

   guardian.co.uk/genes >

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2006


                             330 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                          September 28, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN SPORT PAGES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: Digger: Collins fails to hit the right note on doping

BYLINE: Duncan Mackay

BODY:

   After a summer which has seen some of athletics' biggest names embroiled in
drug controversies, it was probably not the wisest move of Dave Collins to chair
a session at the International Performance in Sport Conference in Gateshead
yesterday on "The science of gene therapy and the scientific issues of gene
doping".

   It may have been an appropriate subject for Collins to debate when he was a
professor of psychology at Edinburgh university, but it sends out the wrong
message when he is the performance director of UK Athletics, an organisation
that asserts its commitment to the fight against drugs. It is the second time
that a decision of Collins has cast doubts over his judgment. This year he also
endorsed the decision of the teenager Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, pictured,
Britain's most promising young sprinter, to train with Justin Gatlin's coach,
Trevor Graham, in the United States.

   Gatlin has since tested positive for testosterone and is one of 13 athletes
associated with Graham who have been linked with doping.

   Meanwhile, talk of the Gateshead conference among the delegates was that
another top British athlete faces trouble after missing three out-of-competition
drugs tests. The Commonwealth 400m champion Christine Ohuruogu was earlier this
month suspended from running for a year for a similar offence. UK Athletics last
night said they had no knowledge of a new case but Digger says watch this space.

   More strife for Woodward

   Sir Clive Woodward is due to meet the press officially for the first time
tomorrow in his new role as elite performance director of the British Olympic
Association. England's World Cup-winning rugby union coach will relate what he
has been doing since he started the job last week, including details of his
meeting with a number of performance directors of the 35 sports he will be
overseeing.

   It is unlikely any of them have said anything to his face but there is
widespread discontent, especially in some of the more successful Olympic sports
who feel short-changed after discovering that Woodward, pictured right, is
earning £300,000 a year. Their salaries are determined by UK Sport, not as rich
as the British Olympic Association, which recently concluded a major deal with
London 2012 to give up its rights to the Olympic rings in the UK and is using
the proceeds to pay some of Woodward's wages.

   Barclays blow for 2012

   Barclays' decision to sign up with the Premiership in a £65.8m deal over
three years could end its interest in becoming one of the main local sponsors of
the London Olympics in 2012. Barclays was widely tipped to become a top-tier
financial partner of the 2012 Games, especially as it arranged a loan last year
to help bankroll the organising committee's set-up costs and rent office space
to Sebastian Coe and his team.

   London hopes the financial-partner category will be one of its most lucrative
and is expecting to raise at least £100m from it.

   Barclays is continuing to negotiate with London officials but may be
stretched by another mega-sponsorship deal.

   Iconic approach

   The NFL is launching a new television advertising campaign aimed at
introducing a younger audience in Britain to American football. The "NFLIcons"
campaign has been created by the league's office in London after consultation
with the Radio One presenter Trevor Nelson and is airing on a mix of
youth-orientated television stations and in cinemas. Its introduction follows
the NFL's announcement of a four-year extension to its rights agreement with
Sky, which will lead to more than double the number of live games being aired.

   "The campaign is intended to position the NFL to an audience who we believe
are open-minded about the sport yet have little knowledge of it," said Alistair
Kirkwood, NFL UK's managing director.

   duncan.mackay@guardian.co.uk

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2006


                             341 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            September 1, 2006 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: Science: Cancer victims living proof of gene therapy breakthrough

BYLINE: Lee Glendinning

BODY:

   Two men have been saved from dying of the most aggressive form of skin
cancer, after their white blood cells were genetically engineered to fight their
tumours.

   Both men had advanced melanoma, but scientists believe the technique used to
cure them may pave the way to fight cancer using the body's immune system -
replacing chemotherapy and radiation.

   Researchers from the US National Cancer Institute believe the technique could
treat breast, prostate, lung, and colon cancers. They add a note of caution,
however, saying the technique would as yet not work for every patient, and it
would be premature to talk of a "silver bullet cure".

   Even so, this is considered the first real success in cancer gene therapy,
because it fights cancer's worst stage, when it has spread through the body,
unlike earlier attempts which targeted single tumours. "It's obviously very
exciting," said Dr Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American
Cancer Society. "It's a proof of concept of being able to develop a technique
where they can use a patient's own blood cells to fight cancer."

   Mark Origer, 53, of Watertown, Wisconsin, was one of two patients treated
successfully. He was diagnosed with melanoma in 1999. It continued to spread
until in June 2004 it was found in his liver. He went through various chemical
and surgical treatments before gene therapy in December 2004, hoping to survive
for his daughter Katie's wedding the following September. By January 2005, his
tumours shrank by half, and he attended the wedding with only a small spot in
his liver; it was later removed, and doctors have told him he is cleared of
cancer cells.

   "I'm cured for now," he said. "I know how fortunate I am to have gone through
this and responded. Not everybody is that lucky."

   Of the 17 patients with advanced skin cancer who had the gene therapy, only
two responded. But they offer proof that adapted cells can survive in the body
then shrink tumours. The second patient, known as "Thomas M", 39, was cleared of
cancer in the liver, lymph node and lung.

   Scientists are as yet unwilling to give a long-term prognosis for the two,
though they have been free for more than 18 months. Melanoma is known for
returning years later.

   "The important thing is this approach worked," said Dr Margaret Kemeny,
director of the cancer centre of the Queens hospital in New York. "Can they make
this approach work more often? That is the question."

   Trials start within a month, subject to approval of US authorities.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2006


                             346 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           August 23, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: BA takes off but FTSE muted by dividend news

BYLINE: Marianne Barriaux

BODY:

   A strong showing by British Airways - after the airport operator BAA said it
was putting additional resources in place to avoid flight cancellations at the
weekend - failed to reverse the general gloom among traders yesterday.

   The FTSE 100 slipped 0.21% to 5902.6 but losses were muted as the imminent
bank holiday kept volumes low. Companies going ex-dividend today, whereby buyers
will no longer be able to receive the latest dividend, played a big part in
dragging it down. Hanson , the construction group, was down 14.5p to 669p, as
was Schroders , the investment bank, down 13p to 925p.

   Rexam , the packaging and drink can maker, was one of the biggest fallers on
the FTSE as analysts took a pessimistic view of the group's interim results
tomorrow. Shares fell 9.25p to 518.75p as analysts predicted a 2% drop in
first-half profits to about £140m, despite the hot weather.

   Interestingly, those companies that announced good results also dragged down
the FTSE. InterContinental Hotels dropped 6p to 898p despite reporting good
first-half profits, up 30% to £107m, and assuring investors there was no sign of
a slowdown for the second half.

   Analysts themselves were upbeat about the results. ABN Amro, summing up
attitudes to the group, said: "Good numbers; good growth; strong forward outlook
on volume."

   Investors were disappointed that the company, which has said it would return
cash to shareholders as part of its hotel asset-disposal programme, said a
decision on the timing and amount of the return may not come until February.

   Persimmon , Britain's biggest housebuilder, was also down - by 16p to £12.60
- despite a 16% rise in first-half profits before tax to a record £271.5m. The
drop was put down to profit-taking, as analysts were positive about the
company's results.

   Oil stocks took a toll, with BP down 3p to 616p and Royal Dutch Shell down
17p to £18.89, as the price of crude steadied after soaring over the past two
days. In the mid-cap arena, Bodycote International was the biggest faller on the
FTSE 250 as a 20.2% rise in first-half profits failed to outweigh worries over
energy costs. The company, which makes heat-treating technology to strengthen
parts for the aerospace, car and power industries, saw its shares fall 11.5p to
237p.

   UK Coal lost 10.75p to 207.25p amid takeover speculation. Peel Holdings, a
transport and property group, was forced to issue a statement about its stake in
Britain's biggest coal producer, saying: "At this time its shareholding is held
for investment purposes and there is no intention to make an offer for UK Coal."
But Peel added that it reserved the right to make an offer if UK Coal were to
announce discussions or if it invited or received an offer.

   On the plus side, British Airways was the biggest riser on the FTSE 100, as
it increased 5.25p to 399.25p. This was on the back of welcome news after the
heightened security measures prompted by the terror alerts, as a BAA spokesman
said the airport operator intended to run a full schedule over the bank holiday
weekend, thus avoiding cancellations.

   The airport operator said it would put on additional staff to cope with the
security measures, causing airlines and passengers alike to breathe a sigh of
relief in what is usually one of the busiest times of the year.

   Meanwhile, the mining sector was still performing well, with Antofagasta up
2.25p to 438p as copper prices continued to surge. BHP Billiton , the world's
biggest miner, was up 6p to £10.56 as the market anticipated record full-year
results today. City analysts also suggested the debacle over striking miners at
BHP's Escondida copper mine would soon be over as the union and the company
edged closer to an agreement. Anglo American rose 15p to £24.70 despite news
that the shares were going ex-dividend. Speculation continued that it would be a
takeover target once its non-core paper and packaging business was demerged.

   Among mid-cap stocks, Taylor Nelson Sofres , the market research company that
issued a big profits warnings in July, rose 4.75p to 180p - one of the biggest
risers on the FTSE 250. The reason lay in the buy recommendation by the broker
ABN Amro, with its analysts declaring: "We believe its recovery potential due to
its solid market research franchise and gap-free global footprint has been
underestimated."

   Fresh hopes for a cancer vaccine boosted Oxford Biomedica , which rose 3.5p
to 29p. The gene therapy specialist said it was presenting details of phase II
clinical trials on its TroVax drug at a conference, and added it would start
recruiting patients for its final phase III kidney cancer trial in the second
half of the year.

   On Aim, Mears Group rose 7.75p to 278p as it announced a 22.5% rise in
turnover for the first half of the year and a 23.4% increase in pre-tax profit.

   Finally, Zenergy Power , which makes and develops commercial applications for
superconductive materials, made a solid start to life on Aim, beginning with an
admission price of 84p and closing the day at 99.5p - an 18% increase.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2006


                             350 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 29, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: GUARDIAN SATURDAY COMMENT PAGES; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 570 words

HEADLINE: BIG IDEA: Social jet lag (the mismatch paradigm)

BYLINE: James Harkin

BODY:

   Unable to sleep at night in all this heat? Feeling sluggish at the office,
and skulking around in a disoriented daze? According to new research unveiled by
the best German sleep physicians, you might well be suffering from an ailment
called social jet lag.

   Social jet lag is said to arise when our body clocks falls out of sync with
the demands of our environment, thus putting us at risk of chronic fatigue and
an increased susceptibility to disease.

   According to a hefty social survey produced by researchers in Munich, there
is a mismatch of at least two hours between most of our biological clocks and
the demands of our jobs. Up to half the population is in a permanent state of
jet lag, they say, a condition exacerbated by poor office lighting and the
tendency of office workers to spend their lunchtimes eating flaccid sandwiches
while sitting at their desks.

   The solution, they say, is to match our natural sleep rhythms more
harmoniously to our daily routine; the average person, according to them,
prefers to sleep between half past midnight and 8.30 in the morning.

   Whatever else it claims to be, social jet lag sounds like a great excuse for
arriving at work late. It is, however, only the quirkiest prong of an intriguing
new train of scientific thinking that investigates ways in which the human body
no longer fits into its surroundings.

   In their forthcoming book Mismatch: Why Our World No Longer Fits Our Bodies,
for example, two scientists named Peter Gluckman and Mark Hanson will argue that
we have created an artificial world that is increasingly out of tune with the
bodies that are our genetic inheritance.

   The idea that many of us would spend vast quantities of time shaking our
limbs in gymnasiums would, a century ago, have provoked the ridicule of manual
workers whose physically demanding jobs meant they were hardly in need of a
workout. In the same way, as Gluckman and Hanson point out, there is a mismatch
between the demands of the female biological clock - which prefers to get
pregnant at a young age - and the cultural preference of many woman to start
families later in life.

   The "mismatch paradigm", they claim, happens anywhere where biology and
environment begin to push in different directions. Humans are ingenious at
adapting to a huge variety of different environments, note the authors, but a
constant need to adapt is a source of stress which may be harmful. "The greater
the degree of match between an organism's constitution and its environment, the
more likely the organism is to thrive," say the authors. "The greater the degree
of mismatch, the more the organism has to adapt or cope."

   The relationship between our genes and our environment is a complex business,
but the good news is that we are quite capable of making a difference to both.
Given the strides we have already made in building a human environment, there is
nothing to stop us from changing it around a bit more to give our bodies a
better fit.

   We could modify our genes, too, but the gene therapies that will help us to
do so won't be up and running for a while. In the meantime, we need cleverer
fixes. We could install artificial sunlight in buses, trains and offices, for
example, or glass roofs to give us more natural sunlight. We could invent more
efficient ways of topping up the nutrients our bodies need, or more interesting
and useful ways of exercising those bodies than wasting valuable time in the
gym.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2006


                             353 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 20, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 211 words

HEADLINE: G2: Television & Radio: Radio: Pick of the day

BYLINE: Phil Daoust

BODY:

   The lakes of Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan are an environmental
nightmare rivalled only by the Guardian's toilets. After decades of dumping by
the former Soviet Union, they (the lakes, that is) are a witch's brew of toxins.
The land around them is not much better, and an outbreak of plague near the Aral
Sea suggests that the health of millions is at risk. Or, if you want to get
apocalyptic about it, every damn one of us. Firdevs Robinson steps into this
cursed land for One Planet (12.30pm and repeated, World Service).

   Elsewhere, Carrie Grace is in China to look at the country's awesome
investment in life sciences. The People's Republic is now world-class in fields
like stem cell research and gene therapy, and expects most of its economic
growth to be generated by science in the near future. But, Grace asks in
Crossing Continents (11am, Radio 4), are corners being cut?

   And Gianandrea Noseda has his first Prom (7.30pm, Radio 3) as principal
conductor of the BBC Philharmonic. It's an all-Russian programme, with
crowd-pleasers from Prokofiev - the overture from his opera War and Peace, and
excerpts from his score for the ballet Romeo and Juliet - framing Shostakovich's
Suite on Verses by Michelangelo Buonarroti, sung by the bass Ildar Abdrazakov.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2006


                             354 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             July 15, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: THE GUIDE; Pg. 91

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: The Guide: Thursday 20: Radio: Soundbites

BYLINE: Will Hodgkinson

BODY:

   China is leading the way in stem cell research and gene therapy, with the
government believing that the country's economic growth is going to come
primarily from science. On Crossing Continents ( 11am, R4 ) former Beijing
correspondent Carrie Gracie returns to China to meet the scientists working in
the biotechnology field, and asks whether their flouting of western scientific
protocol and ethical regulations matters if their work means saving lives across
the world.

   Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan in central Asia have been used as a nuclear and
biological dumping ground for decades. On One Planet - A Witch's Brew ( 12.30pm,
BBC World Service ) Firdevs Robinson highlights and environmental catastrophe
that has so far been swept relatively under the carpet.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2006


                             364 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              June 5, 2006 Monday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 674 words

HEADLINE: Britain's first beating heart transplant heralds new era: Cambridge
procedure an 'extraordinary' success Donor organ carried in its own life support
system

BYLINE: James Randerson Science correspondent

BODY:

   A pioneering form of heart transplant has been performed for the first time
in the UK. Doctors say the technique, which keeps the donor heart beating while
it is transported, could double the number of heart transplants each year.

   Surgeons at Papworth hospital in Cambridge carried out the so-called beating
heart transplant on May 22 and the patient - a 58-year-old man - should soon be
well enough to go home. The procedure, which has been performed just three times
before, in Germany, involves putting the donor heart in a device which keeps it
beating and supplied with blood.

   Chris Rudge, managing and transplant director of UK Transplant, the NHS
organisation that matches transplant donors to recipients, described the
operation as a "really significant development".

   "I think we've got to be cautious because it is very preliminary, but if its
possible benefits are realised I am struggling a bit to contain my excitement,"
he said.

   The device - called an organ care system - resembles a hi-tech tea trolley
and was developed by American company TransMedics. Vessels leading to the heart
are plumbed in and receive oxygenated and nutrient-rich blood, which is warmed
to just below normal body temperature.

   "This buys you lots of time," said Bruce Rosengard, the surgeon who led the
transplant team. He believes it could lead to a 50-100% increase in the number
of transplants performed each year. He said the Papworth operation had been a
great success. "The patient's recovery has been nothing short of extraordinary."

   Currently, hearts for transplant are simply kept on ice while they are moved,
but this means they have to reach the recipient within four to six hours.

   This restricts the distance a heart can be transported and presents problems
if removing the diseased heart turns out to be more complicated than expected.
"When that happens we start getting very nervous, because we know that the heart
is sitting in the box and the clock is ticking," Professor Rosengard said. "With
this device the clock is no longer ticking."

   So far, the longest a human heart has been kept beating in the device is five
and a half hours, but pig hearts have been kept going for at least 12 hours.

   The system allows surgeons to check the heart's function before putting it
into the recipient. In the Papworth operation, Prof Rosengard transported the
heart in so-called resting mode, in which it is beating, but not working hard.
He and his surgical team, Cliff Choong and David Jenkins, then switched it into
working mode for 10-15 minutes to check it could deal with a full pumping load.
Once they were happy, they stopped it from beating and transferred it to the
recipient. The professor stressed that none of his team has any financial
interest in TransMedics.

   The breakthrough means organs which, for example, become inflamed after brain
death in the donor can be repaired by treatment with hormones, drugs or gene
therapy, said Prof Rosengard.

   The system could open up a new source of transplants - so-called non-beating
heart donors. Currently, transplant surgeons only harvest from people who are
brain dead, but with a beating heart. Other patients who have died because their
heart stopped beating are not used because by the time the organ is removed it
has typically been damaged by sitting inert in a warm body. These hearts might
be recoverable with the machine, which could could triple or quadruple the
number of heart transplants each year, said Prof Rosengard.

   Five to 10 years off is the possibility of modifying a heart to prevent
rejection. "That would be very exciting (and make) transplant surgery a whole
lot simpler and safer," said the professor.

   Waleed Hassanein, chief executive of TransMedics, said that if clinical
trials went to plan he hoped to begin marketing the system around Christmas. It
will also be tested on lungs, livers and kidneys.

   According to UK Transplant, 106 people in the UK are waiting for a heart
transplant and 44 need a heart and lungs. In 2005, 139 heart and seven
heart-lung transplants were carried out.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                             367 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN HOME PAGES; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: Bubble jabs could lead to diabetes cure

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:

   Injections of tiny bubbles laced with DNA could eventually treat a range of
genetic diseases, following successful experiments on rats with diabetes,
scientists said yesterday.

   Research has shown that infusions of the bubbles safely ferry genes to
defective insulin-producing cells in the pancreas, and help restore their
ability to control blood glucose levels. Previous attempts to treat diabetes
with gene therapies have been marred by difficulties in delivering corrective
genes to the right cells, and by surgical procedure being complex and invasive.

   If trials are successful in humans, millions with type 1 diabetes, generally
affecting younger people, and type 2, those over 40, could be eventually among
the first to benefit. About 800,00 people with diabetes in Britain use insulin
injections to control the condition.

   Researchers at Baylor University in Dallas made solutions of tiny bubbles
based on glycerol, and filled them with a harmless gas and strands of DNA; each
millilitre held more than 5bn bubbles. The treatment relies on ferrying the
genes to specific cells in the pancreas, where they force cells to churn out
more insulin. Tests following injections into adult rats showed delivery of the
genes increased the rats' glucose tolerance, demonstrating the therapy was
effective, as reported in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                             368 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             May 10, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN SOCIETY PAGES; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 313 words

HEADLINE: Society: Public Inquiry: Rosie Barnes, a former MP, is chief executive
of the Cystic Fibrosis Trust

BYLINE: Mary O'Hara

BODY:

   You were recently a winner at the Breathing Life Awards. What are the awards
for?

   They recognise the achievements of people with cystic fibrosis (CF). There is
an extra award for people who do not have CF but who have made a contribution to
helping people with the condition.

   What did it mean to win?

   It was a very lovely surprise. It means a great deal to me. I enjoy my job
and this was the icing on the cake.

   You have been at the Cystic Fibrosis Trust for 10 years. What has it meant to
you?

   I suppose when I started I knew of CF but I did not have the personal
connections I have now, and I did not know how hard life can be for people. It
really changes your perspective.

   What has been the biggest achievement during this time?

   Taking steps towards finding a gene therapy for CF. We have given it a
significant priority.

   Would you have done anything differently?

   Sometimes, looking back, you can see perhaps the things you would have done
earlier - but that's not possible.

   What does the future hold for the charity?

   I hope we will know whether we are going in the right direction on gene
research.

   Could more be done to enhance public understanding of cystic fibrosis?

   I think it could. It is a very complex condition and very difficult for
people to understand. It's harder for young men (with CF), for example, because
it is more acceptable in society for girls to be fragile.

   If you could change one thing about Britain what would it be?

   On a daily level, I'd really like to change people spitting, and antisocial
behaviour generally - things such as happy slapping and abuse in the street.

   What book are you reading?

   The Night Watch, by Sarah Waters.

   Who would make a good president of the UK?

   Someone who is practical and compassionate and not motivated by ideology.
Someone like Claire Rayner.

   For more information on Cystic Fibrosis and the Breathing Life Awards go to
www.cff.org.uk >

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2006


                             370 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FINANCIAL PAGES; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 968 words

HEADLINE: Financial: Calculators at the ready for Virgin Mobile

BYLINE: Richard Wray

BODY:

   Arbitrage players were sent scurrying for their calculators and computer
models yesterday as NTL's near £1bn offer for Virgin Mobile hit the wires. The
deal has created a great opportunity to play rises in NTL's Nasdaq-listed stock,
in combination with foreign exchange movements, against the value of the offer
for the UK mobile phone company.

   NTL is offering three options to Virgin Mobile's minority investors, who have
29% of the company. The first, to take the money and run, pays out 372p a share.
This has become the de-facto "floor" for the London-listed stock. But at what
height the roof is located is where the calculators and models come in.

   Options two and three involve taking NTL stock. While the number of shares
being offered has been set in stone under the terms of the deal, the actual
value that set number of shares puts upon each Virgin Mobile share will
fluctuate. If NTL's shares rise, options two and three will value Virgin Mobile
at well above the 372p cash offer.

   On Monday, for instance, the 0.23245 NTL shares being offered valued each
Virgin Mobile share at 389p. Yesterday, as NTL stock continued to rise on the
other side of the Atlantic, Virgin Mobile added 4.5p to 391.5p.

   Back among the blue chips yesterday, the FTSE 100 closed down 19.6 points at
6004.7 as BP weighed on the market, down 10p at 664.5p, after Goldman Sachs cut
its forecasts ahead of the oil major's first-quarter trading update today.
GlaxoSmithKline , down 23p at £15.00, was also depressed while HSBC gave up 7.5p
to 968p.

   PartyGaming , meanwhile, eased 2.25p to 131.75p on talk that the company is
poised to bid for Empire Online , up 6p at 152p. But the day's biggest blue chip
loser was Tate & Lyle , down 11p at 564.5p, as American consumer pressure group
Citizens for Health called for the company's artificial sweetener Splenda -
responsible for 20% of Tate & Lyle's profits - to be withdrawn and further tests
conducted.

   Headed in the other direction, shares in J Sainsbury added 0.5p to 333.5p
ahead of today's publication of the latest monthly market statistics from TNS
which are expected to show that the supermarket has clawed its way back into
second place, overtaking Asda. Severn Trent , meanwhile, gained 71p to £11.97
after the utility group announced plans to demerge its UK waste management
business, Biffa.

   Away from the blue chips the FTSE 250 dropped 11.3 points to 9892.3 with the
small cap index up 7.9 at 3638.9 points. Shares in life insurer Resolution
dropped 29p to 654.5p - the biggest loser in the FTSE 250 - as traders took
profits after the company, which merged with Britannic last year, announced
annual results.

   Bellway gained 31p to £12.64 as bid speculation whirled around the
housebuilder after its management said the spring selling season had started
well, with sales over the last eight weeks up 10%. The news overshadowed
half-year results in which pre-tax profits dropped slightly to £88m. The
confident outlook statement led Citigroup to point out that the company is one
of its preferred stocks. The broker is looking for a stock price of £14.84.

   Bid speculation also helped Pennon Group , owner of South West Water, add 31p
to £13.54, and the UK's largest retirement home builder, McCarthy & Stone , gain
19.5p to 820p.

   Down among the small caps, Have lock Europa added 4.5p to 166p - just off a
12-month high - as the support services group announced a jump in annual profits
to £6m from £4m a year ago, its fourth successive year of profit rises. Chairman
Malcolm Gourlay said the board believes the business will make further "good
progress" in the current year. Havelock's business units stretch from retail
interiors and point of sale displays to education furniture and supplies,
including installing science laboratories in secondary schools.

   MSB International added another 5.5p to 49p. Its shares continue to rise
following news last week that it has received a bid approach, understood to be
from rival recruitment firm Quantica , down 0.5p at 69.5p.

   Down on Aim, shares in Clapham House , the restaurant empire that includes
Gourmet Burger Kitchen, The Real Greek and Bombay Bicycle Club, added 4p to 205p
as brokers turned positive following last week's 44p a share bid for Urban
Dining, the rival firm behind the Tootsies chain. Both KBC Peel Hunt and Numis
Securities upped their target prices on the company to 250p.

   Zambezi Resources gained 1p to 16p after announcing that it plans to start
exploratory drilling at a copper-gold project southeast of Lusaka, Zambia,
following the results of a geophysical modelling survey of the region. The tests
showed up three potential areas of interest and drilling will start in May.

   Shares in Thor Mining added 0.12p to 4p after the tungsten miner made
positive noises about production from its project in Australia.

   Finally, Delling Group gained 2.75p to 11p after the marketing and
communication services company said after the market had closed on Monday that
its performance last year was "broadly in line with current market
expectations".

   Biomedica rally

   Shares in Oxford Biomedica have experienced something of a rally over the
past two days on hopes that the gene therapy firm will soon have some good news
about its most "mature" product, potential cancer treatment TroVax . Last week
the company announced that, alongside Cancer Research UK , it will report on
results from phase II trials of TroVax in colorectal cancer at the American
Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) annual meeting starting on June 2 in Atlanta
, Georgia. Oxford Biomedica's American clinical collaborators will also be
presenting results from clinical trials of TroVax in cancer of the kidney. The
presentations will consist of data from five clinical trials of the drug. Oxford
Biomedica's shares added 2p to 30.75p - a rise of 7%.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             372 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 28, 2006 Tuesday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1039 words

HEADLINE: G2: Ideas: The ideas interview: Aubrey de Grey: John Sutherland meets
a scientist who is confident we are approaching 'escape velocity' for defying
ageing

BYLINE: John Sutherland

BODY:

   My parents' generation, at my age, all had false teeth. My generation fondly
expects to go to the grave with a full set of snappers. The extension of the
life of our teeth through developing dental technology, clearly, has happened,
but the biogerontologist Aubrey de Grey believes science will take us much
further. With careful maintenance, he argues, there is no reason the human body
shouldn't last for ever. Or at least for a millennium or so. The central goal of
De Grey's work in Cambridge University's department of genetics and as chairman
of the Methuselah Foundation is, he writes on his website, "to expedite the
development of a true cure for human ageing". He is waging, as he likes to say,
"a war on age".

   Before you get too excited, he doesn't yet know what tactics will win this
war. But he has a broad strategy. "My approach is to start from the
straightforward principle that our body is a machine," he says. "A very
complicated machine, but none the less a machine, and it can be subjected to
maintenance and repair in the same way as a simple machine, like a car. We all
know that with adequate care it's possible to keep a car on the road
indefinitely. Those vehicles, for example, that take part in the
London-to-Brighton run were not meant to last 100 years. And it's the same with
the human body. The only problem is that the body is much more complicated than
any machine that we have. And, on top of that, we didn't design the human body,
and therefore we have to discover how it works in order to figure out how to
make it work better and carry on working."

   De Grey believes that medical treatments - "stem cell treatments, gene
therapies, things like that. Certainly nothing that would be cannibalistic" -
will be the means of extending life. And as those treatments evolve, so people
who are now 30 or so will be able to reach a "life extension escape velocity"
which will enable them to elude the gravity of our current lifespan.

   All it will take, he says, is three decades of technological development:
"The idea is that 30 years on from the initial point the therapies will be so
significantly improved that they can be used ever more comprehensively on the
same people, bringing better and better results. The initial therapies will
repair and obviate the things that are easiest." Subject to funding, he reckons,
there is a 50% chance of achieving life extension escape velocity within 30
years. Eventually, he predicted last year, someone who might have lived to 110
without intervention will be able to chalk up 1,000 years.

   The therapies he talks about will not be targeting the things that go wrong
at the end of life - the degenerative diseases and loss of motor function - but
their precursors, the changes that occur throughout life but which are
manifested most devastatingly in old age. Heart disease, for example, "happens,
mainly, because of the accumulation of fatty deposits in the artery wall. That
accumulation has to proceed, gradually, to a certain critical degree, before
it's bad for us. But if you look at the arteries of even a kid, you find the
precursors of that process. So what I focus on is these intermediates: things
that are happening throughout life, from the beginning, accumulating gradually
as a side-effect of metabolism. Initially, they're inert, but when they reach a
certain level of abundance, they screw up the metabolism, they stop the body
from working well."

   By targeting the diseases of old age before decrepitude creeps in, De Grey
believes he can avoid the common accusation against theorists of longevity: that
they will only prolong frailty. "We are talking about extending 'healthy' life,"
he says. "We're not extending the bad part of life. And the extension of the
healthy part of life is not limited by what we currently have as total lifespan.
The aim is to postpone frailty, postpone degenerative disease, debilitation and
so on and thereby shorten the period at the end of life, which is passed in a
decrepit or disabled state, while extending life as a whole."

   Naturally, there are countless objections to the idea of prolonging life. De
Grey has an answer for them all. What if the extension of life leads to
overpopulation, for example? Well, he has responded in the past, what if the
French prime minister had banned Pasteur from promoting hygiene on the same
grounds? Moreover, he says, we have no right to bar future generations from
something that will benefit them. On his website, he writes: "Pretending that we
will be so unable to cope with future problems that it's better to condemn
indefinite millions to the puny lifespan of their ancestors is a sick joke
anyway, but even sicker when we consider how implausible it is that such
problems would be any worse or harder to tackle than those we've tackled in the
past . . . For example, who would have thought in 1850 that society would submit
to the indignity of wearing absurd rubber contraptions every time they had sex,
just to arrest the population explosion that followed the near-elimination of
infant mortality?"

   As for the "pensions time bomb", De Grey argues that since he is talking of
extending active life, not frailty, people will be able to continue working far
longer - in fact, they will be able to retire for a while, then enter a new
career. Society is burdened by the frail, he says. In his brave new world, there
will be no frailty, and so no burden.

   To the onlooker, the commercial attractions of the elixir of youth would seem
to be overwhelming. Why hasn't there been massive interest from the big
pharmaceutical companies? As much interest, say, as in baldness or erectile
dysfunction therapies?

   "The answer is mainly psychological. We've spent the last few millennia aware
that senescence is horrible but knowing nevertheless that it's inevitable. We've
had to find some mechanism to put it out of our minds so we can get on with our
miserably short lives. There's nothing wrong with making the best of one's
declining years, but what does annoy me is the fatalism. Now that we're
seriously in range of finding therapies that actually work against ageing, this
apathy, of course, becomes an enormous part of the problem" *

   For more about De Grey's work, visit www.sens.org

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2006


                             376 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                             March 4, 2006 Saturday

SECTION: GUARDIAN SATURDAY COMMENT PAGES; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 1351 words

HEADLINE: Saturday: Interview: Test driven: Tipu Aziz sparked a furore last week
when he spoke out for vivisection. Now he has gone a step further, defending
animal testing in the cosmetics industry

BYLINE: Stuart Jeffries

BODY:

   Professor Tipu Aziz is showing me a bullfight on his laptop. "It's a film
from the 60s by a Yale professor called Delgado," he says. "That's an angry
bull," the neurosurgeon adds unnecessarily, pointing at the twitching, menacing
animal. On screen, Delgado hides behind the anti-goring screen at the edge of
the ring, leaving his research student to defend himself with a cape. Then we
see the bull after Delgado has implanted electrodes in its brain. He has become
a picture of calm. If only all bulls had such brain surgery, bullfighting would
be obsolete.

   Aziz shows me this film as one of the first examples of deep brain
stimulation, a surgical procedure he pioneered in Britain to halt the symptoms
of Parkinson's disease (which affects one in 100 people over 60) and other
crippling tremor-based ailments. Patients have small electrodes permanently
implanted in their brains. Wires are passed under the skin to a pacemaker. A
battery is inserted in the chest. Some patients have described the surgery as
miraculous - tremors stop and, in some cases, patients walk again. "Many people
cry after the surgery because they are so happy that the symptoms have been
effectively turned off."

   He shows me several before-and-after videos of sufferers to whom he has
brought relief - upsetting images of twitching, horribly writhing men and women,
unable to walk, unable to talk, but with their mental faculties intact. He shows
me a four-year-old girl suffering from dystonia, a degenerative condition akin
to Parkinson's. "At first we didn't want to operate on a small girl, but when
she came to us she was dying - she couldn't swallow or move. So we operated.
Now," he says, clinching the point, "she is a healthy teenager." These films are
marvellous PR for Aziz's work, of course. He performs brain surgery about three
times a week. He says that 40,000 people around the world have benefited from
the techniques he has developed. He is very proud of his work.

   Only one problem: Aziz is a vivisectionist. He experiments on monkeys. He
drills into their heads and puts electrodes in their brains. He has drugged
them, too, in order to recreate the symptoms of Parkinson's. He reckons to use
on average two monkeys a year this way and estimates that about 100 have been
used for such research around the world. "I have absolutely no qualms about what
I do." He points at his laptop: "These cases are why my conscience is clear."

   Aziz is one of the few animal experimenters prepared to go public about what
he does. Why put your head over the parapet now? "It's not new. People like me
and John Stein (an Oxford neurophysiology professor) have been giving public
lectures for years referring to our animal experiments."

   What is new, though, is that these men have started to fight back against
what Aziz describes as the "misinformed and sometimes illiterate
anti-vivisectionists who adopt terrorist tactics". He says: "What is happening
to the process of democracy is that it's been undermined because of protesters'
intimidation." It was protests against the new animal research lab in Oxford and
what he calls their "campaign of intimidation" against animal experimenters that
led him to accept an invitation from Laurie Pycroft, the 16-year-old blogger who
founded the vivisection-advocating group Pro-Test, to speak before supporters of
the Biomedical Research Centre at Oxford last weekend.

   Aziz believes that the lab, where he hopes to work, is of vital importance.
Why? "Malaria and HIV vaccines, work on curing diabetes - all of these things
and many others will be developed there." For a small country, Britain has
achieved a "disproportionate amount of benefits by medical research using
animals," he says. It also has "probably the most violent and absurd animal
rights movement in the world". "The problem with British society," says Aziz,
"is it has a humanoid perception of animals that's almost cartoon-like."

   Do you take security precautions? "I do, but clearly I'm not going to talk
about them." Why is Aziz different from more reticent colleagues? Partly he is
sickened by having his work misrepresented. "They often show horrifying pictures
of animals who have just undergone brain surgery. But if I showed pictures of
you after you had been operated on by me, it would appal people just as much."

   Are any kinds of vivisection unacceptable? "Give me an example." Isn't using
animals for testing cosmetics wrong? "That's a very strange argument. People
talk about cosmetics being the ultimate evil. But beautifying oneself has been
going on since we were cavemen. If it's proven to reduce suffering through
animal tests, it's not wrong to use them. To say cosmetics is an absolute evil
is absurd."

   Pycroft, for one, regards Aziz as a hero, and described having the professor
to speak at Pro-Test's Oxford rally as being as exciting as it would be for a
"normal person having David Beckham speak at their wedding". I look sidelong at
Aziz as he takes another slug of espresso in his office in Oxford's Radcliffe
Infirmary. The David Beckham of vivisectionists is an unlikely hero: he
resembles a Bangladeshi Walter Benjamin or a saturnine Trotsky thanks to his
round specs and impressively luxuriant moustache. He halts the interview
regularly to go outside to smoke ("there are smoke alarms in my office"), advise
postgrads, and consult with colleagues about operations. He tells me he often
works seven days a week. He used to fly microlights, but no more. "I don't have
time for other interests."

   Do you have pets? "I have dogs who are very friendly and very well loved."
Where does his conviction about being a vivisectionist come from? "At a personal
level, it comes from my father. He was very central in taking a drug called
ivermectin that was used on horses (to kill parasites), and using it in tests in
Africa that resulted in curing millions of humans of river blindness."

   Aziz was born in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) into a medical dynasty. He
arrived in Britain aged 17 with only three O-levels, but after passing A-levels,
studied neurophysiology at University College London. How did you come to
specialise in Parkinson's? "At UCL it was fascinating to me that you could
destroy brain tissue and restore normality." That, in effect, is what deep brain
stimulation does. Then, during his doctorate at Manchester, he started his
pioneering work on animal research.

   How did you realise that you could cure Parkinson's with electrodes? "That's
a long story," he says. It begins in 1980s California, where a chemistry
graduate presented himself to a psychiatrist. "He was catatonic and unable to
move. He had been developing an illegal recreational drug by modifying
pethidine." He had also been supplying it to friends. One of his "customers"
died as a result and, when his brain was examined, it showed damage identical to
Parkinson's disease. In the 80s, monkeys were given this so-called Parkinson's
drug and their immobility was monitored. In Manchester in 1989, Aziz went
further. In order to test the hypothesis that surgically manipulating the
brain's subthalamic nucleus should benefit Parkinson's disease, he injected a
monkey with the "Parkinson's drug". Then he did surgery to install electrodes in
the monkey's brain, which enabled him to "switch off" the Parkinson's symptoms.
This proved to be the foundation of his neurosurgical work for the next 17
years.

   What do you expect to be researching in the next 17 years? "I will be working
in the next few years on viral and gene therapy to treat Parkinson's disease and
other degenerative disorders, using stem cell therapy to repair the brain." Such
research is surely just as contentious as using animals for experiments. Indeed,
you might be forgiven for thinking that Aziz may just be poised to double his
troubles - not only will anti-vivisectionists be shouting him down in public
meetings and sending him hate mail, but campaigners opposed to using human
tissue for medical research will be bombarding him, too. Why is he not more
circumspect about his work? "Because I have no problems about what I do. I know
it is right."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2006


                             379 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                            February 17, 2006 Friday

SECTION: GUARDIAN LEADER PAGES; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 603 words

HEADLINE: Response Don't despair. Sarah: this disorder is no bar to a normal
life: Medical advances are making the CGD genetic condition manageable, says
Rosemarie Rymer

BYLINE: Rosemarie Rymer

BODY:

   I received a number of phone calls when Sarah Mahboubian's article on having
a child with chronic granulomatous disorder was published ('Had I known, I would
not have had children', February 9). People with the condition and their
families understand Sarah's grief and guilt. It is only too familiar from their
personal experiences. But they also feel that the headline represents the pain
and shock of a recent diagnosis (Sarah's son was diagnosed eight months ago)
rather than the reality of a life lived with CGD.

   CGD is a genetic condition that affects the immune system. People with the
condition are vulnerable to infection and have to take drugs daily. There may be
long bouts in hospital.

   Sarah said that she cannot imagine how "the very physical medical intrusion
that goes with the disease . . . can ever be accommodated psychologically". We
at the CGD Research Trust can only counter with the experiences of those
involved with our charity.

   Simon Capell is 26 and has CGD. He also has a 2.1 degree in biology and
geography, has travelled all over the world, and wants to work in conservation
but knows he will have to protect himself from infection. Simon's friend has CGD
and has just become a father. He too sympathises with Sarah but wants people to
know that life is certainly not over if you have a genetic condition.

   Post-diagnosis there is a lot to take in and adjustments to be made. It is
hard not to worry. Sarah spoke about her guilt and self-hatred. We know these
feelings can stay no matter how many times parents are told they are illogical
or irrational, and it can take many years before they are resolved.

   Tracey is a mother of two affected children who has gradually got used to
managing her children's condition, and ensures they have an active life. "I
don't think we've made them feel as though they've missed out because of CGD.
We're careful in that respect," she says.

   Our charity funds a clinical nurse specialist, based at Great Ormond Street
Hospital, who looks after all children and adults with CGD and helps their
families. She is continually amazed at the way people take this condition in
their stride, and at their determination to have the best life possible - even
though there may be times of pain, or lengthy stays in hospital.

   It does take time for everyone in the family to come to terms with living
with the condition. They need the support of peers, friends, the social
services, schools and, of course, the NHS.

   You are not alone if your child is diagnosed with CGD. While rare - one in
250,000 people in this country have it - the condition is by no means unknown.
We work with more than 185 families who have been touched by it.

   One of our main concerns is increasing the awareness of CGD; we fund research
into gene therapy (we founded Jeans for Genes day) and hope that improvements
for particular conditions such as bowel or lung symptoms will help others, for
example, with Crohn's Disease or respiratory problems.

   Management of CGD has been transformed by new drugs, new methods of diagnosis
and improved knowledge among medical professionals. If certain precautions are
taken, a normal life is possible for most people.

   Rosemarie Rymer is general manager of the Chronic Granulomatous Disorder
Research Trust

   cgd@cgdrt.co.uk

   If you wish to respond, at greater length than in a letter, to an article in
which you have featured either directly or indirectly, email
response@guardian.co.uk or write to Response, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road,
London EC1R 3ER. We cannot guarantee to publish all responses, and we reserve
the right to edit pieces for both length and content

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006


                             380 of 1016 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2006 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                              All Rights Reserved
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                           February 9, 2006 Thursday

SECTION: GUARDIAN FEATURES PAGES; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 1064 words

HEADLINE: G2: Health: 'Had I known, I would not have had children': The
discovery that she had passed a life-threatening condition on to her
two-year-old left Sarah Mahboubian full of guilt and self-hatred

BYLINE: Sarah Mahboubian

BODY:

   Any 39-year-old woman will have her own reproductive history to tell. If she
has children, there is the tale of her body's nine months in pregnancy, the
first stirrings of the child inside, the sweet kicks and the "I can't do it"
mumbled before the job is done. There may be the spectres, too, of any children
lost to miscarriages or terminations. All notches carved into the timber of the
female self.

   But I have an extra burden. My two-year-old son David has a life-threatening
disease and it is my fault: I gave it to him. He has Chronic Granulomatous
Disorder (CGD), a very rare primary immune deficiency that affects about just
one in a million people worldwide. He has a faulty bone-marrow gene, which means
his white blood cells are unable to produce the bleach-like chemicals needed to
kill non-oxygen-producing bacteria and fungi, leaving him wide open to
life-threatening infections.

   Generally, CGD is an inherited disease, the missing chromosome X-linked. I am
the carrier and have passed it on to my two beautiful children. My four-year old
daughter Esther should be all right. Her extra X chromosome will mean that her
immune system should function normally. But in David's case it is, if left
untreated, fatal. Blood tests have confirmed that my mother and sisters are not
carriers, suggesting that some spontaneous mutation arose in my case, yet I feel
guilty and am full of self-hatred.

   Had I known that I was a carrier, I am certain I would have chosen not to
have children. Nor would I have willingly chosen to see a child of mine suffer,
or face the possibility of my son dying while I am alive.

   The options facing confirmed carriers today are brutal: prenatal tests on
womb tissue (chorionic villus sampling) or fluid (amniocentesis) can show
whether the baby will have CGD. If the child is male and has CGD, therapeutic
termination is available.

   Esther is a carrier too. If she has children with an unaffected man, there is
a 50% chance that any sons born would develop the condition. Though her
daughters would not have CGD, there is a 50% chance they would be carriers. When
I ask the consultant at Great Ormond Street hospital about Esther's future, he
says that in 30 years' time people will not make love to have children.

   He is referring to the use of the technique called Pre-Implantation Gender
Determination (PIGD), which involves using IVF (invitro-fertilisation) treatment
and enables couples to choose the sex of their baby. This complicated technique
is available today and, in years to come, its highly developed form could
perhaps offer a comprehensive genetic screening of the foetus-to-be.

   The consultant speaks as a physician who is keen to see the eradication of
disease. But to me, still reeling from the pain of a new diagnosis, the
statement reads like a rejection of David - an indictment of our son, who was
conceived in love, and bought forth into the world in good faith.

   David - it means "beloved one" in Hebrew - has always been a very happy,
active boy. And very independent, too: we found him once halfway up a hill and
on his way to our B&B at a party in Shropshire. He was also very big for his
age, making diagnosis more difficult in his case, as children with CGD are
typically on the smaller side.

   Eight months ago, six boils appeared on David's nose, for which the GP
prescribed anti-bacterial Fucidin cream. Then came the high fevers and awful
night sweats. David was finally admitted to the paediatric liver unit at King's
College hospital, after the ultrasound of the liver taken at the local hospital
that day showed "masses". He had been fighting three liver abscesses all the
while, and the following week, a simple test called the NBT (nitro blue
tetrazolium) confirmed that David had Chronic Granulomatous Disorder. Our
hospital stay lasted 11 weeks.

   I was acquainted with illness, but disease has a different feel to it; you
just sense it. David had had 13 hospital admissions by the time he was two and a
half, and despite being given the all-clear by a distinguished immunologist, an
uneasy feeling remained.

   What does the future hold ? At the moment, while we await a resolution to the
liver abscesses, David is on a three-month cocktail of oral antibiotics, with
blood tests taken weekly to check a fall in his blood inflammation markers. Once
we are over this episode, David will start a lifetime course of daily
prophylactic antibiotics and antifungals. Any fever above 38C will need prompt
investigating by the local paediatric ward.

   This can happen at any time; I started this article at the local hospital,
where David was admitted with a fever and a cough. Intravenous antibiotics were
immediately started through David's Hickman line (a plastic tube inserted into
and then out of the chest through an incision at the neck) and blood taken.
Luckily, on this occasion the combined results of a chest x-ray, ultrasound and
blood cultures showed up nothing more sinister than a viral infection, which
David's body can fight. Inflammation invariably causes problems too for people
with CGD - David has colitis, an inflammation of his large bowel which regularly
causes blood-stained diarrhoea.

   I cannot imagine how such abrupt changes of gear - the very physical medical
intrusion that goes with disease, or the swift disappearance of home - can ever
be accommodated psychologically: my daughter is suffering, too.

   And despite our wonderful consultant's admonitions to give the boy a normal
life, the list of things not to do is prohibitive. David cannot paddle in
streams or splash about in puddles. He cannot dig in the garden, go near cut
grass or jump in piles of leaves. Caves, barns, sheds and lofts are off-limits,
as are any buildings where works are taking place.

   Cure exists in the form of bone marrow transplantation, which depends on
finding a compatible donor - with siblings sometimes presenting as exact matches
- but carries very serious risks. Gene therapy is in its infancy and is at
present only offered as part of clinical trials.

   In my daydreams, David is cured by gene therapy and we set off in a camper
van to see the world, or just garden like we used to. In the meantime, black is
a colour I will not wear, cannot bear looking at. I start to dress our children
in the bright colours and patterns of the children of the mountains of the Iran
of my childhood *

   For more information about CGD, see www.cgd.org.uk

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2006


                             386 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                November 8, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Education Pages, Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1559 words

HEADLINE: Education: Higher: Interview: Steve Jones: Snail male: The nation's
favourite geneticist came off the academic treadmill to enjoy a vulgar career.

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:


    It's somehow fitting that a man who has spent most of the last 40 years
studying snails should describe his career as life in the slow lane. "I'm one of
the top six geneticists working with snails," Steve Jones laughs, "and the other
five agree." It's undoubtedly true that you don't win Nobel prizes working with
molluscs; so how do you account for the fact that he's far better known to the
public than most geneticists - including those who have picked up the top gong?

    Never one to miss an opportunity to put the boot into himself, Jones happily
calls himself a "tired old media tart". Which is one way of putting it. Another
is that after several radio appearances in the 80s, he stormed the public
consciousness with his Reith lectures on genetics in 1991 and, with a sequence
of best-selling popular science books, such as The Language of Genes and In the
Blood, not forgetting frequent TV, radio and newspaper appearances, has remained
there ever since.

    Not that this popularisation of science - which earned him the Royal
Society's Faraday medal in 1997 - has all taken place at the high-profile end of
the market. As professor of genetics at University College London, Jones has
taught several generations of undergraduates and postgraduates, but has also
made a point of travelling to lecture in schools - "my job is to make sex
boring, and I'm very good at it" - and this week he takes on a bunch of year 5s
in a science series for Teachers' TV.

    Jones clearly enjoys the challenge of making science accessible - "as a
Welshman who grew up in the Wirral, I have a pathological aversion to
snotty-nosed, Anglo-Saxon Oxbridge elites" - but he does have regrets about the
impact it has had on his career. "I would have liked to spend more time on my
own research," he says, "but funders are looking for big, slick operations, such
as the human genome project. I tend to come up with small, quirky ideas that
don't attract any money.

    "Sometime in the early 90s, I found a print-out of my book on Darwin and it
was actually smaller than my pile of failed grant applications. I realised that
my career could go two ways. I could either become a full-time administrator -
there's always a lot of money and opportunities in that field - or I could go
down the path of what the French call "vulgarisation".

    There have been advantages, though, because with vulgarisation comes a
certain liberation from the academic treadmill. For one thing, Jones now has the
clout to develop some of his smaller and quirkier ideas without worrying too
much about how his peers judge him. His current project involves feeding fruit
flies magnetic food and then bunging them through a solenoid to find out how
much they weigh.

    "The point of the experiment is to quantify the cost of sex," he explains.
"It's often thought that women pay a higher price for sex; this shows that both
male and female fruit flies eat significantly more when they're having sex, so
the costs are equal."

    More importantly, Jones's position outside the mainstream allows him to
disengage from the hyperbole that is often attached to genetic research. "We
have made progress," he concedes. "Twenty years ago, people thought it was an
impossibility to map the human gene sequence, but now we have done it. Yet all
we have really done is create an accurate description. The human genome project
is not like the discoveries of Copernicus and Gallileo that instantly
revolutionised the way we understood the world. Rather, it is equivalent to
Vesalius cutting open the heart to discover it had four chambers instead of the
three. From there it took a further 100 years to discover the circulation of the
blood and 400 years to conduct the first heart transplant."

    Jones isn't suggesting a similar timeline for any significant genetic
medical breakthrough. What he is keen to do, though, is reframe both the public
and academic perception of where we are on the continuum. "Genetics may have
played a part in diagnosing diseases and devising drug regimes to treat them,"
he argues, "but gene therapy has been a complete dead end as a treatment in
itself.

    "Twenty-five years ago, a geneticist called French-Anderson announced that
he had cured a child of "bubble boy" immunodeficiency. This turned out to be a
hopelessly optimistic assumption. Only now have we found a way of treating such
children in this way, but have had to abandon it as one of the side-effects is
that it gives the patient cancer.

    "Similarly, I get immensely worried when I hear cystic fibrosis sufferers
saying they aren't worried about their illness because a gene therapy cure is
round the corner. It isn't. All the advances in life expectancy for sufferers
have been entirely due to conventional medicine.

    "There are promising areas of genetic research, most notably stem cells, but
we are still only operating at the edges. DNA is chemistry, which is stupid;
stem cells are biology, which is clever. So even though stem cells appear to
offer solutions, we still don't know quite what we're doing or how exactly they
work."

    In any case, it's a task Jones is happy to leave to others. But then he's
contrived to always be on the edge of the main event - not least at the
beginning when his career was almost over before it started. "Like a lot of
kids, I was taught science very badly at school," he says, "and it was only an
interest in bird-watching that made me continue. I ended up with five not very
good A-levels."

    Nationalist to the last, Jones applied to five Welsh universities and was
turned down by the lot. "That looked like the end of my academic career and I
got a job working in a factory," he continues. Fortunately, it was the year
before university applications were centrally processed and Jones discovered the
closing date for applications to Edinburgh was two weeks later than everywhere
else. So he bunged a letter in the post and was accepted by return.

    Jones went on to do a doctorate at Edinburgh that involved numerous field
trips collecting snails in the former Yugoslavia, before adding a BTA to his
Phd. "Back in the 60s it was vital to have 'Been To America' on your CV," he
says, "because the US was then streets ahead of the rest of the world both in
the technical and intellectual understanding of genetics. I spent two of the
scariest years of my life at the University of Chicago: guys like Dick Lewontin
and Stephen Gould lived and breathed genetics 14 hours a day."

    Back in the UK, Jones settled down to comparative obscurity, working in the
women's medical school of the Royal Free hospital in north London - "they
thought I was an anomaly for being a snail man, I thought I was an anomaly for
being a man" - before winding up at UCL, where he has remained to this day, with
a number of visiting academic posts at Harvard and the University of California
at Davis.

    Eventually, though, the good times came to an end. "I'm still embarrassed
about it even now," he confesses. "I devised this hideously expensive and
ludicrously time-consuming experiment that went disastrously wrong. As ever with
me, the idea was sound but the execution was poor. The idea was to breed
gazillions of fruit flies with two rate genetic variations and to transport them
to a remote location and study them to see how selection worked.

    "The location we chose was San Miguel, a remote and inaccessible island off
the coast of California. Just about everything that could go wrong, did. We had
a fight with the crew of the boat who didn't want to land us, the US military
tried to warn us off and then a hurricane blew all our flies away. To round
things off, I picked up a copy of Nature to discover that an Australian
geneticist had successfully completed an identical experiment in two cactus
plantations a few hundred miles apart."

    Predictably, the Americans weren't too impressed with a few hundred thousand
dollars of research money going missing, but you get the feeling that Jones
isn't altogether unhappy about the outcome. Far better the heroic failure of the
grand and absurd than some petty, lab-based project that satisfies only the
number-crunchers of the research assessment exercise.

    At 61, Jones is nearing the end of his career - a prospect he finds highly
disagreeable. He plans to keep going at UCL for as long as he is allowed, but
even when he finally leaves his Gower Street office he has no plans to give up
work. "There are books to write," he says, "and I dare say that I'll find
something snaily to keep me interested." And for those who still question
Jones's decision to work on the less glamorous margins of genetics, he would no
doubt point to that other slow and shelly creature, the tortoise, that
comfortably won the race.

    Teaching Challenge with Steve Jones is on Teachers' TV tomorrow at 9.30pm
and repeated during the week

    Curriculum vitae

    Name Steve Jones

    Age 61

    Job Professor of genetics, UCL; president, Galton Institute

    Publications The Language of the Genes, 1993; In the Blood, 1995; Almost a
Whale: The Origin of Species Updated, 1999; Y: The Descent of Men, 2002

    Awards Royal Society Faraday Medal for public understanding of science,
1997; Institute of Biology Charter Medal, 2002

    Likes going to France

    Dislikes administration

    Married to Norma Percy, a TV producer


LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2005


                             387 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                November 7, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Obituaries Pages, Pg. 37

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: Other lives: Benjamin Angel

BYLINE: Anthony Angel

BODY:


    By any standards Dr Benjamin Angel, who has died aged 26, achieved a
remarkable amount, by sheer determination, organisation and willpower. His
intellect, leadership qualities, wisdom and charm meant he had a great impact on
all those he came into contact with. Throughout his life, my son refused to
regard himself as a victim or to be defined by the disease of cystic fibrosis
(CF), with which he was diagnosed when just a few days old.

    Although CF may not have defined Benjamin, it influenced his early work. In
his gap year, he worked first at the ion transport laboratory at the Royal
Brompton hospital in London, and subsequently as a guest investigator at the
laboratory of cardiac/membrane physiology at Rockefeller University, New York.
He was interested in the

    development of a gene therapy treatment for CF, the most common
life-threatening inherited genetic defect.

    His work at the Royal Brompton was published (in a co-authored paper) in
Nature, while his experimental work at the Rockefeller on understanding the
fault in the chloride ion channel, the basic defect underlying CF and causing
the damaging viscous mucous in the lungs, was published in a paper he

    co-authored in the Journal of General Physiology. Both were based on
research he did when he was only 19. He started to support the work of the
Cystic Fibrosis Trust in raising funds for gene therapy, delivering lectures and
appearing in a fundraising film, A Cure Is within our Grasp. He later became a
member of the trust's clinical trial advisory group (CTAG).

    Benjamin read medicine at Cambridge, and quickly became active in Jewish
circles - in the L'Chaim Society and as events officer at the Jewish Society. He
was committed to Jewish and Zionist learning and ideology, but most importantly
to its practice.

    After leaving Cambridge in 2002 he married Louise, whom he had met in London
through the Federation of Zionist Youth. He completed his medical studies at the
Royal Free and University College Medical School, and qualified as a doctor in
2004. At the Royal Free, he became immensely frustrated with the antiquated
systems within the NHS and worked to improve patient care, developing
computer-based systems to assist his team. These gave him the idea for an
e-learning system for doctors that won him the undergraduate prize in the
UCL/London Business School Entrepreneur Challenge 2004, and he set up a company,
ITL Systems, to further the concept.

    Benjamin knew his time might be limited, but he never acted that way.

    He played tennis, loved golf and was an accomplished skier, keen
photographer and swimmer. He enjoyed food and cooking; his musical tastes ranged
from classical to rock guitar; he had a passion for travel and a love for all
things Jewish.

    He was an incredibly optimistic person. At the end of 2004, he was
critically ill in intensive care, but bounced back against the odds to continue
his e-learning project. He inspired everybody he worked with, accomplished
virtually any task he set himself and approached life with humour, humanity,
kindness and maturity.

    He is survived by Louise, his brother Jonathan, his mother Ruth and myself.

    Has someone you know died since August who should feature in Other Lives?
Send contributions to: Other Lives, Obituaries, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon
Road, London EC1R 3ER, email other.lives @guardian.co.uk or fax 020 7837 4530. A
selection will appear on our website


LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2005


                             390 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                October 18, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: Today on the web: Stem cell research

BYLINE: Ben Rooney

BODY:


    Embryonic stem cell research is a touchstone issue for the religious right,
particularly in the US. "If one truly believes that life is sacred and also
believes that it begins at the moment of conception, it is perfectly reasonable
to be opposed to any procedure that would destroy that life, even if it could
theoretically help others in the long run. The end result does not validate the
method used." evanwbrown.blogspot.com

    But away from the fundamentalists there is a fervent, and well informed,
debate. The Stem Cell Blog is an excellent clearing house for news. "This blog
is a labor of love from my sadness at seeing my closest of relatives suffer from
diabetes and kidney diseases and my hope to see them healthy again through stem
cell transplants." Stemnews provides a similar service. stemcell.taragana.net

    www.stemnews.com

    Speaking for the scientists, Science Clearing House says: "If one wants to
have a fully consistent position on stem cells then one can either be for them
or against them. Each cell contains the entire genome so it has all the
information to create life. Destroying a cell is tantamount to destroying life.
If one is against stem cell research then one must be against all genetic and
cellular manipulations in humans - no IVF, no gene therapy, no ultrasound
imaging of the foetus and certainly no amniocentesis." sciencehouse.blogspot.com

    An editorial in Christianity Today avoids the hysterical language that
reduces the argument to a slanging match: "Scientists have been reluctant to
discuss the nature of the element critical in that work: the embryo. When asked
whether he considers the embryo to be human, (stem cell researcher) Greenwood
instead mentions research protocols vetted by a private ethics advisory board.
'I can't put labels on these materials,' Greenwood says. 'The materials are what
they are medically and scientifically, and that's what we describe. It's IVF
material.'" christianitytoday.com

    "I don't think it really has much to do with ethics at all. I think the core
issue is that some people are afraid and threatened by scientific research into
the origins of life. They see it as something that should remain the sole
purview of a god." grahamglass.blogs.com


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2005


                             391 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                October 15, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Financial Pages, Pg. 26

LENGTH: 840 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Compass moves point to takeover

BYLINE: Neil Hume

BODY:


    Compass was in demand yesterday amid talk that the contract caterer could be
a private equity takeover target. Despite the cash generative nature of its
operations, Compass has hitherto not been considered a leveraged buyout
candidate on account of its pension fund deficit, which currently stands at
£450m.

    French broker Exane believes this problem could be solved by finding a buyer
for Compass's Select Service Partner (SSP) division, which operates Moto service
stations in Britain and the Upper Crust sandwich chain and Cafe Ritazza coffee
bars in railways stations.

    Compass put SSP up for sale in September after issuing its third profits
warning in 12 months. Since then Elior, a Paris-based catering and concessions
company, has expressed an interest in buying the division, which is estimated to
be worth £1bn.

    "We think a coalition between private equity funds and Elior could provide a
solution. Elior could buy SSP, while two other funds could take control of
Compass guaranteeing that the pension deficit will be covered by the disposal of
SSP," Exane said in a note to clients.

    With Exane upgrading its rating on the stock to "outperform" and arguing
that an offer of 250p could be justified, Compass shares closed 4.75p higher at
198.75p.

    In the wider market leading shares closed higher, boosted by Hilton Group
which climbed 40.75p, or 13.4%, to 345.5p after revealing that it is in talks to
sell its hotels division to US sister company Hilton Hotels Corporation. News of
the approach also lifted InterContinental Hotels Group , 34p stronger at 723p.

    A bright opening on Wall Street following strong results from General
Electric added further support to the FTSE 100, which finished 9.8 points higher
at 5275. Nevertheless, over the week the blue chip index has dropped 87 points.

    Elsewhere, the picture was mixed. The FTSE 250 index added 4.4 points to end
at 7626.8 but the FTSE Small Cap index eased 4.4 points to 7626.8.

    In the bond market, the 10-year gilt closed around 102.660, yielding 4.415%.

    Hedge fund manager Man Group ended a miserable week on a positive note,
chalking up one of the biggest gains in the FTSE 100. Its shares, which opened
on Monday at £16.40, rallied 32p to £15.41 after its joint broker, Merrill
Lynch, placed the company on its "Europe 1" list of recommended stocks.

    The US broker believes the recent sell-off, which seems to have been
triggered by the crisis at US futures broker Refco, has created a good buying
opportunity. Merrill analyst Philip Middleton reckons Man is trading at a 20%
discount to its peers and to the wider market.

    Another stock that has struggled this week is retailer Next and like Man its
shares rallied yesterday thanks to some positive comments from its house broker.
"While retaining a cautious view on the sector, Next's valuation has, in our
view, become compelling and we see scope to shift money towards it within the
sector," UBS analyst Matthew Taylor said.

    Next shares started the week at £13.57 but hit £12.68 on Thursday after US
broker JP Morgan claimed the company had too much stock heading into Christmas.
Next shares closed 19p higher at £12.87 yesterday.

    Elsewhere, drinks group Diageo advanced 17p to 839p after a UBS upgrade to
"buy" with a 960p target price. The Swiss broker reckons current market
forecasts are too conservative.

    Among the mid caps, Rank , the bingo and Hard Rock Cafe conglomerate, gained
5.25p to 294p on hopes it could be a takeover target for Hilton, if the company
manages to sell its hotel arm.

    HMV , the music retailer and Waterstones book seller, eased 0.25p to 193.75p
despite the appearance of US fund manager Brandes on its share register with a
debut 3.1% holding. Brandes is a value investor and traders believe it amassed
its position after the company's recent dismal trading update, which sent its
share price below 200p for the first time since January 2004.

    Vague bid rumours saw Corus , the Anglo-Dutch steel group, rise 0.75p to
47.25p.

    Among the small caps, Antonov , the gearbox technology group, eased 2.5p to
102.5p on news that it will take a year before a decision is reached in its
patent infringement case against Toyota. On the bright side, if Antonov receives
a favourable judgment, stockbroker Dawnay, Day Townsley estimates the company
could be awarded between £28m-£41m. To put that figure in perspective, Antonov's
current market value is £32m.

    Oxford Biomedica , the gene therapy company, improved 0.25p to 43p. Traders
are expecting a positive update on its TroVax treatment for colorectal cancer on
Monday and possibly a licensing deal with US drugs company Pfizer.

    Parkdean Holdings , the caravan park operator, rose 6.5p to 259p on hopes
that the private equity arm of Dutch bank ABN Amro will soon make an offer.
Parkdean revealed a takeover approach this week.

    As a result of excitement ahead of next week's investor visits to ASOS 's
new warehouse, the online clothes retailer rose 2p to 75.5p.


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2005


                             392 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                October 12, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 11

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: Science: £10m to study how to regrow damaged limbs

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:


    British scientists have been awarded £10m to develop genetic treatments that
could enable humans to regrow limbs damaged by accidents or surgery and allow
patients to recover from wounds without scarring.

    The ambitious project aims to unravel the genetic quirks that allow certain
amphibians, such as frogs and salamanders, to recover from severe injuries by
regenerating fresh body tissues. By identifying the genetic mechanisms behind
such extraordinary feats of healing, the researchers hope to develop medical
treatments that do the same in humans.

    Enrique Amaya, a tissue engineer at Manchester University and leader of the
project, has begun work looking at the regenerative capabilities of frogs. At a
press conference in London yesterday, he gave details of one experiment in which
he cut frog embryos to see how the wounds healed. "This is a really big scrape.
It's the equivalent of a 20-year-old falling off a motorbike at 70mph," he said.
"But within one and a half hours, the wound completely heals."

    As embryos, frogs can recover from even severe wounds without a trace of
scarring, but in adults this ability disappears. By working out which genes
govern wound healing in the foetus and which genes come into play in the adult,
Dr Amaya's team hopes to identify the genetic factors at work and develop drugs
that would coerce the human body to heal itself when damaged. "We know we have
all of the genes to do this," said Dr Amaya. "The potential to heal without
scars and regenerate tissues is in us all."

    The ability to recover from wounds without scarring is not confined to
amphibians. Rare cases of babies being operated upon in the womb have shown that
if surgery is performed within six months' gestation, the baby is likely to be
born without any signs of scarring.

    In another experiment, Dr Amaya clipped the tail off a tadpole. The tail
grew back in nine days. "It shows that even complicated tissues can regenerate,
with everything ending up in the right place."

    Perhaps the most impressive tissue regeneration occurs in salamanders, which
are able to regrow entire limbs, even as adults. Experiments by Dr Amaya showed
that when a front limb was clipped off a salamander, the stump formed a ball of
cells called a blastema which went on to grow into all the specific tissue types
needed to regrow the limb, completing the task in about 25 days. "You can clip
it off as many times as you like, it will still grow back," said Dr Amaya.

    If the researchers can tease apart the subtle genetic differences that allow
some organisms to regrow limbs and heal without scarring, they still have
significant hurdles to clear before developing a treatment for humans. Genetic
therapies are in their infancy and years of animal studies would be needed to
ensure any treatment did not trigger uncontrolled cell growth, leading to
cancer.

    Gus McGrouther, a plastic surgeon at Manchester University, said that while
the research was in its early stages, the goal of regrowing limbs was not beyond
human grasp. "It's an achievable future, it will eventually happen."

    guardian.co.uk/science >


LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2005


                             393 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                October 10, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 24

LENGTH: 918 words

HEADLINE: G2: Ideas: The ideas interview: Julian Savulescu Eugenics need not be
Nazi, and drugs in sport are good, Oxford's leading ethicist tells John
Sutherland

BYLINE: John Sutherland

BODY:


    The Boys From Brazil is one of Julian Savulescu's favourite movies. That
would not raise an eyebrow, were it not for the fact that his main interest as
Uehiro professor of practical ethics at Oxford University is "biological
enhancement" - also known as "the new eugenics". Savulescu's views on cloning
and the improvement of the body have caused controversy before. So having a soft
spot for a film that imagines Josef Mengele cloning an army of Hitlers seems a
little risky.

    Yes, he says, but the film's value is that it foregrounds cloning as an
all-important issue: "What was science fiction when the film was produced, is
reality today."

    That may be true. But however one renames it, can eugenics ever throw off
the legacy of the Third Reich? "It depends what you mean by eugenics," he says.
"In point of fact, we practise eugenics when we screen for Down's syndrome, and
other chromosomal or genetic abnormalities. The reason we don't define that sort
of thing as 'eugenics', as the Nazis did, is because it's based on choice. It's
about enhancing people's freedom rather than reducing it."

    "Enhancement" comes up time and again with Savulescu. Doesn't "enhancement",
as he applies it, go well beyond screening for Down's? "Yes and no," he replies.
"Enhancement can be seen as the whole range of things we do nowadays to
manipulate, for example, the maternal environment to have a healthier or more
intelligent child. In so far as we can use biological interventions or
reproductive interventions, I see them as being no different from providing good
schools or more nourishing school meals."

    Does he, then, foresee parents using gene therapy to ensure their children
get a head start in life? "Yes, in the same way that parents today give their
children vitamins to make them brighter. But as for genetic manipulation, I
don't think that it's 10 years away, but, yes, at some point we will be
intervening at the genetic level in the way that we intervene in the dietary
level now."

    One of the hotspots into which Savulescu's brand of practical ethics has
taken him is sport. He has contrarian views on performance-enhancing drugs. "I
positively support certain kinds of performance enhancement. When you look at
the objections, one of the principal ones is it's unsafe. I agree that this is a
valid objection to some kinds of performance enhancers. But it doesn't, for
example, apply to moderate levels of growth hormones or even moderate levels of
anabolic steroids. It all depends on what you class as 'safe enough'."

    Wouldn't this simply produce competition between chemists rather than
athletes? "I don't believe human races are like horse races or dog races where
you just line the contestants up, flog them, and find out who wins," he
counters. "We humans have the ability to exercise choice over how we run our
race, and also how we train, and we also reserve the right to decide what kind
of athlete we are."

    According to Savulescu, the permitted and controlled administration of
performance-enhancing agents will "make sport fairer and, indeed, in the long
term safer by getting rid of backyard illegal enhancements. What you'll see
instead is the expression of human choice about not just how you are going to
run the race, but what sort of competitor you want to be."

    Right now, Savulescu believes, the biggest challenge concerning
pharmaceuticals is how they and other medical interventions can be employed for
non-medical uses. "How, that is, we can use that technology not just to treat or
prevent disease but to enhance our lives."

    What precisely, are the life-enhancing drugs he has in mind? Is Viagra, for
example, a biological enhancer? "It is, because it's changing people's
performance - people who are affected by the normal processes of ageing. Drugs
that enhance our sexual satisfaction are going to be increasingly important in
the future." As, he believes, will be the development of anti-ageing
interventions that could biologically enhance us to the extent of doubling life
expectancy.

    Cloning, too, he sees as a challenge not a threat. When the United Nations,
in March this year, issued its denunciation of cloning, in all its forms, as an
insult to human "dignity", Savulescu shot back with a co-authored paper. Drawing
a clear line between reproductive cloning (which he agreed should be banned) and
therapeutic cloning (essential), Savulescu insisted: "The UN must immediately
retract its misguided and immoral Declaration on Human Cloning before it
consigns many more future people to early and avoidable suffering and death."

    Does the future, then, hold nothing to scare him? "I'm very frightened," he
says, "about biological-weapons programmes, about nuclear war, about global
terrorism, about nanotechnology: any of which could result in global
destruction. I think we face challenges of extinction over the next 100 years."

    But he's not frightened by, say, cloning or genetic manipulation? "No, not
at all. I see the job of practical ethics to increase the confidence in certain
propositions where there is unjustified lack of confidence. The other job of
practical ethics is to introduce uncertainty where we have unjustified
certainty. And I think we have unjustified certainty that we'll continue to
exist as a species in the next 100 years. Those threats are not going to come
from cloning, or genetic enhancement, or pharmaceuticals. The challenge, for our
children's sake, is to concentrate on the real risks."


LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2005


                             398 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               September 17, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Financial Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 982 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Soaring gold price gives miners muscle

BYLINE: Neil Hume

BODY:


    Anglo American spearheaded another strong performance from the blue chip
mining sector as the gold price came within a whisker of a 17-year closing high.
Concern about inflation and uncertainty about the direction of the US economy
saw the price of bullion hit $ 459 an ounce yesterday. Dealers said the price
had also been supported by the weak US dollar and the continued absence of
selling by central banks.

    Of the UK's biggest mining stocks, Anglo is the most sensitive to the gold
price because of its 51% shareholding in AngloGold Ashanti, one of the world's
largest producers. As such, it was no surprise to see Anglo outperforming its
mining peers yesterday. It closed 75p stronger at a record high of £15.54, the
biggest riser in the FTSE 100.

    Among other miners, Rio Tinto advanced 79p to £21.49 on the view that rising
Chinese demand will support iron ore prices over the next year, while BHP
Billiton gained 27p to 873.5p after Deutsche Bank increased its target price to
960p. Xstrata climbed 49p to £14.24.

    The strength in the mining sector coupled with a solid opening on Wall
Street and further gains for oil stocks BG , up 8p to 522.75p, and BP , 7p
better at 653.5p, helped leading shares end the week on a positive note. The
final scores showed the FTSE 100 up 24.4 points at 5407.9 - the first time in
four years it has closed above 5400. Over the week the blue chip index gained 48
points.

    The FTSE 250 climbed 35 points to 7901.6, while the FTSE Small Cap index
rose two points to 3142.9. In the bond market, the 10-year gilt closed around
104.050, yielding 4.247%.

    Shire Pharmaceuticals , off 10.5p at 685p, bucked the strong market trend
after UBS removed the stock from its buy list, citing valuation concerns. Shire
shares have risen sharply since it completed the $ 1.6bn (£900m) acquisition of
Transkaryotic Therapies, a loss-making American rival, at the end of July.

    Man Group , the hedge fund manager and broking company, was also under
pressure, sliding 12p to £16.45 after Citi group Smith Barney downgraded to hold
from buy, citing fears that this month's trading update could disappoint.
Analyst Carolyn Dorrett was concerned about Man's hedge funds sales. She
estimates second quarter net sales could be zero, down from $ 800m in the first
quarter, and believes the market had yet to appreciate the extent of the recent
downturn.

    Mobile phone operator O 2 was marked 3.75p higher at 155.25p as the City
responded to Thursday's after-hours statement from Telefonica that it did not
rule out a bid for the company.

    Regus , the serviced office firm, was the FTSE 250's top dog. Its shares
advanced 5.75p to 101p after a distressed seller was cleared out. Heading in the
other direction was LogicaCMG , which fell 9.75p to 168p after the IT services
group revealed it was in talks to acquire France's Unilog for about euros 940m
(£635m). Market professionals reckoned the deal would be announced on Monday and
be partly financed by a deeply discounted £400m rights issue.

    EasyJet , the no-frills airline, was also in demand as traders bet FL Group,
the parent of Icelandair, might take advantage of recent share price weakness to
add to its 13% holding. Traders also noted that easyJet's chief operating
officer, Ed Winter, had told reporters at a conference in Amsterdam that the
company had enjoyed a good summer and was on course to hit full-year earnings
guidance. The shares rose 11.75p to 293.75p.

    Elsewhere, buyout rumours continued to swirl around Kesa Electricals , the
owner of Comet. Its shares rose 10.75p to 277p. Traders said the Kesa share
price had also benefited from investors switching out of DSG International ,
down 2.25p to 154.25p. DSG, the former Dixons Group, makes most of its money in
Britain, whereas Kesa makes most of its profits across the Channel.

    Office services group Mitie improved 3.5p to 181p despite chief executive
Ian Stewart declaring the sale of stock worth £1.7m.

    Among the small caps, BTG , the intellectual property company, was one of
the outstanding performers, rising 12p to 210p after US biotech company Genzyme
announced positive clinical trial results for multiple sclerosis treatment
Campath. BTG licensed Campath five years ago to ILEX, a company now owned by
Genzyme, and it is one of its biggest royalty generators.

    BowLeven , the oil exploration company with interests in Cameroon, was
marked 39.5p higher at 757.5p on talk that a £55m fund raising, which has yet to
be announced, was struck at 650p and the shares were two times oversubscribed .
Biofuels firmed 0.5p to 147.5p ahead of Monday's eagerly awaited extraordinary
general meeting at which it will update investors on its biodiesel plant, which
is supposed to be operational this month.

    DAT Group , the smart phone software developer, rallied 5.5p to 88p after
Panmure Gordon said the company had enough cash to keep it going until 2007,
when it should turn cash-flow positive. Finally, Teesland , the asset manager,
held firm at 80p despite whispers of a takeover approach.

    Strong Friends:

    Friends Provident hit a six-week high as takeover talk intensified. The life
assurer finished 6p stronger at 179.75p with 61m shares traded as rumours of a
235p-a-share bid from a European rival swirled through dealing rooms. Traders
said that speculation was triggered by Thursday's news that French insurer Axa
had increased its holding in FP to 15%.

    Although Axa said the stake was held in various funds managed by its US
subsidiary Alliance Capital, that did little to dampen the rumours. As the
smallest of Britain's blue chip insurers, FP has long been viewed as a
consolidation candidate. On a more fundamental level, analysts noted it looked
relatively inexpensive given its growth potential, which was highlighted by this
week's better than expected half-year results.


LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2005


                             402 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                August 20, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 28

LENGTH: 368 words

HEADLINE: FSA to look at Shire trading

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson

BODY:


    Financial regulators are expected to investigate the purchase of shares by
Shire Pharmaceuticals' chief executive days ahead of a share price rise prompted
by talks about a major deal for the company.

    The Financial Services Authority is charged with examining the circumstances
surrounding directors' share trades. Shire's shares soared on Thursday due to
rumours that it was in discussions to extend the life of its hyperactivity
disorder drug, Adderall XR, which makes up half the sales of the company.

    It admitted yesterday that it was in talks with Barr Laboratories, the
generic drug firm trying to invalidate Shire's patent on the drug and therefore
the right to make it exclusively and charge a high price.

    "Given the very preliminary nature of the discussions, it is not possible to
form any judgment as to the likelihood of reaching any agreement with Barr,"
Shire said.

    Yesterday, the share price moved slightly lower than Thursday's three-year
high of 681p.

    On Monday, Matt Emmens, Shire's chief executive, bought $ 200,000 (£111,000)
of stock in the company, since which time they have risen about 5% in value.
Directors are not allowed to trade in shares if they have information the
general public or investment community does not.

    A Shire spokeswoman would not reveal when the talks with Barr had begun.

    However, she said the company's brokers, lawyers and the chairman had
approved Mr Emmens' share purchase before he took the action. "It is the first
opportunity he found to invest in the company because previously it has either
been a close period or in discussions," she said.

    The FSA has not been in contact with Shire, she added.

    Recently the company completed the $ 1.6bn acquisition of the American
biotechnology firm Transkaryotic Therapies. While takeover discussions are under
way, directors are normally prevented from trading in the company's shares.

    Mr Emmens joined the company in March 2003 from the German pharmaceuticals
company Merck.

    A spokesman for the FSA said it would not comment on individual cases.
However, he added: "We always look at companies' compliance with listing and
disclosure rules and major announcements."


LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2005


                             407 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 August 6, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 27

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Retail retreat drags Footsie down

BYLINE: Richard Wray

BODY:


    London's index of leading shares ended the week with a whimper rather than a
bang yesterday, closing virtually unchanged as weakness in retailing stocks and
Wall Street's lacklustre start dragged the market down.

    The FTSE 100 index closed down 0.8 points at 5314.7 points as retailers
filled up the blue chip loserboard after Citigroup Smith Barney warned against
buying into the idea that because UK interest rates were cut on Thursday it's
time to bundle back into the sector.

    The broker said in a note that there is still potential for further
downgrades among the retailers. As a result shares in Kingfisher fell 6p to
248.25p, Dixons eased 3.25p to 155p and Next closed down 31p at 1540p.

    Shares in Barclays added 17p to 576p as the last of the major high-street
banks to report results announced better than expected half-year figures while
bid speculation prodded ITV up 1.5p to 119.25p.

    Shares in ICI eased 7p to 289.5p as Deutsche Bank dropped its stance on the
chemicals group to hold from buy, following results earlier in the week, saying:
"while we expect the group's earnings resilience to continue, we believe the
shares now reflect fair value".

    Among the second liners, shares in Aegis rose 11p to 125.25p as investors
reacted to the news overnight that corporate raider Vincent Bollore has picked
up a stake of just over 6% in the media buyer.

    News that media stocks are back in fashion helped shares in market research
firm Taylor Nelson gain 7p to 208p.

    The FTSE 250 closed down 5.1 points at 7680.5 points with the small cap
index up 2.8 points at 3069 exactly.

    Easyjet had a good run, up 14.25p at 265.25p, after the low-cost airline
raised its guidance on its full-year profits.

    Randgold Resources fell 32p to 798p after the gold miner admitted that the
commissioning of its second mine, at Loulo in Mali, is running a month late, due
to the early onset of rains and some construction issues. It will be up and
running later this month,

    Down among the smaller stocks Ark Therapeutics gained 4p to 100.5p after the
biotech group said its scientists in Scandinavia have developed a way to make
gene therapy less dangerous.

    The company's new delivery technology avoids a gene being inserted in the
wrong place, which has potentially dreadful consequences.

    Shares in internet security group Surfcontrol gained 5p to 428.5p on hopes
that new chief executive Patricia Sueltz - formerly of SalesForce.com, Sun
Microsystems and IBM - will carry out a quick turnaround of the business, which
has seen its shares sink from more than 670p in March.

    On Aim, Formjet plunged 2.75p to 3.625 , a drop of more than 40%, as the
software group warned that it will report a first-half loss because sales
forecasts were not met in the second quarter of the year.

    It has also seen sales from its Panda Software business fall short of
expectations, especially in June and July, so the business will "materially
undershoot" its budget for the year "and this could result in the whole group
trading at no better than break even in the second period".

    But shares in entertainment group IP Live gained 6.5p to 60p. The company,
which has investments in Billy Elliot and the Princess Diana Exhibition, has
held investor meetings with one institution picking up a significant stake in
the business as a result.

    Shares in European Diamonds lost their shine, down 10.75p at 24.25p after
the company said its previously announced private placing, designed to raise
£5m, has only raised £2.9m and has been halted.

    That leaves the company with a £2m hole, according to a note from Numis
yesterday, at a time when delays to the start of production from a new mine mean
initial diamond sales are likely to take place in November rather than at the
end of September as previously foreseen.

    Numis said European Diamonds has £1.1m of cash and is therefore deferring
its bulk sampling programme in Finland until funding permits.

    "Even so, it appears that European Diamonds' short-term working capital is
under pressure," the broker added.

    European Diamonds is talking with its advisers about alternative potential
sources of finance to meet its cash needs.

    Numis reckons that it is probably building up a stock of diamonds to sell
later in the year and those may be "sufficient to support short-term debt
financing".

    Zenith Hygiene, which joined Aim in February, added 7p to 153.5p on talk
among traders that the cleaning products group is poised to announce a contract
with the NHS while United Clearing, which provides financial clearing and
settlement for mobile phone companies around the world, ended up 2.5p at a new
high of 112.5p following the recent announcement of contract wins.

    A profit warning pushed InTechnology down 9p to 36p while rumours of a
private equity bid for Floors2Go, up 3p at 36p, persisted despite the company
saying it knows no reason for its recent share price rise.

    Finally, punters are piling back into Desire Petroleum, up 0.75p at 40.25p,
following news earlier in the week that it has picked up the oil exploration
rights over another area of the sea north of the Falkland Islands.


LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2005


                             411 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 July 29, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 21

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: Shire sales increase by 32%

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals was the third British drugs firm yesterday to report
unexpectedly good results, writes Heather Tomlinson

    The company also completed the $ 1.6bn (£910m) purchase of US business
Transkaryotic Therapies, which develops treatments for rare genetic disorders.

    Shire said its sales grew 32% in the second quarter to $ 425m, helped by
strong growth of its best-selling amphetamine, Adderall, used to treat children
with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. This drug comprises nearly half
the company's sales.

    Shire also benefited from its new drug Fosrenol, which helps patients on
kidney dialysis. It was launched in January and has taken an 8% market share in
the United States.

    Chief executive Matthew Emmens said this was twice as good as rival drug
Renagel, made by Genzyme, after the same period of time on the market. "We
continue to deliver on our promises, achieving good financial results and
meeting key strategic milestones," he said.

    Shire's profits rose 30% to $ 141m - discounting the effects of a division
sale last year. Finance director Angus Russell said there would be no provision
for the potential increased payment to rebel shareholders in TKT. They are
planning to ask a US court to force Shire to pay more. Shire had cash of $ 1.6bn
at the end of last year, but it will be used to buy TKT.

    Shire's shares were unchanged yesterday at 655p.

    Irish firm Elan also reported yesterday.

    However, it gave no update on its multiple sclerosis drug Tysabri, which was
pulled from sale this year after the deaths of two patients from a rare brain
disease. The drug had been seen as the saviour of the indebted firm. Its loss in
the second quarter widened to $ 143.5m against $ 104.9m last year.


LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2005


                             413 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 July 28, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 170 words

HEADLINE: Media business: Biotech: Roundup: TKT rebels push Shire to pay more

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson

BODY:


    Rebel shareholders in Transkaryotic Therapies, the US biotech firm that is
being bought by Shire Pharmaceuticals, could force Shire to pay more after
vowing to take the deal to court.

    Shire said yesterday it is pressing ahead with the $ 1.6bn (£918m) purchase
of TKT despite opposition from a third of the American firm's shareholders. The
deal should be completed today.

    Yesterday 52.6% of TKT's investors voted in favour of the deal, with 27.7%
against. Some American shareholders have opposed the bid, particularly after TKT
announced successful results for a treatment for Hunter syndrome, a rare genetic
disorder.

    They have the right under US law to ask a judge to force Shire to pay rebel
investors more than the $ 37 a share agreed with the TKT board. TKT chief
executive Michael Astrue resigned in April when the deal was announced because
he thought the price was too low.

    TKT said yesterday that 34.6% of investors had asked for an appraisal, the
first step in taking Shire to court.


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2005


                             418 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 July 23, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Saturday Pages, Pg. 16

LENGTH: 4109 words

HEADLINE: Saturday Review: Profile: Peter Singer: Moral maze: Moral maze: The
son of European Jews who moved to Australia to escape the Nazis, he studied
philosophy in Melbourne before moving to Oxford. He campaigned against cruelty
to animals, arguing that ethics should be applied to everyday problems. His
utilitarian views attracted death threats from 'pro-life' groups on his
appointment to Princeton.

BYLINE: Interview by Stuart Jeffries:

BODY:


    George W Bush and Peter Singer were born on the same day - July 6 1946. But
there the similarity ends. Only one is an Australian vegetarian who campaigns
against animal cruelty and does not believe in the Judaeo-Christian nostrum of
the sanctity of life. Only one supports abortion and infanticide in some cases
and backs stem-cell research that uses genetic material from embryos. Only one
thinks the world would be better if the US were subject to UN sanctions for
emitting more than its fair share of greenhouse gases.

    And yet there are parallels. In his 2003 book The President of Good and
Evil: Taking George W Bush Seriously , Singer quoted from one of Bush's
speeches: "Some people think it's inappropriate to make moral judgments anymore.
Not me." To which Singer added: "Well, not me either, so that is one view about
morality on which the president and I agree." Both men, in an age of seeming
moral relativism and selfishness, insist on the overwhelming importance of moral
renewal.

    That book nonetheless argued that Bush's ethics consisted mostly of
hypocrisy and intellectual confusion. By contrast, Singer stresses that his
moral philosophy is the product of cold logic. Singer concedes his views are
often upsetting for Bush supporters. "In a Christian society we have views about
the sanctity of life that were formed in a totally different period when we
didn't have to make decisions about embryos or whether you should keep people
alive who are irrevocably unconscious. People get stuck with this ethic from the
past, which has not been able to adapt itself to other circumstances because it
has been encapsulated in a set of religious beliefs."

    Singer sought the clash with neo-con America, partly to revive a career that
was going stale. True, when he was appointed Ira W de Camp Professor of
Bioethics at Princeton University in 1999, Bill Clinton was in the White House,
but still Singer had been lured from the relatively liberal milieu of academic
Melbourne because he thought the challenges in one of the world's most selfish,
reactionary societies would galvanise him anew as an ethical person. "The things
I'm saying I believe need to be said here," says Singer in his office at
Princeton's Centre for Human Values. "There's a lack of radical critique of the
status quo in America. I'm not just talking about my views on euthanasia, but
also the obligations on rich countries to assist the world's poorest people."

    Understimulated in Melbourne, he stood as a Green candidate for the
Australian senate in 1996, and, when defeated, started to unearth the history of
his grandfather, a Viennese Jew who collaborated with Freud and Adler, who died
in Theresienstadt concentration camp in 1943.

    Those excavations resulted in Pushing Time Away: My Grandfather and the
Tragedy of Jewish Vienna , hailed by the New York Times as having "all the power
of a great novel". Both before and after its publication in 2003, though, with
dark irony, Singer was frequently compared to the Nazis who imprisoned his
grandfather David, grandmother Amalie and other members of his family. One
"pro-life" group accused him of "taking the Josef Mengele chair in bioethics",
while the Wall Street Journal, attacking Princeton for "jettisoning . . . the
understanding of man's dignity that has defined western civilisation for two
millennia" in appointing Singer, compared him to Hitler's deputy Martin Bormann.

    Ten years before, his glasses were broken by protesters during a thwarted
lecture tour of Germany during which he sought to set out his views on
euthanasia. Disability rights groups compared him to Third Reich leaders. Before
he arrived in the US, groups such as Princeton Students Against Infanticide and
Not Dead Yet mounted campus protests. Singer was then still in Melbourne,
campaigning against the brutality of chicken farming. His departure was not
lamented in all quarters: an article in The Age newspaper by philosopher David
Oderberg was headlined "Good riddance to the warped philosopher".

    He and Princeton president Harold Shapiro received death threats. The
university laid on security for his first lecture and supplied him with a
scanner to check his mail for bombs. "The larger protests were pretty much
entirely people from outside the campus, some bussed in from Illinois," Singer
recalls. "That's not to say there weren't people in the university who probably
thought I shouldn't be appointed, but they didn't protest about it - they had
more respect for academic freedom."

    The New York Times said that not since 1940, when City College tried to hire
Bertrand Russell, had a philosopher's appointment by an American university
caused such a commotion.

    One of those causing the commotion was Steve Forbes, CEO of publisher
Forbes, who stood twice for Republican presidential nomination and was,
crucially, a Princeton trustee. "The Singer appointment," Forbes wrote to
Shapiro, "sends a dangerous and debilitating message that anything goes, that
there are no bounds when it comes to questions of life and death." He threatened
to freeze his donations to his alma mater until it got rid of Singer.

    Singer refused to withdraw. "He is very brave. He stands his ground and I
admire that," says Simon Blackburn, Cambridge professor of philosophy. "Peter's
style is always very in your face. He is not afraid of saying there are some
persons for whom it might be reasonable to regard their lives as not worth
preserving." And yet Blackburn suggests that those disabled people who protested
against Singer at Princeton, chanting "We're not dead yet!", misunderstood his
views on euthanasia and infanticide. "Nobody with the kind of disability that
Peter was talking about could possibly campaign against him."

    Singer argues that in certain circumstances people in irreversible
vegetative states ought to be killed rather than allowing nature to take its
course or pointlessly keeping them alive. More challengingly, he argues that
parents and doctors might be justified in deciding to kill neonates with drastic
disabilities, such as lack of higher brain functions or spina bifida.

    Marca Bristo, chairperson of the National Council on Disability, said during
one of the Princeton protests: "Singer's core vision, that the life of a person
with a disability is worth less than the life of a person without a disability,
and therefore it is OK to kill infants with disabilities if that is what the
parent wants to do, amounts to a defence of genocide."

    Singer denies advocating genocide or discriminating against those with
disabilities. "It is always frustrating to be misunderstood. But I've had to put
up with that frustration for a long time."

    In the preface to One World (2002), written after the Princeton row, he
thanked his wife Renata. "Her readiness for adventure made it possible for us to
leave our friends and families in Australia to try the new life in the United
States." Would she have come had she known what she knows now? "Aside from the
small but not negligible risk of getting shot by some right-wing lunatic, we
would have both been up for it even if we'd known all the facts. Maybe she'd
have had some doubts about going, but she's a courageous woman."

    Singer says he has flourished at Princeton, writing not just his book on
Bush, but editing a collection of his essays, Writings on an Ethical Life
(2000), commissioned because the furore around his appointment provoked renewed
interest in his views. He was invited to give the prestigious Dwight H Terry
Lectures at Yale in November 2000, and later published them as One World: The
Ethics of Globalisation . "To work you need a good local environment so I need
people to talk to and debate with and the sense of feeling welcome and
supported. Princeton gives me exactly that." He's researching a book about the
ethics of what we eat, and is contemplating another about what goes on in our
heads neurologically when we make moral judgments. It's invidious to suggest
that death threats and hate mail have stimulated Singer, but his US adventure
has given him a second wind.

    That said, the Singers have found some aspects of American life hard to deal
with. "We haven't waved any national flags since we were kids in school, lining
the streets to welcome visiting royalty," he wrote recently. "So when, after
September 11, the board of our apartment block hung a huge American flag off the
side of the building, we felt uncomfortable." The couple live in an apartment
block in Chelsea, Manhattan, though Peter also has a flat on the Princeton
campus. They describe themselves as "rootless cosmopolitans", ironic since it
was originally Stalinist code for Jews, suggesting they had no commitment to the
Russian Motherland.

    They met as students in Melbourne and have been married for 37 years. Renata
was born in Poland, like him the child of Jews who migrated to Melbourne. She
has written novels, developed anti-racist programmes, taught in secondary
schools and run workshops. She teaches part-time at New Jersey City University,
demographically very distant from Ivy League Princeton. They have collaborated
on The Moral of the Story , an anthology of great literary passages relevant to
particular questions of moral philosophy. It sounds as though it could be an
insufferably intense marriage, but it isn't. "People think we spend our lives in
philosophical discourse," says Renata. "Usually our conversations go like this:
'Did you put the rubbish out?' 'Yeah. Why are you asking?'"

    But Singer spends a great deal of time thinking about and discussing
philosophy: International Who's Who 2006 may list his recreations as
"Bushwalking, reading, swimming", but his academic commitments leave little time
for outside interests.

    To understand Singer's moral character as an adult we must go back to
Melbourne, August 19 1946, when his grandmother Amalie, liberated from
Theresienstadt in May, arrived in Australia. "There she met not only the
six-year-old granddaughter who occupied her thoughts during the dark years of
Hitler's rule, but also her six-week-old grandson, myself," he writes in Pushing
Time Away . "To both of us, for the nine years that she was still to live, she
gave all the pent-up love that had been frustrated during so many years of
sadness."

    His parents, Ernst and Cora, escaped the 1938 Anschluss and fled to
Australia. His father became a successful coffee and tea importer, while his
mother practised medicine. Peter was seduced into philosophy by a Catholic
friend called John Dwyer, who was then dating and later married his sister Joan.
"He'd done a law degree but was doing a master's in philosophy because he'd got
interested in the philosophical questions, 'what is an act?' and 'what are the
consequences of an act?'. Was someone pulling a trigger, were they firing at a
shape in the bushes, were they killing a human being: there are various possible
descriptions of an act, some of which suggest moral culpability and some don't,
and that's very relevant for, say, Catholic discussions of what counts in taking
a human life." Ironically, it was just these sorts of distinctions that the
mature Singer would reject in arguing that consequences alone were relevant for
determining whether an act was right or wrong.

    "It was the whole enterprise of arguing about these things that intrigued
me," says Singer, who studied philosophy at Melbourne University, graduating in
1967. Singer says he was lucky to avoid the abstruse linguistic analysis that
passed for moral philosophy in much of the anglophone academic community. He
recalls one particularly influential teacher, the intuitionist HJ McCloskey. "He
was rather old-fashioned in that he believed there were important substantive
issues of right and wrong that philosophers should discuss, whereas many other
philosophers at Oxford at that time would have thought this wasn't something
they should do."

    Nonetheless, Singer went on a scholarship to do a BPhil at Oxford, partly
because it was "the natural climax to the education of an Australian philosophy
student preparing for an academic career". His MA thesis in Australia was
entitled "Why Should I Be Moral?". As Radcliffe lecturer at University College,
Oxford, he worked on a PhD on civil disobedience (published as Democracy and
Disobedience ) under RM Hare. "He was always pushing you to be very clear in
your arguments and language."

    Important, too, was Hare's account of the universal nature of moral
judgments. In How Are We to Live? (1993), Singer took this to mean that
irrespective of personal affiliations, doing the right thing meant attending to
the sufferings and preferences of other sentient beings. Already, Singer was
committed to practical ethics, applying his reflections to everyday moral
problems.

    At Oxford, beyond his steady progress towards the academic holy grail -
tenure - Singer made a radical difference to how he acted. One day in 1970, he
left a lecture on free will by Jonathan Glover and fell into a conversation with
a graduate student called Richard Keshen. The Canadian proposed that the
conversation continue over lunch at his college, Balliol. Singer heard Keshen
ask whether the spaghetti sauce contained meat and when he found it did, took a
meatless salad. "I asked Richard why he had avoided meat," Singer recalled in
Between the Species . "That discussion changed my life."

    Singer and his wife read about factory farms and animal experimentation.
"Renata and I decided that if we were to retain our self-respect and take moral
issues seriously, we should cease to eat animals."

    How was this received by his contemporaries? "I remember a conversation with
Gareth Evans (the philosopher of language), who was incredulous. The sense I had
was that what people ate or should eat was a private matter like money or
religion - not a fit subject for the common room. I think he came to see one
could philosophically question the networks of concepts that people held, that
they might not hold together as well as people thought, which was what he was
doing in his work. Having been involved with protests against the Vietnam war I
guess I was more open to the idea that widely accepted beliefs might be wrong."

    Was Singer temperamentally susceptible to such arguments? "I was never an
animal lover, and in Australia I'd certainly been a hearty meat-eater. I
remember going for a walk with my father along a beach and there were people
fishing and a bucket with fish suffocating in it. He said: 'I don't know how
people can think it's a pleasant way of relaxing with these poor fish dying next
to them', so I guess I had that sense that suffering extends to fish."

    One of the vegetarian thinkers with whom Singer increasingly associated at
Oxford was Richard Ryder, who coined the term speciesism to describe
meat-eaters' belief systems. Singer took this to mean there was a tyranny of
human over non-human animals and inspired by that thought, the dearth of animal
liberation organisations and the mistreatment of animals, he decided to write a
book. In the preface to the 1975 edition of Animal Liberation , he drew a
parallel with another liberation movement: "This tyranny has caused and today is
still causing an amount of pain and suffering that can only be compared with
that which resulted from the centuries of tyranny by white humans over black
humans."

    Even as a graduate student at Oxford, Singer was a utilitarian - one who
believes a person's first duty is to maximise utility, where that term can be
variously taken to mean increasing overall pleasure and minimising pain, or
preference-satisfaction. In Animal Liberation , he wrote: "The ethical principle
on which human equality rests requires us to extend equal consideration to
animals too." To those who would ask why, Singer quoted Jeremy Bentham, the
British utilitarian philosopher, who wrote: "The question is not Can they
reason? nor Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?"

    Singer wrote much of this book in 1973-74 at New York University, where he
accepted a visiting position. Animal Liberation , says Singer, was not an
immediate success, either in terms of sales or reducing animal suffering. Thirty
years on, he says, animal liberation is very much on the popular agenda - the US
animal-rights group called People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals has
750,000 members and supporters, while his book has been translated into 18
languages. During those decades, though, Singer has felt obliged to dissociate
himself from those who couch anti-speciesist arguments in terms of animal
rights, and also from those who use violence to press their cause.

    Even philosophical critics of Singer have praised his writings on animals.
Martha Nussbaum, Chicago professor of law and ethics, writes in Frontiers of
Justice , published this autumn: "Peter Singer's writing contains some of the
most powerful invitations to imagine animal suffering ever written . . . Good
imagina tive writing has been crucial in motivating opposition to cruelty toward
animals."

    Philosopher Roger Scruton, too, praises Singer for demonstrating that humans
"have no God-given right to ignore the suffering just because the victim belongs
to some other species". In Animal Rights and Wrongs , though, he wrote: "In the
arguments of Singer and his followers I find much casuistry, little ethical
philosophy and no serious metaphysics."

    After completing the book, Singer returned to Melbourne where, apart from
numerous visiting appointments, he remained until 1999, first as senior lecturer
at La Trobe University, then from 1977 as professor of philosophy at Monash
University. There he continued to write and campaign against speciesism, and to
write on life and death.

    Singer was once asked what he would do if he had to save either a human
being or a mouse from a fire. He replied: "In almost all cases I would save the
human being. But not because the human being is human. The qualities that are
ethically significant are, firstly, a capacity to experience something - that
is, a capacity to feel pain, or to have any kind of feelings. That's really
basic, and it's something that a mouse shares with us. But when it comes to a
question of taking life, or allowing life to end, it matters whether a being is
the kind who can see he or she actually has a life - that is, can see that he or
she is the same being who exists now, who existed in the past, and who will
exist in the future. Such a being has more to lose than a being incapable of
understanding this."

    This means, says Nussbaum, not all animals are equally worth saving. "The
painless killing of an animal that does not foresee its own death or take a
conscious interest in the continuation of its life is, for Singer and Bentham,
not bad, for all badness, for them, consists in the frustration of interests,
understood as forms of conscious awareness." This view underpins not just
Singer's vegetarian philosophy but his views on abortion, infanticide,
euthanasia, and genetic research. "I hold to the preference utilitarian approach
because I cannot deny that for me, a good life is one in which my own
considered, informed preferences are maximally satisfied."

    In the late 1990s, his mother suffered Alzheimer's and could no longer
recognise her family. Philosophy lecturer Peter Col-osi, of the Franciscan
University in Gaming, Austria, says: "According to his ethical theory, she ought
to have been killed or left to die. Certainly no money should have been spent on
her care, since it could be better spent lowering the suffering of the greatest
number of other people." Instead, Singer arranged expensive hospital care. He
argued it was not hypocritical, explaining his sister's preferences had been
important. If he were solely responsible, he might not have acted as he did.

    Singer has tried, throughout his ethical life, not to be swayed by personal
preferences. Indeed, in The Expanding Circle (1981), he called Mother Teresa
irrational because she described her love for others as love for each of a
succession of individuals rather than as "love for mankind merely as such". "If
we were more rational," he wrote, "we would use our resources to save as many
lives as possible." Singer says only a universal ethic will do, that one is
obliged to do good for strangers as much as one's family. He contends that such
a universal ethic, the so-called golden rule, is accepted by all major ethical
traditions. In How Are We to Live? he delineates several formulations of that
rule, including Jesus's "Love your neighbour as yourself".

    He proposed in his essay "Famine, Affluence and Morality" that anyone able
to help the poor should donate at least 10% of their income to relieve poverty,
reasoning that, when one is already living comfortably, a further purchase to
increase comfort will lack the same moral importance as saving another person's
life. Singer donates 20% of his salary to Oxfam and Unicef.

    This year, his Princeton contract became part time, enabling him to work as
professor of applied philosophy at his alma mater, the University of Melbourne.
While he remains in the US, however, he feels there is plenty of work to do.
"The abortion debate is much more intractable here, but the view that I hold had
simply not been part of the American debate and now it is, so maybe I can take
credit for that. The debate had been in terms of whether the embryo or foetus is
a human being. But what matters is having characteristics such as minimum
sentience or perhaps even self-awareness. And that position is now at least
getting noticed, even if it's regarded as notorious. But the Bush book obviously
didn't have enough impact because if it had he wouldn't have got re-elected."

    He is hopeful that Bush's hostility to embryo research will be overcome, and
welcomes this prospect not least because it highlights what he regards as the
obsolescence of ethical systems based on the sanctity of human life. "It's now
clear that the fact that the embryo has the potential to develop into a person
is not unique to embryos because it's true of every cell in our body. I'm sure
that the cloning of human beings by this method will be possible. So if you're
going to talk about the sanctity of life you're going to have to talk about a
way of distinguishing embryos from other cells. It's not as easy as you might
think."

    For Singer, technological innovation opens up the possibility that human
nature can be improved. In an article entitled "Darwin for the Left", he
enthused about the "freedom to shape our genes so that instead of living in
societies constrained by our evolutionary origins, we can build the kind of
society we judge best."

    Indeed, earlier this month he gave a talk at London's Institute for
Contemporary Arts in which he expressed some startling hopes for genetic
therapy. "He wasn't being contrarian, but what he said was very challenging for
an audience of English intellectuals and animal rights people," says James
Harkin, the ICA's director of talks. "He suggested that if you could cure
paedophiles by gene therapy that would be a good idea. He saw no problem with
parents giving their children gene therapy in order to make them more
intelligent. He even suggested that if you could modify genes and thereby equip
animals to do human jobs and they were happy doing such work, there would be no
ethical problem."

    "I think the question will be, can we control our abilities in such a way
that the genetic modifications will be positive and leave us all better off?"
says Singer. "Evolution is a crapshoot so I don't think we should regard it as
untouchable. If we can improve on it without any harmful side effects, we
should."

    Life at a glance

    Peter Albert David Singer

    Born: Melbourne, July 6 1946.

    Education: 1967 BA, Melbourne; '69 MA, Melbourne; '71 BPhil, Oxford.

    Career: 1971-73 Radcliffe lecturer, Oxford; '73-74 New York University;
'75-76 La Trobe; '77-99 Monash; '99- Princeton; '05- University of Melbourne.

    Married: 1968 Renata Diamond; three children: Ruth, Marion and Esther.

    Some books: 1973 Democracy and Disobedience; '75 Animal Liberation; '79
Practical Ethics; '82 Test-tube Babies; '85 Should the Baby Live? (co-written
with Helga Kuhse); '93 How Are We to Live? Ethics in an Age of Self-interest;
'94 Rethinking Life and Death; '99 A Darwinian Left; 2002 One World: The Ethics
of Globalisation; '03 Pushing Time Away, The President of Good and Evil: The
Ethics of George W Bush; '05 The Moral of the Story (co-edited with Renata
Singer).


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2005


                             419 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 July 13, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 20

LENGTH: 123 words

HEADLINE: Shire takes a fall

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals was one of the biggest FTSE 100 fallers yesterday
after a leading US broker questioned the prospects for a key anaemia drug.

    Jefferies International believes Dynepo, which Shire is acquiring as part of
the $ 1.6bn (£900m) takeover of US biotech company Transkaryotic Therapies, will
face tough competition when it is launched in Europe, probably next year. As
such, it thinks Dynepo is unlikely to capture more than 5% of the anaemia
market.

    Shire is relying on Dynepo and several other drugs to reduce dependence on
its best-selling hyperactivity drug, Adderall XR, which could face generic
competition next year.

    Shire, which is the UK's third-biggest drugmaker, closed 13.5p lower at
614.5p.


LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2005


                             429 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 June 21, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 16

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Shire buoyed by success of bid target

BYLINE: Richard Wray

BODY:


    Shares in Shire Pharmaceuticals gained more than 5% yesterday when its bid
target, Transkaryotic Therapies, revealed promising trial results and analysts
speculated that a deal is more likely to be completed.

    Analysts had been keenly awaiting the results of US firm TKT's drug I2S, for
the treatment of the rare genetic disease Hunter syndrome.

    The results had been seen as a make or break for the $ 1.6bn (£877m) cash
deal, which was strongly criticised when it was unveiled by Shire in April.
Analysts said TKT was too expensive and didn't fit with the firm's strategy.

    However, Shire has argued that TKT's drugs are low-risk and it fits with its
focus on specialist disease areas. The American firm develops drugs that replace
missing enzymes in rare genetic disorders.

    After taking I2S for a year, patients could walk 44 metres in six minutes
rather than seven metres for those taking a placebo sugar pill, results that
were hailed by analysts and shares gained 32p to close at 627.5p. Shire
shareholders will receive a circular containing details of the deal in the next
10 days. The rise in Shire's price helped buoy an otherwise lacklustre market
with the rising oil price - pushing up towards $ 60 a barrel - spooking
investors.

    While BP added 4p to 590.5p and BG closed up 6.75p at 455.75p on the back of
the rising oil price, British Airways hit turbulence - down 4.5p at 273p - on
fears that the soaring oil price will feed through quickly into fuel prices.
Down among the second liners easyJet was also hurt, down 5.25p at 242.75p. ICI
lost 7.5p to 266.5p as investors fretted that the rising crude price will
increase raw material costs.

    With Wall Street also lower and adding to the downward pressure, the FTSE
100 closed down 5.6 points at 5072.0.

    SAB Miller bucked the trend, up 13p at 854.5p, on talk that it is close to
winning the battle for Colombia's Grupo Empresarial Bavaria and a positive note
from the beverages team at Bear Stearns released just before the weekend.

    Cadbury Schweppes was also higher, up 10p at 541.p, on talk among traders
that it has received a bid for its beverage operations from US venture capital
firm KKR. But Royal Bank of Scotland lost 9p to 1662p on German reports that it
is considering trumping the bid tabled by Italy's Unicredito for HVB Group and
Enter prise Inns dropped 10p to 815p as the government unveiled its plans to ban
smoking in public places.

    Away from the blue chips the FTSE 250 closed down 19.2 points at 7335.7 with
the small cap index up 1.3 at 2917.1 points.

    Talk of a possible bid for car dealership operator Pendragon saw shares in
the company lodged at the top of the FTSE 250 leaderboard up 13.25p at 293.25p,
while Matalan was also boosted by bid speculation to 179p, up 3p.

    Cobham lost 24p to 1434p as the aerospace engineer announced the departure
of the managing director of its Chelton antenna and navigation unit, Geoff
Cooper. The news led Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein to lower its recommendation
on the stock to hold from add.

    Also heading lower was CSR - formerly Cambridge Silicon Radio - as the
analyst team at Baird dropped their stance to neutral from buy owing to the fact
that the stock has hit its 390p target price. The shares eased 0.5p to 390p.

    The decision by Carphone Warehouse to launch its cheap-rate Talktalk service
in Ireland offset news that non-executive deputy chairman David Ross, who
co-founded the business with chief executive Charles Dunstone, has sold 6m
shares in the company, making himself £10.3m. He retains a stake in the business
of just over 22%. His sale of shares follows the disposal of a similarly sized
chunk of stock by Mr Dunstone earlier this month. Mr Dunstone still has more
than 34% of the business.

    Shares in Hardy Underwriting added 3.5p to 222.5p as the specialist
insurance group turned down a second offer from rival Omega Underwriting but
said it will remain in talks.

    The ongoing talks helped support other insurers including Wellington
Underwriting , up 2.75p at 106p, and Jardine Lloyd Thompson , up 7.25p at 385p.

    Shares in Finnish-based technology group Inion closed up 7.5p at 115p after
the company, which makes biodegradable medical implants, announced US regulatory
clearance for a number of new products while mobile phone software group
Ubiquity rose 3.5p to 42.5p as it signed a deal with Nokia.

    But Wichford shares remained unchanged at 184.5p despite news that the
property investment group has successfully raised £100m, through a placing at
180p, to buy more property.

    The market welcomed a number of new entrants yesterday with restaurant group
FishWorks debuting on AIM at 33p and closing at 44.5p and E-retail rising 20% to
close at 4.25p. Laser treatment company Chromogenex had a slightly less dramatic
first day, closing at 11.75p after being placed at 11p.

    Finally the market will play host to internet technology firm Z Group today
as the company joins AIM at 108p in a flotation expected to value the business
at about £21m.

    Z Group, which raised £2.5m in an over-subscribed offer, is the first
listing by the combined Panmure Gordon/Durlacher stockbroking outfit.


LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2005


                             442 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 30, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 30

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Business roundup: Drugs: Shire sells TKT deal to investors

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson and Reuters

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals' chief executive said yesterday that its investors had
backed the firm's controversial takeover of a US biotechnology firm.

    Last week the company announced it intended to pay $ 1.6bn (£837m) to buy
Transkaryotic Therapies, which specialises in finding drugs for rare genetic
diseases. The deal prompted the resignation of TKT's chief executive, Michael
Astrue, and analysts have questioned the strategy as well as the price.

    Shire reported a 73% fall in profit yesterday to $ 20.5m. The dive had been
expected because the firm had to spend more on marketing owing to the launch of
three new products. Overall, sales grew 3% to $ 334m.

    Sales of the attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder treatment Adderall XR,
an amphetamine, rose 4% to $ 146m, shrugging off safety concerns after Canadian
regulators ordered it to be withdrawn from that market.

    * GlaxoSmithKline has acquired US company Corixa for $ 300m. Corixa, which
makes biotechnology drugs and vaccines which regulate the immune system, said
Glaxo will pay $ 4.40 in cash for each share of its common stock and that it
will assume Corixa's outstanding convertible notes.The transaction is expected
to close in the third quarter of this year.

    Glaxo and Corixa have collaborated on a number of drugs including a
hepatitis B vaccine that contains Corixa's MPL compound - a derivative of the
lipid A molecule found in certain bacteria - and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma drug
Bexxar.


LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2005


                             445 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 29, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Sport Pages, Pg. 32

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: The race hots up to destroy genetic monsters: Gene doping is the
ultimate in cheating

BYLINE: Duncan Mackay

BODY:


    The issue of gene doping in sport is akin to the space race during the Cold
War in that it is surrounded by so much propaganda that it is difficult to know
what to believe.

    Dick Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency, has spoken of a
doomsday scenario of athletes having the technology to use gene doping to boost
performance by the time of the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing.

    In addition, leading scientists have warned that they expect athletes to
attempt to exploit the technology without understanding its effective ness and
with a disregard for the potential dangers.

    For those individuals looking to cheat and steal an edge on their rivals,
gene doping has become the ultimate aim, and the prospect of genetically
modified athletes competing like so many Frankenstein monsters was again raised
in the United States Congress on Wednesday, during a hearing to discuss the
National Football League's drugs policy.

    Dr Lee Sweeney, who has closely studied genetic therapy at the University of
Pennsyl-vania, said the sporting world has already made direct inquires about
his methods.

    "I would say half the emails I get now are from athletes," he told a science
conference in Washington State. "The other half is from patients with muscular
dystrophy."

    Sweeney has experimented on rats and mice with genes that produce insulin
growth factor (IGF-1), helping muscles to grow and repair themselves. The genes,
introduced into the body by a harmless virus, produce more IGF-1 than the body
would do normally, stimulating muscle growth.

    While the leap from laboratory animals to human beings remains hypothetical,
Sweeney and other speakers at last year's annual meeting of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science said it was inevitable that athletes
and their coaches would attempt to hijack the research on rodents.

    Pound is on record as saying that it is feasible that athletes may be able
to use gene doping by the next Olympics. "It is disturbing but not out of the
realm of possibility," he said. "Wada has for some time considered genetic
doping to be a looming threat. As dangerous and wrong as traditional doping is,
it is hard to conceive what the consequences could be of altering a person's
genetic make-up just to make them better in sports."

    Gene doping is top of Wada's hitlist and it has set up an investigative
panel of some of medicine's leading experts.

    The head of the panel is Dr Theodore Friedmann, professor of paediatrics and
director of gene therapy at the University of California. "We have no proof that
it has happened yet," he said, "but we think it is likely to happen. Gene doping
won't replace traditional drug doping because gene-based approaches will be more
difficult. But as the technology advances, there will be those with means and
motivation who will be willing to try."

    Those athletes prepared to take the risk could be playing Russian roulette
with their health. "The technology is evolving very rapidly," said Friedmann.
"The science is not all that difficult and can be reproduced by many
well-trained people in many thousands of laboratories all over the world.

    "The research results in the field are rapidly and widely published in the
open medical and scientific literature and therefore are available to any and
all to learn. What is extremely difficult is to transfer the underlying basic
scientific technology into human beings. For humans, gene therapy remains very
immature, experimental and highly risky."

    The dangers were illustrated by experiences in France. There, in a clinical
trial, 11 boys successfully received experimental gene therapy to replace
missing protein to allow their immune systems to function properly for the first
time. However three of the boys contracted leukaemia and one has died.

    The fear at Wada is that unscrupulous scientists will encourage desperate
athletes to experiment with gene doping without understanding the potentially
fatal risks, including the incidence of cancer. Some officials even admit
privately that it is already happening in parts of China as the country prepares
for the Olympics in its capital city.

    Friedmann added: "The frightening thing is that rogue, unregulated
laboratories will not be concerned about safety and will not be concerned about
informed consent from athletes."

    The potential of how science can manipulate sport is clear. This month the
first clone of a champion racehorse was unveiled by scientists in Italy. The
foal was cloned from a skin cell of Pieraz, a multiple world champion in equine
endurance races of up to 50 kilometres.

    Wada is determined that gene doping will not be allowed to destroy sport and
has been at the forefront of formulating a plan to combat the potential problem
since 2002. It is currently sponsoring five projects worldwide, including one at
the HFL Laboratory at Fordham in Cambridgeshire and another at University
College in London.

    "We know the threat of gene doping is very real," said Pound. "We need to
start fighting this threat now, before it becomes reality. It is easier to
prevent a problem than it is solve it."


LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2005


                             448 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 27, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Brewer's gloom weighs on Footsie

BYLINE: Neil Hume

BODY:


    It may be one of the smallest stocks in the FTSE 100, but Whitbread , the
hotel and leisure group, was blamed for the poor performance of the blue chip
index yesterday.

    A warning that sales growth at its restaurant and health club businesses had
slowed in the past seven weeks sparked heavy selling of its rivals and added to
mounting concerns about a slowdown in consumer spending.

    Pub operator Enterprise Inns , down 23.5p to 750p, bookmaker William Hill ,
off 15p to 555.5p, and brewer Scottish & Newcastle , 11.25p cheaper at 469.5p,
were among the day's biggest fallers.

    Traders said these poor performances, coupled with a weak opening on Wall
Street, had dragged the FTSE 100 down 19.4 points to 4,845.5.

    Elsewhere, the picture was no better. The FTSE 250 dropped 63.1 points to
6,953.7, weighed down by weakness in its retail constituents after Carpetright
revealed a big drop in comparative sales at its British stores. Competitors
Headlam and Topps Tiles fell 14.5p to 404.5p and 6.75p to 169p respectively.

    Carpetright closed 24p higher at 912p as the company bought back 515,000
shares for cancellation.

    Lower down the market, the FTSE Small Cap index slipped 12.4 points to
2,874.1 while the FTSE Aim index dipped 7.7 points to 1,046.7 as investors
continued to offload oil and mining stocks. In the bond market, the benchmark
10-year gilt closed around 101.450, yielding 4.572%.

    Shire Pharmaceuticals managed to buck the weak market trend, rising 19.5p to
561p after some kind words from its corporate broker, Morgan Stanley.

    The American investment bank said it was surprised by the 10% fall that
followed Shire's recent £840m cash offer for US biotechnology company
Transkaryotic Therapies, because it believes that the acquisition will be
"highly value enhancing".

    "Strategically, we think the acquisition makes sense, as it will strengthen
Shire's existing renal and haematology product offering and provide a pipeline
to fuel longer term growth," Morgan Stanley said.

    Traders said Shire's management team had also been meeting UK institutions
to explain the merits of the deal.

    Elsewhere in the drugs sector, AstraZeneca advanced 40p to £22.95 after a
push from its house broker, Deutsche Bank. Lifting its price target to £24.50,
Deutsche said an experimental drug dubbed 865 was likely to deliver "more rapid
symptom relief" and "greater healing rates" than Astra's current ulcer drug,
Nexium.

    If the early promise shown by 865 is confirmed in phase II trials this year,
Deutsche reckons it will help AstraZeneca defend its strong position in ulcer
treatments, which is under attack from generic drug manufacturers.

    It was not all good news in the drug world. Alizyme slipped a further 4.5p
to 91p on concerns that Japanese bank Nomura will end up with a large chunk of
the biotech company on its book.

    Nomura is the underwriter of Alizyme's £28.2m placing and open offer, which
was announced last week.

    Lower down the market, Dairy Crest was marked 22.5p lower at 433p after
reports claimed it had lost a contract to supply milk to supermarket group
William Morrison , off 2.5p at 200p.

    Wyndeham Press gained 4.5p to 139.5p after an upbeat trading statement that
prompted Numis Securities to recommend a switch out of rival printing group St
Ives , 12p lower at 348.25p.

    Analyst Paul Jones noted that St Ives still trades at a premium to Wyndeham,
despite the fact that Wyndeham is forecast to deliver superior earnings growth
in the next two years.

    Meanwhile, there was more pain for investors holding some of the Aim
market's recent high flyers.

    Regal Petroleum , which raised £45m in a share placing at 390p on Monday,
fell 28.5p to 364.5p on disappointment at the lack of progress at its Kallarachi
asset in Greece, while Asia Energy declined 50p to 645p and DAT Group sank 31p
to 326.5p.

    DAT shares were initially un settled by confusion over a £3.5m share placing
announced by DA Group , up 4p to 71p.

    This was partly caused by an erroneous price in this column yesterday and
the fact that DAT Group trades under the stock market ticker DA.L.

    Biotechnology company Oxford Biomedica was also under pressure, falling 2p
to 28.5p despite speculation that the company was in America discussing a
takeover with either Genentech or Johnson & Johnson.

    The company is in the US at the moment, but only to attend a bio-partnering
conference in Washington.

    Elsewhere, Lavendon , the powered access hire group, held steady at 187p,
despite the appearance of SVG Investment Managers on its share register with a
4% stake.

    SVG is the second fund management group basing its investment decisions on
private equity valuation techniques to announce a large holding in Lavendon.

    The other is Cycladic Capital Management. It owns 14.6% of the company.

    SVG, which is about to start marketing a new investment trust to
institutions, also announced that it had increased its holding in Chorion , the
media group that owns the rights to Noddy, to 6.3%. Chorion gained 11.5p to
315p.


LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2005


                             450 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 26, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 23

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: ML Laboratories cuts 65 jobs

BYLINE: Financial staff and agencies

BODY:


    Biotechnology company ML Laboratories is cutting 65 jobs as part of a
restructuring plan that will see it focus on its respiratory products business.
The move will see it go into the red for the full year.

    The firm, which ousted its executive chairman this year following poor
performance and a shareholder rebellion, said the restructuring would result in
a one-off cost of between £5m and £7m and lead to annual savings of about £4m.

    ML Labs said it would sell or seek partners for other businesses and
products such as Devacade, which enhances the pain relief produced by morphine,
and gene therapy technology.

    It will consolidate its existing operations into one site at St Albans, the
present headquarters of its respiratory business, Innovata Biomed.

    The group's headquarters will be relocated to St Albans and operations in
Liverpool, Leicester, Keele, Tewkesbury and Warrington will end.

    The group's Farnham site will remain in operation for the next two years.

    Kieran Murphy, ML's chief executive, said: "By placing greater focus on our
revenue-generating respiratory business and consolidating our operations on one
site, we will move closer towards our goal of achieving sustainable
profitability, increased earnings quality and cash generation for the group.

    "While we regret the loss of jobs, we believe that the reduction of costs
and exit from higher risk programmes will reposition the company for future
growth," he added.

    Stuart Sim, ML's former chairman and chief executive, left the company
earlier this year and is said to be in line for a £650,000 pay-off from the
company he had run since 1997. Under his stewardship the company's share price
fell by about 90%.


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2005


                             463 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 22, 2005

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 20

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Shire bids $ 1.6bn for loss-making US biotech company

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson

BODY:


    Shire Pharmaceuticals announced yesterday a $ 1.6bn (£838m) bid for a US
biotech company to boost its pipeline of experimental drugs and make it less
reliant on the American drugs market.

    The bid for Transkaryotic Therapies, which specialises in treatments for
rare genetic disorders, prompted a share price fall of 8% as analysts fretted
about a hefty price to offer for a loss-making firm.

    Shire has been looking for a deal for some time because it is sitting on a
mountain of cash: $ 1.4bn at the last count.

    The deal appears to have prompted the resignation of the chief executive of
the American biotech, Michael Astrue, although the remainder of the TKT board
has approved the purchase. The company refused to say why he had resigned, other
than it was a "mutual decision".

    Shire's chief executive, Matt Emmens, has been under pressure to spend the
cash or give it back to investors. He had already completed a deal worth up to $
500m for a new drug for people with attention- deficit hyperactivity disorder.
This could take the place of the ADHD drug Adderall, an amphetamine that makes
up nearly half of Shire's annual sales but faces the loss of exclusivity in the
next two years.

    The bid for TKT also marks a move into the relatively new area of technology
known as biologicals - which have produced successes for American firms such as
Amgen and Genentech - rather than Shire's business of traditional
pharmaceuticals, which use small chemicals as drugs.

    TKT makes Dynepo, which treats a form of anaemia, although it only owns the
European rights to the drug.

    It also owns Replagal, which treats people with Fabry disease, a rare
genetic disorder that can lead to kidney problems, heart attacks and strokes.
This drug is on sale in Europe although Shire said yesterday that it planned to
talk to US regulators to get approval in that country.

    The TKT website said the US firm had previously decided to "end its efforts"
to get Replagal on the market in the US.

    TKT also has drugs in clinical trials to treat Hunter syn drome, Gaucher
disease and a genetic disorder that leads to very high cholesterol levels. It
also has a large early-stage drug research operation.

    Shire had previously closed its early-stage research division but a
spokeswoman said the bid did not deviate from the firm's strategy, because TKT's
research is lower risk.

    The deal took the market by surprise and the share price fell 8% to end at
559.5p yesterday, the biggest fall in the FTSE 100 leading index of shares. "I'm
not overwhelmed by the deal and neither is the market," said one analyst, who
declined to be named. "People had hoped they would buy something in the late
stage of development with obviously big potential."

    Mr Emmens said the firm was ideal because TKT caters for small niche markets
where the doctors are specialised, similar to Shire itself. "It is a deal we
have been pursuing for quite some time," he said.

    TKT at present makes a loss but its management had predicted that it would
break even in 2007. Shire is to take on a $ 500m loan to help fund the deal.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2005


                             471 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 4, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: 'Editing' technique can rewrite genes: Hope of cure offered to many
with inherited diseases

BYLINE: David Adam, Science correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists at a company in California have developed a potentially
revolutionary technique to permanently rewrite any gene in the human body.

    The breakthrough brings hope to millions of people with genetic diseases
such as sickle- cell anaemia - but campaigners have warned that the technology,
called gene editing, could be abused by parents who want to alter the physical
characteristics of their children after they are born.

    The scientists, at Sangamo Biosciences, have used the technique to correct
mistakes in a gene that causes a rare genetic disease called X-linked severe
combined immune deficiency (SCID) - so-called bubble boy disease. Sufferers
never develop a fully working immune system and usually die within 18 months of
birth.

    Edward Lanphier, the president of Sangamo, said: "We can target any gene we
want, go into human cells and correct mistakes. These results highlight the
potential for gene correction therapy for human monogenic disorders, those
diseases caused by mutation of a single gene."

    The first applications were likely to be for blood diseases, Dr Lanphier
said.

    The technique can also target and destroy genes. Clinical trials of its
ability to stop the HIV virus infecting immune system cells will start in humans
next year.

    Gene editing exploits the body's natural ability to repair broken strands of
DNA, the blueprint cells use to churn out thousands of proteins.

    The scientists combined a molecule called a zinc finger protein, which can
identify and bind to a specified gene, with an enzyme that can cut DNA. The
protein effectively delivers the enzyme to its target, just in front of the gene
the scientists want to cut out.

    The scientists fool the cell into using their chosen gene in repairing the
cut DNA strands, rather than a new version of the faulty one, by supplying a DNA
template for it to copy. Sir Aaron Klug, the Nobel prize-winning scientist who
discovered zinc finger proteins, said: "For years scienists have been searching
for a way to modify, or edit, the genome of plants and animals in a precise and
predictable fashion.

    "This work is therefore truly a landmark study that provides the foundation
for gene modification without the safety issues that have plagued many
traditional gene therapy applications."

    Conventional gene therapy inserts a correct version of a faulty gene into a
patient's DNA. It is difficult to control and has resulted in several
high-profile deaths.

    In laboratory tests, the gene editing technique successfully replaced the
faulty X-linked SCID gene with a working version in 18% of human cells.

    According to Sangamo, this could be enough to cure some SCID patients.

    The results appear today in the online version of the journal Nature.

    Dr Lanphier admitted the technique could target and change genes not
involved in disease, such as those that control eye and hair colour.

    "The technology is very flexible and does lend itself to those sorts of
questions," he said. "But I think the reality is that . . . the people who apply
it will do so for medical reasons."

    Sue Mayer, of the group Genewatch UK, called for regulation to stop gene
editing being used for "trivial" changes. "We sometimes overstate how many
people would want to use it for that, but unless there are safeguards in place
the temptation will always be there," she said.

    guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2005


                             495 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2005 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                January 11, 2005

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 421 words

HEADLINE: Missing link? Genetic difference in monkeys may help fight HIV

BYLINE: Sarah Boseley Health editor

BODY:


    The discovery of a genetic difference between rhesus monkeys and humans may
help find a way to stop HIV infection developing into Aids, researchers said
yesterday.

    British scientists funded by the Medical Research Council say they have
identified a gene that prevents the rhesus monkey from getting infected by the
HIV virus. Rhesus monkeys can be infected by a monkey form of HIV, SIV (simian
immunodeficiency virus), but not by HIV itself.

    New World monkeys, on the other hand, have a form of the gene that blocks
infection from SIV but not HIV.

    The human form of the gene has what appears to be the crucial difference of
just one amino acid from that of the rhesus monkey. Jonathan Stoye of the
Medical Research Council and colleagues, who published their work yesterday in
the journal Current Biology, said they found that a single change to the gene
would make it recognise HIV. "If we'd had this change, we would probably never
have had Aids in the first place," he said. "The virus would probably never have
entered the human population."

    Dr Stoye said the question was: can we try to make use of this single
difference to try to treat humans? He and his colleagues will spend the next
couple of years conducting experiments in the hope of devising a form of gene
therapy that would limit the impact of HIV on the human body.

    They hope to make a modified human gene that can be introduced to cells in
the body of somebody who is HIV-positive. The modified gene will be targeted at
cells that have not yet been invaded by the virus in order to make them block
its entry. The virus would remain at low levels in infected cells, but it would
not be able to spread throughout the body and thus bring about Aids.

    "It is a hope," said Dr Stoye. "It's a long way in the future. If there is
to be a successful gene therapy for Aids, this would be the kind of approach one
would want to take. It would be designed to stop the progression of Aids."

    Around 40 million people in the world are living with the virus. Expensive
drug treatment can keep them alive, although it is slow to reach those in the
worst hit parts of the world, especially sub-Saharan Africa.

    The drugs have to be taken every day for life to keep the levels of virus in
the body low and prevent Aids developing. HIV is adept at mutating to develop
resistance to medication, so new drugs are needed. If gene therapy can work in
the way Dr Stoye hopes, long-term medication would not be necessary.

    guardian.co.uk/medicine


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2005


                             501 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               November 16, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1190 words

HEADLINE: G2: Health: Banking on life: Donations of stem cells from umbilical
cord blood are proven to save lives. So why are hospitals refusing to take
samples at birth - and why is the register of donors so small? Julie Wheelwright
reports

BYLINE: Julie Wheelwright

BODY:


    When Karen Brooks was pregnant with her younger daughter, she picked up a
leaflet about a service that offered to store the stem cells from her baby's
umbilical cord so that if ever her child needed a bone marrow transplant, it
would have a perfect match. For Karen and Garry Brooks, whose eight-year-old
daughter Robyn died in March of cancer, the decision to use the UK Cord Blood
Bank for a £400 fee was obvious. "If we'd done the cord blood with Robyn, we
would have had clean stem cells," says her father, a 44-year-old lorry driver
from Rochdale. "It would have given her a better chance of recovery."

    Instead, when Robyn was diagnosed with a neuroblastoma aged three, she
underwent nine rounds of chemotherapy, two stem cell transplants and
radiotherapy. Two years ago, when NHS doctors decided that nothing more could be
done for her, Garry heard about an experimental programme in gene therapy at
Sloan- Kettering memorial hospital in New York, raised $ 1.4m for Robyn's
medical bills, and moved the family to the US. "It was real rocket-science
stuff," says Garry, "and it extended her life for two and a half years."

    But while they were in New York, Robyn's cancer came back and she died
there, the same day Karen discovered that she was pregnant again. Since doctors
had told the Brookses that Robyn's blood might have been infected with cancer
cells from birth, their new daughter Sasha Robyn underwent tests in utero and
she was born in perfect health last month.

    If Robyn had the use of her own stem cells, says Karen, it could have given
her immune system an incredible boost. "Her blood counts were always low, so her
body could never recover. It would have definitely helped her," she says. The
Brookses are taking no chances with Sasha and have banked her blood as a
safeguard.

    After Sasha's umbilical cord was cut and tied, 80ml of her blood containing
a high concentration of stem cells was drawn from the cord and delivered by
FedEx to the UK Cord Blood Bank laboratory in Boston. There the blood is tested
and stored for possible future use. "My newborn's got 800 million stem cells, a
crazy amount," says Garry. "Who knows what's going to be happening in the
future, but at the end of the day, it could save lives and thousands of pounds."

    Stem cells drawn from cord blood are already being used in the treatment of
conditions ranging from leukaemia and Hodgkin's disease to inherited disorders
such as sickle cell disease. Earlier this year, six-year-old Charlie Whitaker,
born with diamond blackfan anaemia, received a transplant of stem cells from his
brother Jamie's umbilical cord. Although his condition has been cured, his
parents had to undergo IVF in America after being refused permission in the UK
to screen embryos to find a perfect tissue match.

    Although these are extreme cases, an increasing number of parents are
banking their children's cord blood. And the complexity of these issues is
fuelling a growing conflict between private cord blood banks, the NHS and the
medical establishment.

    Sean Brooks, the marketing manager for UK Cord Blood Bank, says parents
using his service are facing growing resistance from hospitals and midwives.
Last month, a Midlands hospital refused to allow a couple to have either their
midwife or doctor collect the stem cells after the delivery. "The father was
handed the umbilical cord and the placenta in a basin and he went outside into
the parking lot and did the procedure himself," says Brooks. The hospital cited
concerns about legal action if their medical staff did not collect enough cord
blood.

    Brooks dismisses these fears as unfounded, but says that many parents have
reported that hospitals are refusing to extract cord blood for no apparent
reason. Shamshad Ahmed, director of the UK-based Smart Cells International,
which offers a similar service, says: "We do find situations where there's a
hospital in one area that's happy to do this collection but five miles down the
road, there's a complete ban."

    Neither do the private blood banks yet have backing from the Royal Colleges.
Sue Macdonald, a representative of the Royal College of Midwives, says that her
organisation does not support commercial collection. "It's a fiddly thing to do
after delivery," she says. "The midwives have other priorities. The primary
purpose of our care is the mother and baby, and this is a side issue.

    "We don't know about the long term," she goes on. "You might have an idea
that if you collect your stem cells it will help your baby in the future, but we
don't know if it's going to be as effective as the private companies claim it
will be."

    Professor Pete Braude, who chairs the Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists' scientific advisory committee, says the chance of an individual
needing to use their own stem cells for transplant is one in 20,000. Even then,
he adds, the stem cells need to be cultured to create an expanded population and
that still requires a lot of research. Instead, he says that the European
Union's ethics working committee on stem cells is pushing for an expansion of
existing national blood banks.

    But the private companies point out that while demand for the service is
growing, the NHS service that collects stem cells from anonymous donors for a
national registry operates routinely in only three hospitals in north London.
Once the blood is tested, it is placed on bone marrow registers and can be used
worldwide. "With the private service, people are only saving for their own
family use," says Sue Armitage, head of the Cord Blood Bank, "In most families,
transplant is quite a rare event, but we've got people donating for anyone's
use." The bank has issued 80 units of cord blood since they opened in 1996 and
have about 7,000 units banked. Armitage says her service is proposing to bank
another 20,000 units from selected hospitals with large maternity units and
believes a bigger national service is the answer.

    Whatever reservations there might be, stem cell transplants from cord blood
are already saving lives and there is a growing demand for it. In the US, more
than 100,000 units are taken every year, and in at least two states,
obstetricians are legally required to give pregnant patients information about
cord blood banks. Smart Cells International estimate their UK collections at 150
a month and Ahmed says the issue won't just go away. "The figure of one use in
20,000 is ridiculous," he says. "One shouldn't focus on whether it's one in 10
or one in ten million, but on whether it works. And it does."

    For Mark Behan, a Northamptonshire police officer whose seven-year-old
daughter Caitlin suffers from a rare form of anaemia and who has just received a
vital stem cell transplant from an anonymous donor in Spain, there's no question
that national registers are the way forward. "My experience has made me very
evangelical about many things," he says. "For a small amount of time and effort
and because it doesn't affect you in any way, why wouldn't you do it? Cords
aren't a panacea, but through a donation, you can save someone's life."


LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2004


                             502 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               November 12, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1859 words

HEADLINE: G2 in China: Science: Open your mind: Critics say Chinese biology and
medicine are uncontrolled - a sort of 'wild east'. After witnessing a bizarre
operation on a drug addict's brain, David Adam is inclined to agree

BYLINE: David Adam

BODY:


    Two weeks before we met, Sheng Mingjie was a heroin addict. The tall,
well-dressed Shanghai entrepreneur shows me the scars that cover his arms and
tells me how, when he could no longer find a vein there to inject the drug, he
stuck the needles into his legs. Two weeks before we met, heroin was his life. A
committed user for 10 years, he took a hit up to eight times a day while his
business crumbled and his family despaired.

    Then, two weeks before we met, scientists drilled two holes in Sheng's
skull, inserted metal rods deep inside his head, and burned away the part of his
brain they believed was driving his addiction. Mingjie is the 11th heroin addict
to volunteer for the operation since neuroscientists at the Renji hospital in
the centre of Shanghai's Pudong district started offering it in July. The
surgeons believe that by destroying the brain cells implicated in addictive
behaviour, they are tackling the root cause of the problem. They have performed
two operations each week since the summer and there are 150 more addicts on the
waiting list.

    Pockets of such psychosurgery for conditions including depression linger in
the west, a legacy of the postwar boom in lobotomies as a "cure" for everything
from bulimia to homosexuality, but 21st-century ethics boards here would never
approve the Chinese procedure. One British expert describes it as astonishing.

    The Shanghai brain surgeons are not the only scientists in the city, or in
China, to find themselves at odds with the social and ethical views of the west.
Stem cell research using embryos, field trials of GM crops and neuroscience
experiments on monkeys have all pushed ahead. In October last year, as the west
questioned the safety of experimental gene therapy following several deaths,
China became the first country to license a version for clinical use, to treat
head and neck cancer.

    It will be at least three months before the Renji neuroscientists will judge
if Sheng's operation was a success, but the 39-year-old, his black hair starting
to grow back into stubble that does not yet hide the parallel scars 10
centimetres above his eyebrows, is optimistic: "I feel now that even if someone
was to place the drugs in front of me, I wouldn't want them."

    Before the operation it was different. In and out of state-run detox clinics
for a decade, Sheng says he could think of nothing else, and reckons he blew
several hundred thousand yuan (tens of thousands of pounds) on the drug. "I
couldn't clean up. I still craved it and I failed to stay clean whatever I
tried," he says, his eyes fixed in an intense stare. His family, fearing the
worst if his drug habit continued, paid the surgeons' fees of 40,000 yuan. "Now
I haven't thought about drugs for two weeks."

    The question is, what else has he not thought of - and, with an area of his
brain permanently removed, will he never think of again? Sex, perhaps? "That's a
good question. We will ask the patients about that as part of the follow-up,"
says Ji-Yao Jiang, chairman of neurosurgery at the hospital.

    Leaning back in his chair, Professor Jiang - who, like many of China's top
researchers, trained in the US - surveys the mountain of papers on his desk. "Of
course there are risks, but there are risks with any brain surgery," he says.
"We explain the risks to the patients and they accept them because after years
and years of being a drug addict, they all want to quit." He says that severe
memory loss and other "short-term psychological effects" are common, but clear
up after a few weeks.

    The Shanghai work follows trials at Tangdu hospital in Xian. Scientists in
St Petersburg used the technique to treat 365 Russian addicts in the 1990s, of
whom they claim 237 have been cured. Those operations were halted in 2002 after
a former patient who claimed he suffered damaging side-effects won a court case
against the clinic. If a procedure is too risky for Russia - a nation not known
for its cautious approach to science - it is hardly a ringing recommendation,
and some experts have publicly criticised Renji's move.

    Shen Mingxian, director of law and ethics at the Chinese National Human
Genome Centre in Shanghai, told a local television channel: "The moment we halt
his reliance on drugs, responses such as excitement, anxiety and other basic
instincts may also be changed. I'm against these operations since it may change
people's minds."

    Jiang says: "The patients have a right to choose any method and we respect
their choice. So far we have had no complaints." He says his group obtained
permission from the government, and that the science, ethics and possible
complications were discussed at a meeting of more than 100 experts in Beijing in
September. Another operation is planned for the next day, and Jiang invites a
photographer and me to see it for ourselves.

    The patient is a 27-year-old man from Shanghai who has been on heroin for
seven years and through rehab 10 times (the scientists say they only take
addicts who have exhausted all other options). When we arrive, several staff are
struggling to hold him down. The operation is usually performed under a local
anaesthetic; the conscious patients recall names and numbers to avoid damage to
brain regions responsible for thought and reason. In this case, the man's
withdrawal symptoms prevent that. Cold turkey means a general anaesthetic.

    Before the surgeons pick up their scalpels, they pore over scans of the
addict's brain to pinpoint their target, the nucleus accumbens. The coordinates
that identify its position are now scrawled on a piece of paper stuck to the
side of a monitor with the familiar peaks of heart rate and other vital signs
dancing across the screen. Beneath, they are translated into crude felt-tip
crosses drawn on the back of the patient's clamped head. Under that is a bucket.

    As the surgeon sends the tip of the hand drill grinding into bone, the
patient's feet jerk and his heartbeat increases. Blood oozes from the wound.
Within 15 minutes there are two holes, anchored open with metal clips.

    Then high-precision surgery turns into high farce when the electrical needle
- the end of which has to be hot - fails to switch on. Hurried checks on the
connections, phone calls, and an ignominious scrabble under the bed end when one
of the team sheepishly flicks the missing switch. The electrode hums into life.
With a jarring tone that indicates the resistance of the brain tissue it is up
against, the surgeon slides it into place, guided by a precisely aligned tube
bolted to the head clamp.

    Sixty seconds later the noise stops. Its work done, the surgeon removes the
probe, turns his attention to the second hole, and asks us to leave. We do not
see the patient again.

    "It's an astonishing thing to do," says Barry Everitt of the experimental
psychology department at the University of Cambridge. "You have to worry about
them treating addiction this way. You would imagine it to have very widespread
effects that I don't think are being assessed here." Animal studies and human
trials have implicated the nucleus accumbens in the way drugs work, he says, but
not in the brain's craving for them. "Neurosurgeons are a law unto themselves,
but there would be an outcry if you tried to do this in Britain."

    Reports from China suggest the Ministry of Health halted the procedures on
November 2, less than two weeks after the Guardian's visit, citing "no accurate
conclusions on the effect, safety and other indispensable elements of the
operation". No one from the ministry or the hospital could be contacted for
comment.

    The surgery will provide more ammunition to critics who claim a lack of
control over bioethics has turned China into the "wild east" of biology. But
Guoqing Fu, director of the Shanghai Science and Technology Commission, insists
standards mirror or exceed those of the west. Besides, he says, as Chinese
scientists seek wider recognition for their work, it is in their interests to
follow the ethical guidelines demanded by the major journals they want to
publish their findings.

    Fu says there remains a deep-seated prejudice in the west about science in
China, and he should know. His commission is funding controversial research at
another Shanghai hospital which, more than any other, has thrust the city's
science on to the world stage.

    In August last year, researchers in the lab headed by Huizhen Sheng revealed
they had implanted human DNA into rabbit eggs and extracted stem cells from the
resulting cloned embryos. (The Sun greeted the story with the headline: "The
bunny monster: why they created creature from hell".)

    On the sixth floor of the accident and emergency department at Xin Hua
hospital in the north of the city, Professor Sheng's laboratory, filled with
microscopes and sterile cabinets, looks as anonymous as any other. Only the
floor-to-ceiling Perspex screens are unusual. Those, and a pink-spined book
sitting in a locked bookcase: Human Cloning.

    Her group uses rabbit eggs because those from humans are a rare resource.
Despite the Sun's illustration of a buck-toothed, floppy-eared man with
strangely developed legs, there is no intention to keep the cross-species
embryos alive beyond a couple of weeks. They only want to investigate the stem
cells, which have the potential to develop into any tissue in the body. "China
and Shanghai certainly have provided a favourable environment for stem cell
research," Sheng says. "The framework has created a regulated yet permissive
environment." The Home Office, which governs research using animals, says it
would not grant a licence for Sheng's work in Britain.

    But some in the west are taking China's efforts in this field more
seriously. Stephen Minger, a stem cell researcher at King's College London,
visited Sheng's laboratory as part of a DTI-sponsored fact-finding trip in
September. "I went with the typical chauvinistic western idea that they were
probably lagging considerably behind," he says. "I came back ashamed." He says
he has now scrapped plans to forge greater links with academics in the US, where
George Bush has banned stem cell research using public money, and will instead
look east for collaborations. "I didn't come away with the impression that
people were cutting corners. Ethically they were very, very conservative."

    It is hard to see irreversible brain surgery for drug addiction in this way,
though at Renji hospital Prof Jiang says his patients will be watched for at
least two years. If the operations have been halted, then for Sheng Mingjie such
a move has come too late, though debates and discussions over whether what was
done to him was right seem far from his mind anyway. "It saved my life," he
says, lowering his eyes for the first time. "It was some kind of a miracle."

    1. A surgeon analyses the patient's brain scans before the operation

    2. Measuring up the skull for surgery

    3. The drilling begins

    4. The surgeon's notes, taped to the heart monitor

    5. The wound is held open and exces blood is drained

    6. The surgeon inserts the electrical needle and begins cutting


LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2004


                             503 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                October 22, 2004

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: Lords reject biotech patent plea

BYLINE: Heather Tomlinson

BODY:


    American biotechnology firm Amgen yesterday lost its right to produce a
billion-dollar anaemia drug, Epogen, exclusively in the UK after a House of
Lords ruling.

    It had challenged the right of US firm Transkaryotic Therapies and French
multinational Sanofi-Aventis to sell their rival Dynepo, even though the drug is
a version of a natural hormone, EPO.

    The Lords said that Amgen's patent could not hold in the UK; it is contrary
to a recent US ruling that went in Amgen's favour. "It is clear that Amgen have
got themselves into difficulties because, having invented a perfectly good and
ground-breaking process for making EPO . . . they were determined to try to
patent the protein itself, notwithstanding that, even when isolated, it was not
new," the ruling said.

    EPO stimulates the production of red blood cells, counter-acting anaemia.
When Amgen discovered a way of making EPO, it patented the technology, but the
method for producing Dynepo had not been invented at that stage.

    "Because the technology has advanced so much, no one could have envisaged
you could do what Transkaryotic does," said Stephen Bennet at law firm Lovells.
"People already had a view that the UK is quite mean on patent infringement,
this will reinforce that."

    Amgen's main anaemia treatment in Europe is Aranesp, so the ruling will not
hurt its business.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2004


                             510 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               September 16, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Life: The latest research: Simple route to early diagnosis

BYLINE: David Flickling in Sydney

BODY:


    The discovery of a cheap, simple blood test to spot the presence of
mesothelioma was greeted as a breakthrough when it was announced by a joint
Australian- American team last November.

    The giveaway is a molecule, soluble mesothelin-related protein (SMR),
normally found only in the mesothelium membranes that surround the lungs,
intestines, heart and sex organs. The researchers took blood samples from 272
patients and volunteers and measured the quantities of SMR. Most of the
mesothelioma sufferers had increased levels of the protein. Researchers could
tell a diseased sample from a normal one just by its appearance under the
microscope.

    Significantly, similarly raised SMR levels were detected in the blood of
seven people who had not developed mesothelioma, but had been exposed to
asbestos. Within five years, three out of this group had developed tumours.

    The results suggested that a screening programme could help mesothelioma
sufferers. Similar programmes for breast cancer, cervical cancer and skin cancer
have improved survival rates.

    "This could be a test used by anyone at risk. They could take it every six
months," says Bruce Robinson, who led the research at the University of Western
Australia. "It's just a blood test, not much more expensive than any other blood
test."

    A commercial test should be available by the end of the year, but Robinson
says the evidence still needs further testing. He is more excited by several
other therapies he is trying out at Sir Charles Gairdner hospital, Perth. There
has been a gene therapy trial, which he describes as "very
front-page-of-Time-magazine", and a vaccine therapy, which has been less
futuristic but more effective. It has been used to treat up to 40 patients in
the past two years and has increased survival rates by two to three months with
no major side effects.

    The problem of mesothelioma is felt particularly keenly in Australia, which
has the highest rates of asbestos disease in the world. In Western Australia,
men have a one in 150 chance of developing the cancer at some point in their
lives. Already 7,000 people have died from it, with 700 more last year.
Fatalities are not expected to peak for 20 years, and 18,000 more people are
expected to develop the cancer.

    Robinson would like to see the vaccine therapy developed into a drug. "We'd
like to give it to every single person who's been exposed to asbestos, the way
you would give people a polio vaccine," he says. "That would be terrific."


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2004


                             511 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               September 13, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Sport Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: Sport braced as the gene genie escapes from its bottle Peta Bee on the
latest threat to fair play

BYLINE: Peta Bee

BODY:


    A little knowledge is a dangerous thing but never more so, apparently, than
when bequeathed to those with designs on becoming record-breaking gene machines.
This was the conclusion reached last week by leading scientists who debated
sport's hottest topic - the imminent threat of genetically modified athletes
competing on the world stage- at the Science Museum in London.

    Such has been the publicity surrounding the potential abuse of gene therapy
in sport that some experts believe that athletes have been provided with a
bluffer's guide to cheating by the media. Professor Geoff Goldspink, a pioneer
of research into gene treatment at the department of anatomy and developmental
biology at University College London, has made a formal complaint to the World
Anti-Doping Agency about the detail provided in some published articles on the
subject.

    Goldspink has been researching gene therapy for 12 years. He is in little
doubt that it represents a huge medical breakthrough. Its therapeutic
implications are huge and range from being used as the first effective treatment
for wasting diseases, such as muscular dystrophy, to preventing growth problems
in vulnerable children. But the same approach can also be adopted to manipulate
muscle development so that power, speed or endurance are enhanced in sport.

    Its appeal to some athletes is obvious. Gene therapy can alter the
proportion of fast or slow twitch muscle fibres to aid sprinters or marathon
runners respectively. An injectable synthetic gene is being developed to block
myostatin, a substance that limits muscle growth, which could benefit power and
strength athletes; genes to produce synthetic erythropoietin (EPO) and so boost
the body's oxygen-carrying capacity are also being investigated. And so far,
pending long-term studies, there are no confirmed negative side-effects.

    A test to detect unscrupulous use of gene therapy by athletes is in
development by Goldspink and others. It should be available within 12 months and
will almost certainly be used at the 2008 Olympics in Beijing. But there are
doubts whether even that will have sufficient impact to prevent widespread use
of genetic modification.

    It is so costly to administer that mass screening of all competitors will be
impossible; only those suspected of its use will be targeted. Dr Michael Turner,
a former medical officer for the British Olympic Association, is one of many
experts who believes it is only a matter of time before someone sets up a
laboratory offering performance-enhancing gene therapy.

    Already researchers are being approached directly by intrigued athletes and
coaches wanting to know more about when, where and how gene therapy will become
accessible. One of Goldspink's subjects is a former British gold medallist who
contacted him in desperation after being injured in a serious accident. By all
accounts, with gene treatment his recovery has been staggering.

    While this particular athlete's glory days are long over, his case raises
the question of whether it is ethical to use gene therapy in the treatment of
sports injuries affecting those who are still competitive. Is it acceptable to
use naturally occurring substances in this way or will it merely create a
generation of Frankenrunners? If athletes are to continue moving faster,
stronger and higher, then maybe gene doping is necessary for them to progress?

    Before the debate at the Science Museum began, the audience (made up of
scientists, athletes and interested members of the public) were asked to use an
electronic voting system to declare whether or not they considered the use of
gene therapy in elite sport to be cheating. An overwhelming number said yes, it
should be banned. Tellingly, by the end of the session one quarter of delegates
had changed their minds.


LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2004


                             517 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               September 1, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: The Editor:From the science magazines: Do deaf children have a right
to the sound of silence?:

BYLINE: Jenny Kleeman

BODY:


    Scientists are ever closer to "curing" deafness, through developments in
cochlear implant surgery, stem cell therapy and gene therapy, reported Pat Hagan
in the New Scientist (August 28). The last thing these scientists anticipated
was that their research would be met with deep resentment by large sections of
the deaf community.

    That's because they have not taken into account what deaf people want. Many
"believe they are not sick and do not need curing", said Hagan. To some, "it's a
personal right to remain deaf," and the idea of removing that right is "akin to
eugenics" or "genocide".

    Many of those who are profoundly deaf immerse themselves in the deaf
community from an early age, and define themselves as "a minority with their own
rich culture and language", which they have no wish to leave and instead want to
preserve. This feeling of identity is strong enough for some deaf people to
ostracise those who have had treatment to improve their hearing.

    But the problem poses a dilemma: is it "ethically defensible to restore or
refuse hearing to a deaf child too young to decide for themselves"? Hearing is
vital for language acquisition, so if a decision is not taken early enough, a
child's ability to speak could be impaired, noted Hagan.

    Forget vegetables and vitamins: the real secret of long life lies in insects
and abstinence, according to a special edition of Scientific American . Karen
Hopkin looked at the physiology of animals that live far beyond their life span
hoping to glean something to make us live longer.

    The most striking result discussed by Hopkin came from experiments in which
long-living flies were bred by delaying when the insects reproduced. "Like
'good' teenagers, they don't waste their energy on sex," said Cynthia Kenyon of
the University of California in San Francisco. By the time the flies are
elderly, "they're flying around, fornicating and having a good time while the
regular flies are dying," she continued. But don't be fooled, warned Hopkin:
"Delaying parenthood would not affect your own life span - although it might
help your descendants live it up 100 generations down the line."

    Assuming we do all live to reach triple figures, there's a chance that we
might have to contend with robot enemies, claimed Focus (September). Sunny Bains
asked whether advances in robotics could endow machines with the "means, motive
and opportunity" for world domination.

    Most experts believe that "machine intelligence will eventually be cracked",
and with machines already being used for nefarious purposes, in the form of
stealth fighters and smart bombs, a world of Terminators is not entirely
inconceivable.

    But they will be let down by their lack of teamwork, Bains argued. Robots
will be purpose-built and different models will have little in common. As such,
it would be difficult for them to "identify with one another and cooperate" in
any grand conspiracy.

    If you are finding a problem difficult to solve, your best bet could be to
call it a day and go to bed, according to Nature (August 26). Our ability to
perform complex tasks "can be better the morning after a practice session the
night before," claimed Laura Nelson.

    This is due to "procedural learning" that takes place during periods of deep
sleep that surround each bout of REM. "During the training, the brain tags the
task as something to be improved upon later during sleep," she explained. It
learns in pieces and sleep puts it all together.

    Scientists are unsure of what actually occurs during these periods of deep
sleep, which have been termed "slow wave" after the "synchronised waves of
electrical activity that can be seen on electroencephalograph traces undulating
across the brain at fewer than four cycles a second".


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2004


                             520 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 August 5, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 2010 words

HEADLINE: Life: Cover story: Testing the waters: On the eve of the Olympics,
David Adam kicks off our special science and sport issue by going behind the
scenes with the UK's top drug detective, David Cowan

BYLINE: David Adam

BODY:


    David Cowan is a man with a lot of piss on his hands. About 650 litres of
the stuff passes through his system each year, donated by everyone from
millionaire premiership footballers and elite UK athletes to promising amateur
sports stars.

    Cowan's drug testing laboratory at King's College London is where the
sporting careers of record-breaking British pole vaulter Janine Whitlock and
rising sprint star John Skeete ground to a halt after traces of banned
stimulants were found in their urine (it was later found that Skeetes'
supplements had been spiked). It is where Manchester United defender's Rio
Ferdinand's sample would have been tested, had he supplied one (he didn't and is
currently serving a ban). And it is where the bulk of Britain's Olympic team
will have been screened before they head to Athens next week, for anabolic
steroids, amphetamines, protein hormones, epitestosterone, darbopoetin and up to
500 other controlled substances that could illegally boost their chances.

    Entry to the laboratory is tightly controlled, for good reason. It handles
7-8,000 anonymous urine samples sent from across the UK every year, and each
must be treated with great care and precision. In the event of a positive test,
sports stars can send their own scientific experts or lawyers to sniff out
sloppy procedures, or anything else that could save a shamed reputation.

    So when the Guardian was granted rare access to the lab last month, it was
under strict instructions not to touch anything.

    It is not only the athletes who are preparing for the Olympics. Leading drug
testers will gather in Athens, ready to pit their wits and skill against the
cheats in a specially constructed facility that will work around the clock to
test about 3,000 samples in all.

    The experts are facing unprecedented challenges. The Athens games are the
first major event since the THG designer steroid scandal rocked athletics and
saw British sprinter Dwain Chambers banned. The scientists have been forced to
accept an unpalatable truth: their most dangerous opponents are now their own
kind - rogue chemists specifically designing drugs to slip past the tests.

    The move caught anti-doping experts by surprise. "That was new for me,
because I was working on the basis that no sensible athlete would take a drug
that hadn't gone through the proper testing," Cowan says. "I was wrong. They're
prepared to take substances of unknown toxicity, and that's scary. It's also a
bit uncomfortable that there is clearly some connivance. There are some crazy
scientific minds probably just making money out of designing things to beat the
tests."

    Things could get worse. According to US scientists developing gene therapies
to treat patients, several athletes have already asked about having their DNA
rewritten to boost physique and stamina. In theory, athletes could inject genes
to rapidly, and perhaps undetectably, increase muscle size and strength. Other
gene techniques being tested to treat blood disorders could boost the numbers of
oxygen-carrying red blood cells. "I think it's on the horizon," Cowan says. "But
I don't think it's as near as everyone says it might be."

    Conventional thinking says sporting pressure and rewards have created a
greater incentive than ever to cheat, and that dopers have become so
sophisticated that the drug detectives on their trail are constantly one step
behind. "I'm not in total agreement with that," Cowan says. "Is there more
pressure to cheat? Our testing has improved over the years so it's a bit of a
balance between the two, I'd say." In some cases, he says, the anti-dopers are
ahead of the field: tests have already been developed for several new substances
not yet abused in sport.

    Doping is no modern phenomenon. Olympic victories brought ancient Greek
athletes tax exemptions and deferment from military service, and competitors
would ingest any preparation they believed might enhance performance. Roman
chariot racers are said to have doped themselves and their horses with
mysterious herbal infusions in the search for speed. Much later, in the early
years of the 20th century, brandy, strychnine, heroin and cocaine were all used
widely.

    Neither is fighting the dopers new. The first recorded case of anti-doping
came in 1865 when the organisers of an Amsterdam canal race expelled a swimmer
for taking an unnamed performance-enhancing substance.

    The development of amphetamines in the 1930s raised the stakes. After a
succession of deaths linked to the drug, British cyclist Tommy Simpson collapsed
and died during the tough ascent of Mount Ventoux in the 1967 Tour de France.
His death, brought on by heavy amphetamine use and caught on film, convinced the
authorities that action was needed. Drug testing began at the Winter Olympics in
Grenoble the following year.

    The early tests to detect amphetamine use were developed by the British
chemist Arnold Beckett, with whom Cowan - an expert in the way drugs break down
in the body over time - began working in the mid-1970s.

    "As a naive academic I said 'look ,we can't just occasionally get samples
from sport because it disrupts the research. We need to do it properly'," Cowan
says.

    Screens to find anabolic steroids followed, and in 1985 the King's College
operation became one of only a handful in the world to be accredited by the
International Olympic Committee.

    The global operation against the cheats - now run by the World Anti Doping
Agency (WADA) - today boasts more than 30 labs. Last month, the horseracing
forensics laboratory in Newmarket became the UK's second WADA-approved testing
facility.

    Cowan may be less naive now, but he remains an academic and has interests
away from sport. He is involved in criminal cases as a forensic toxicologist,
and his group is one of a few in the world given a licence to let people take
the dance floor drug ecstasy to test its effects. Neatly for a chemist, he
crystallizes much of his academic interest to one simple question: "If we find a
sample of drug in your body, we have two important unknowns: how much did you
take and when did you take it?"

    The answer often lies within a mass spectrometer - the tool of the serious
drug hunter's trade, which analyses the different chemicals in a given sample to
produce a characteristic profile of peaks and spikes. The King's sports lab has
banks of them, sitting side by side and quietly hunting their way through a
checklist of banned drugs in dozens of samples every day.

    Some sports allow substances that others have banned (swimmers, for
instance, can take some stimulants that high-board divers can't) which means
that, while the testers do not know the identity of the person who supplied the
sample, they are told the discipline.

    Urine to be tested arrives from the collecting officers responsible for
taking it from the athletes in two identical bottles. One, the B sample, is
frozen for long-term storage, while the A sample is cracked open (the lids have
tamper-proof seals). Small amounts are chemically treated before the search for
prohibited substances.

    "Urine contains thousands of chemicals," Cowan says. "We want to get rid of
the ones we're just not interested in and concentrate on the chemicals that
shouldn't be there."

    Up to 90% of samples breeze through the battery of tests and are declared
all clear. Others require more attention. "We see something that's allowable,
but could it be hiding something that's prohibited?"

    Such masking agents are a growing problem for anti-dopers. Some tests for
the anabolic steroid testosterone, for example, rely on the fact that the
supplements throw the body's chemistry out of kilter - specifically the ratio
between testosterone and epitestosterone.

    Taking supplements of epitestosterone with the active steroid makes the
ratio appear normal. Balco labs, the controversial site in California at the
heart of the THG enquiry, has been accused of supplying a mixture of
testosterone and epitestosterone, which was also produced by a pharmaceutical
company in the former East Germany.

    "Why would a pharmaceutical company make a hormone preparation of active and
inactive material if not to aid the East German athletes?" says Cowan. "That was
the state system; what we're seeing now on the US side is probably
finance-driven. That one is dead easy science, but cleverly, they had the
knowledge of our tests. That's one of the reasons it's better if we don't all
use the same methods."

    Back in the lab, the suspect 10% samples are subjected to closer scrutiny.
"When it becomes a more solid suspect we go right back to the original A bottle
and analyse it specifically for that substance," Cowan says. "We must get two
hits before we put that first report out. We're awfully careful to get it right,
it's not like workplace testing where they might use a single sample."

    Accused athletes have the right to visit the lab to see the B sample
retrieved and tested while they watch. Few do: "We get them from time to time,
sometimes with their lawyers. The big names often get their representatives to
come along."

    About 1% of samples tested are positive - down from 2-3% when testing was
introduced. "Testing clearly helps control drug abuse in sport," he says.

    But to reduce it further and to tackle the problem of designer drugs like
THG, Cowan believes that sweeping changes are needed to the system.

    "The interesting thing about THG is that we couldn't have found it from
urine samples alone - the concentrations are just too small. Give us a few
litres and we'll identify it, but give us just 75ml and that's really pushing
it."

    THG was only identified because traces were found in a syringe handed
anonymously to the US authorities.

    Cowan says that rather than trying to find the drugs themselves, we should
be watching for their knock-on effects on athletes' physiology. Testing sports
stars more regularly and comparing the tests month-on-month could allow the
authorities to build up a profile of normal hormone levels in each individual.
"Then if you use THG we would start to get suspicious because, if we had your
profile, we would see that your androgens are suppressed."

    He says this system would be much harder to beat. "I'd be able to say 'wait
a minute, what's happened to you suddenly?' I think that would make the whole
system a lot more powerful."

    It could also clear innocent athletes tainted with drug allegations. "I
don't need to know who the individual is. All I need to know is that it's from
subject x rather than subject y," he adds.

    "Athletes want a level playing field and they want us to do it properly. If
we're not doing it properly then a number of them on the borderline are going to
go to the wrong side of the rules."

    Despite Cowan's immersion in sport's murkier side, he says he is able to
watch events without much suspicion. In fact, he takes a low-key attitude to the
moral aspects of his work. "It's more the science of it than 'yes, we've got
someone'," he says. "When I was in Salt Lake City (for the 2002 winter games)
there was a lot of excitement when we got the first darbopoetin positives."

    Cowan will not be drawn on how many athletes may be getting away with drug
use, and how many could have narcotics to thank for the medals they will win in
Athens later this month. But he is certain of one thing - they won't get away
with it for ever.

    "One of the things about cheats is that they keep cheating," he says. "And
we catch them in the end."

    Life at a glance

    Education BSc, PhD in pharmacy from Chelsea College

    Career Director of Drug Control Centre and professor of pharmaceutical
toxicology, King's College London; member of the International Olympic
Committee's medical commission for the 2000 Olympics.

    He says "If we had the means of looking at individuals rather than
populations that would really help."

    They say "He's awesome - a rare combination of expertise and wisdom." Don
Catlin, head of UCLA's Olympic testing lab.


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2004


                             521 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 August 5, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 708 words

HEADLINE: Anti doping expert calls for monthly drug tests for sports stars

BYLINE: David Adam, Science correspondent

BODY:


    Britain's leading expert on doping in sport has called for sweeping changes
to the way athletes are screened for performance-enhancing drugs.

    Professor David Cowan, head of the drug control centre at King's College
London, where most of the British Olympic team have been tested ahead of the
games, says the introduction of such "undetectable" designer steroids as THG and
the prospect of athletes abusing genetic techniques means the current system
cannot be relied on to catch the cheats.

    Speaking before the Athens Olympics, the build-up to which has been
dominated by a succession of high-profile drug scandals in the United States,
Prof Cowan said sports stars should be tested each month so that scientists can
develop a profile of their normal levels of hormones and other body chemicals
and watch for suspicious changes caused by drug use.

    "That's definitely the way to go - looking for the effects of a drug rather
than the drug itself," Prof Cowan said.

    "It would vastly improve the fight against designer drugs and things beating
the system. Athletes want a level playing field and they want us to do it
properly. If we're not doing it properly then a number of them on the borderline
are going to go to the wrong side of the rules."

    In an interview with the Guardian, Prof Cowan said monitoring hormone levels
in this way would have caught athletes who had taken THG much earlier, including
the British sprinter Dwain Chambers.

    The so-called designer drug is an anabolic steroid similar to testosterone
modified to slip past standard tests, which search urine for signature products
the drugs produce after they break down in the body.

    Because THG was an unknown substance, tests used at the time were not primed
to find it - it was only detected after traces were found in a syringe handed
anonymously to the US authorities.

    Once they knew what they were looking for, scientists at the University of
California quickly developed a test for THG. But they and the US Anti-Doping
Agency warned earlier this week that some competitors in Athens will be using
other, as yet unknown, designer drugs.

    Prof Cowan said regular profiling offered a solution: "It would be less easy
to beat. If you use something like testosterone, it will have the effect of
suppressing your natural hormones. I'd be able to say 'wait a minute what's
happened to you?' and then start homing in on that sample."

    Profiling could also provide an early warning of sports stars using medical
gene therapy techniques. According to US scientists developing them to treat
patients, several athletes have already asked about having their DNA rewritten
to boost physique and stamina.

    Inserted genes would produce performance-enhancing hormones
indistinguishable from the body's natural supply, making them difficult to
trace. "If we're monitoring an individual and see a sudden change, then that's
one way to detect it," Prof Cowan said. "I think the more we talk about this,
the more it will become clear it is the way to go."

    Michele Verroken, the former head of anti-doping for UK Sport, said: "A lot
would depend on how regularly you tested the athletes and that brings you into
the cat-and-mouse game you play in terms of the testing programme."

    She said unofficial monitoring of profiles had already taken place when
anti-dopers became suspicious of certain individuals. "There were times when I
gave him (Prof Cowan) a series of sample numbers and said can you have a look at
that range together."

    Guin Batten, who won a rowing silver medal at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney,
said athletes would not mind being tested more regularly. "I think most athletes
would bend over backwards to make sure their sport was clean," she said. "If
this is the only way, then I think we have no option."

    A spokesman for UK Sport said: "We are always looking at ways of improving
all aspects of the anti-doping programme to ensure an athlete's right to compete
in drug-free sport is maintained.

    "Clearly this system of regular screening could help,

    although the practical and financial implications need to be considered
carefully to see whether it is a truly viable option."

    guardian.co.uk/drugs

    Life, pages 4-5


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2004


                             529 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 July 24, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Nicky West

BYLINE: Ed Owen

BODY:


    The extraordinary character and determination of Nicky West, who has died
aged 30, was an inspiration to those of us whose lives have been touched by
cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common life-threatening genetic condition in
Britain today. She had a unique ability to communicate about CF and, more
particularly, about the campaign to raise money for a gene therapy "cure".

    I first met Nicky last autumn when she spoke to an audience of businessmen
and women about living with CF. I was there because my two-year-old daughter,
Ella, suffers from the disease. No one in the room that evening was left
unaffected by what Nicky said; most were moved to tears.

    Stunningly beautiful, and with a charming personality, it was a mark of
Nicky's selflessness that she took on these events for the Cystic Fibrosis Trust
even though she knew that any medical breakthrough would not help her. "It's all
too late for me," she said to me with a calm dignity. "But I am determined to
ensure that I do everything I can to ensure it comes in time for children like
Ella."

    This was Nicky's overriding mission in her last few months, and she took on
a hectic schedule. She spoke at Downing Street and Foreign Office receptions,
and at dinners involving politicians, royalty, industrialists and entertainers.
Thus did people like Cherie Blair, Sir David Frost, Richard Madeley and Judy
Finnegan take her cause to a wider audience.

    Her public engagements were carried out despite the tremendous pain and
suffering brought about by a disease that attacks the lungs and the digestive
system. Every day, Nicky had to endure two-and-a-half hours of physiotherapy, a
constant stream of oral, nebulised and intravenous drugs, and overnight feeding
though a tube into her stomach. Regular admissions to the Royal Brompton
Hospital, west London, were the norm.

    But Nicky never sought sympathy. Her determina- tion and sense of
independence motivated those of us who sometimes look to the future with
trepidation and fear. She had a wicked sense of humour, which could be deployed
with disarming effect on those tempted to patronise her because of her illness.
Her email address -"poorlychick" - encapsulated both her forti tude and her
acceptance of what was to come.

    Nicky had always excelled, even before the ravages of CF overtook her life.
Born in Wimbledon, south London, she left Surbiton high school with 12 GCSEs and
three A-levels, and graduated from Brighton University in bio-medical sciences.
In her early 20s, she became a City headhunter, a post she reluctantly gave up
to accommodate the increasingly gruelling treatment regime needed to counter the
disease's symptoms. Inevitably, her social life and tennis playing were affected
too.

    But she achieved more in her 30 years than most of us will in twice that
time. Right up until her death, she was active in helping the Cystic Fibrosis
Trust raise the £15m needed to give medical scientists the chance to make the
final push in finding a cure. A few weeks ago, she spoke at Chelsea football
club, in front of Tessa Jowell, Kenny Dalglish and Peter Beardsley, and was
instrumental last month in securing a £1.5m grant from a charitable foundation
towards the gene therapy research.

    Nicky's aim was to give children like my daughter the health and
opportunities she did not have herself. She will be missed by thousands. She
leaves a loving family - her mother, Linda, and stepfather Tony, as well as her
sister Sam and brother James.

    Nicola 'Nicky' West, campaigner, born April 24 1974; died July 20 2004


LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2004


                             530 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                  July 6, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1442 words

HEADLINE: G2: Health: A matter of life and death: Scientists hope that by
injecting human embryo stem cells into the brain, they will be able to cure
Parkinson's disease. But is such radical treatment worth the risk? Vivienne
Parry reports on the extreme side of medicine

BYLINE: Vivienne Parry

BODY:


    Last week's announcement that a team of Israeli scientists had successfully
used human embryo stem cells to treat rats with symptoms of Parkinson's disease
raised hopes that a similar effect might be possible in humans. For those
afflicted by this miserably debilitating condition, it is light at the end of a
dark tunnel. But for those unaffected, having cells injected into your brain
sounds like extreme medicine: a Frankenstein treatment.

    Yet my guess is that Dr Benjamin Reubinoff, who led the study at Hadassah
University, already has a sackful of letters from people offering to be the
first human guinea pigs - and this notwithstanding the distressing history of
brain injections of foetal cells, which were touted as a treatment for
Parkinson's in the 80s and 90s. Despite initial results, which seemed promising,
particularly in younger people, the bad news was that after a year some
developed exaggerated symptoms known as disabling dyskinesias, which were
permanent and irreversible.

    Being worse off after last-ditch, last-hope treatments, seems very cruel.
Yet they are never sold with guarantees; indeed, most come with dire warnings.
The fact that people are still prepared to sign up for them is testament to the
quality of life of those with chronic illness or pain; that and their desperate
quest for hope.

    Extreme medicine is usually reserved for those with immediately
life-threatening illnesses. Robert Tools is typical. A retired telephone company
employee, the 59-year-old American had been turned down for the heart-transplant
programme, had suffered multiple heart attacks, and also had diabetes and kidney
disease. His life was ebbing away when in 2001 he received the world's first
self-contained artificial heart at Jewish Hospital in Louisville, Kentucky.

    The AbioCor heart is the size of a grapefruit. It requires an external
battery pack, worn on a belt, plus two extra bits of kit installed inside the
body, an internal controller unit and a rechargeable battery (imagine someone
telling you that they would like to insert a phone charger into your stomach).
Tools lived for 151 days before succumbing to haemorrhage. "Mr Tools and his
family are heroes," said his surgeon, Dr Robert Dowling. "Their willingness to
be the first to participate in the AbioCor clinical trial could potentially pave
the way for a revolutionary treatment for heart disease."

    Seven-hour surgery in which someone cuts out your admittedly failing heart
and replaces it with a machine untried in humans certainly qualifies as extreme
medicine. And, as with treatments for Parkinson's, previous history was not
encouraging. In 1982, Barney Clark, a dentist from Seattle, lived for 112 days
following the implant of Jarvik-7, the first device designed to be a completely
permanent replacement heart. This air-driven device was an even more worrisome
prospect. It was connected by protruding wires to a large external unit and it
was these wires that did for Clark, introducing infection after infection into
his body. Although four more patients received the Jarvik-7, its days were
numbered. Enhanced and renamed as the CardioWest heart, its purpose today is
solely as a bridge to transplantation.

    Even these heroic operations were less extreme than those that preceded them
in the quest to do away with reliance on scarce human organs. In 1963, a patient
lived for nine months following the transplant of a chimpanzee kidney, and in
1984, a newborn baby, known as Baby Fay, survived 20 days with a baboon heart.
In neither case was life significantly prolonged or quality of life improved.
Yet researchers remain undeterred and we are still talking about the possibility
of xenotransplants today, but with the organs being supplied from genetically
engineered pigs. For those not lingering on a transplant list,
xenotransplantation is an ethical nightmare, with many concerns, including the
prospect of new disease caused by transplanted pig retroviruses. But the people
waiting - and I have spoken to many - are prepared to live with the risks.

    As transplant pioneer, Christian Barnard, put it: "If a lion chases you to a
river filled with crocodiles, you will leap into the water convinced you have a
chance to swim to the other side. But you would never accept such odds if there
were no lion."

    Louis Washkansky, a 53-year-old South African grocer, found himself pursued
by that lion. He became the recipient of the world's first human- to-human heart
transplant in 1967, surviving for 18 days. He is a legend and today - thanks to
him and those that followed - heart-transplant surgery is successful and
commonplace.

    A heart transplant is an extreme solution to an extreme situation, but
conditions that are not life threaten ing also prompt extreme solutions. Some
years ago I made a film for Tomorrow's World about a man who had damaged the
cornea of both eyes. Corneal transplants had failed and he was facing the
prospect of being blind for the rest of his life. Somehow he was persuaded that
taking out one of his teeth and putting a bit of it in his eye, would restore
his sight. In an extraordinary operation, the tooth was removed (and yes, it was
his eye tooth). It was cut down, providing a thin sliver of dentine, into which
a hole was bored. The sliver was put into a pocket created in the man's cheek.
Three months later, it was removed and the frill of tissue that had by now grown
around it was used to attach it to the man's cornea. A week later I visited the
man in a hospital in Brighton, where he was reading a newspaper.

    Reconstructive surgery is also replete with extreme medicine, where toes are
removed and fashioned into thumbs and bone is taken from the hip to be crushed
into moulds to make new palates. But what all extreme medicine has in common is
the patient's absolute trust in his doctors. It doesn't always have a happy
outcome. The charismatic Irish surgeon, William Arbuthnott Lane (1856 - 1943),
emboldened by the success of his treatment for constipation that involved
removing huge sections of the gut, decided to do the same thing as a
prophylactic measure for those who weren't actually ill, but whom he considered
at risk of "autointoxication". It was detoxing at its most extreme and yet still
his eviscerated patients worshipped him.

    From the coffee enemas offered by Gerson Therapy to those with terminal
cancer, to new surgical treatments such as islet transplants for diabetics, and
even face transplants for burn victims, those with lifelong or life-threatening
conditions willingly submit to treatments that are dangerous because they feel
that they have nothing to lose. In these circumstances, where an untried
treatment is the only hope, can proper consent ever be given and should those
not afflicted make judgments about what people in desperate pain and suffering
can or can't do to their bodies? Should the patients be protected from
themselves, and more to the point, from their doctors who may be exploiting
their hope to extend their skills and knowledge?

    The case of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in 1999 changed thinking. Gelsinger
had a rare genetic disease that affected the way ammonia, the toxic by-product
of protein breakdown, was cleared from his body. He had a mild form of the
disease that was controlled by drugs and diet and was not life-threatening, but
nevertheless volunteered for gene therapy - then, and now, an extreme solution -
at the University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy unit. Four days later, he was
dead, killed by a severe immune- system reaction.

    A subsequent inquiry revealed that neither Gelsinger nor his family had been
told of similar reactions in animal trials, his liver test results should have
made him ineligible for the study and poor results of other gene-therapy
volunteers had not been made available to the regulatory body at the FDA.
Disturbing details about the way that people - who would not themselves benefit
from the trial - were recruited to it, and the intense commercial interest in
its outcome, were uncovered. As a result, the FDA stopped many gene therapy
trials and tightened regulations on consent.

    Some ethicists - famously Arthur Caplan of Penn State University - believe
that there is no such thing as informed consent in life and death situations and
that some other third party should give consent. It's a thorny subject that gets
to the very heart of whose life it is anyway. What is certain, however, is that
without pioneer patients such as Washkansky, extreme medicine cannot develop
into common or garden everyday lifesaving. We have much to thank them for.


LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2004


                             542 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                  May 7, 2004

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 20

LENGTH: 184 words

HEADLINE: Business roundup: Health Ark's gene therapy go-ahead

BYLINE: Heather Stewart

BODY:


    Ark Therapeutics, the British biotech business that floated in March, has
been given the go-ahead to conduct trials of its gene-based treatment for brain
cancer.

    Small-scale trials have suggested Cerepro could buy a few months of life for
sufferers of a type of brain cancer called malignant glioma, after they have
undergone surgery.

    Ark said yesterday that the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory
Agency had approved its plan to carry out trials, which should take up to two
years. "The message is: Ark is delivering," said its chief executive, Dr Nigel
Parker yesterday.

    Ark has one product on the market already, a surgical dressing called
Kerraboot, which is being sold to NHS hospitals. It will use the revenues plus
proceeds of its float to fund the research on Cerepro, which analysts see as its
most promising drug.

    Dr Parker explained that Cerepro, which is injected into the brain, should
work by making healthy brain cells produce an enzyme which when combined with
another drug, ganciclovir, makes a substance that will target, and kill, cells
which divide.


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2004


                             544 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 April 28, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Society Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1506 words

HEADLINE: Society: Interview: Out of the box: Nick Ross is best known for his TV
work, but he's also passionate about social policy. He talks to Jonathan Myerson
about crime, road safety and choice in public services

BYLINE: Jonathan Myerson

BODY:


    Picture the scene: it's the 1950s, the three Ross children - Nick is the one
in the middle - are gathered on their parents' bed for Sunday morning storytime.
Will it be Goldilocks or perhaps something from Enid Blyton? No, as always, it
is another true life story derived from his parents' lives as Liberal
councillors in Sutton, Surrey. Councillors' casework stories: unexpected
beginnings, gruesome middles and hardly ever a happy ending. A bit like
Crimewatch, Ross's crime reconstruction TV show, then.

    Those bedtime stories may also explain why, when his life must be busy
enough with TV and radio appearances, and the spin-off conference work ("I turn
down more than I accept"), he is serious enough about social affairs to find the
time to sit on several commissions and working parties, from the NHS Plan
taskforce on health inequalities to the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee.

    On the morning of our interview, he was supposed to be visiting a marmoset
with electrodes in its brain, as a member of the Nuffield Council bioethics
working party on research involving animal experimentation. It didn't happen.
Which means we can meet in a cafe in Notting Hill, west London, to talk about
his latest "good work", as a commissioner on the independent policy commission
on public services, which has just reported - on choice, the public policy topic
of the moment - to the National Consumer Council.

    So what was it like, his first day on that particular commission, when
everyone else in the room is a professor or a sir or has an impressive
collection of letters after their name? "Some never watch the television or
listen to radio so don't know me," he says. "And then some rather expect that I
am going to be able to introduce some magical insight as to how to manipulate
public opinion."

    And presumably most people think he is just Mr Crime. He is passionate about
tackling crime - but not in a glitzy TV-ish way. "I was making a series called
Out of Court, which was more about keeping people out of jail rather than
putting them in, and Crimewatch just came along as a job," he says.

    "I wasn't even interested in crime for the first four, five years of the
programme, not remotely. But then I started to see there were solutions lying
around that people weren't picking up. And even now I'm not interested in the
sort of stuff that crime correspondents are interested in - blue lights and all
that."

    It is when you start to probe deeper about those "ignored solutions" that
Ross starts to get fired up, and his normally modulated tones pick up an edge.
It is poorly targeted effort that infuriates him. "I find it truly astonishing
how unintellectual we are about crime as a problem," he says. "It takes three
things to make a crime. First, you need to be predisposed to break the rules;
second, you need temptation; and third, you need opportunity. All the effort
currently goes into the first factor. But there is so little effort targeted at
the other two factors. That's all just left to individuals. If we put a tenth of
the thought and energy into the other two things that we do into the first one
we'd have a huge effect."

    Ross helped to set up the Jill Dando Institute of Crime Science, named after
his former Crimewatch co-presenter, who was shot dead in 1999. The institute
focuses on designing out crime, rather than on who commits it, and its remit
reflects his "how" rather than "why" view of crime. Ross coined the term "crime
science", its analytical approach posited in contemptuous opposition to what the
institute website calls the populist "battle between good and evil" concept of
crime.

    He blames his fellow journalists for this shallow crime narrative.
"Journalism's a grubby, competitive business," he says. "It's easier to write
inaccurately with a flourish than dull, honest stuff. Look at these health
scares, such as MMR (the mumps, measles and rubella triple vaccine) and mobile
phone masts. The air is full of radio waves already! People understand so
little."

    Ross almost became an academic, before being lured into journalism, and he
retains a professorial reverence for evidence-based policy. Exercised by
shocking statistics on fire prevention - "If we spent a tenth of the billions
we're now spending on the railways in order to save, what, six lives a year, we
could save 300 deaths annually from domestic fires" - he's now running a
competition to design an affordable sprinkler system. "You only ever see them in
offices because they're very expensive and need special plumbing. I want them to
be affordable, running off normal pipework and part of building regulations
within 10 years."

    For someone who has effectively been given a platform to expound any theory,
any manifesto he chooses -both in the media and in his committee work - he
remains almost obsessively tied to the minutiae and makes few grand
pronouncements. But isn't he tempted to? He says: "I made a programme about road
traffic accidents, The Biggest Epidemic of Our Times. It moved from BBC2 to
BBC1, it was re peated endlessly, and didn't change a thing." And then he shrugs
and thinks again. "Except it did later get me access to the minister (the
Conservative, Peter Bottomley) and we started to do things. Because all it took
was a bit of white paint." He grabs my pen and starts to draw me a diagram of a
particular T-junction at the brow of a hill. "Huge numbers of accidents, right
here, and no one could understand why. All we did was put chevron lines here . .
. and here . . . and a right-turn box there . . . and suddenly, no more
accidents. That's all it takes."

    Maybe that is why he has not ended up in politics. Despite being the child
of local politicians, despite marching on the barricades during the civil rights
movement in Belfast (he was studying psychology at Queen's University) alongside
Bernadette McAliskey, former MP for Mid-Ulster, he has veered away from overt
politics since going into TV. "My wife and kids don't even know how I vote," he
says. "Not that it stopped Alastair Campbell (the former No 10 press chief)
saying I was a Tory when I disagreed with a government policy."

    It is this apolitical stance that crucially underpins his credentials as Mr
Everyman when they are picking sides for these panels of the great and the good.
But he is not just Mr Telly Face - he knows his stuff. I ask him about the
problems of implementing the recommendations of this new National Consumer
Council report, about how to convince consumers that they really are the
paymasters and make them exercise their right to choose. His reply goes off into
a detailed analysis of the relative successes and failures of left and right
over the past 30 years and how choice has become axiomatic, and how public
services must be democratised. He clearly thinks way beyond the teleprompter.

    Yet when I invite him to imagine himself as prime minister for the day, he
is unwilling to name his top three new laws. Either he will not be drawn or he
just does not think on a large canvas. He is the sort of guy, it seems, who will
take the world as it is, and then seek out and support the changes that can be
squeezed in.

    He is scornful of glib soundbites. "The problem with crime is everyone
thinks they're an expert - as I did before I got involved. In fact, I was much
more certain before Crimewatch than I am now. Everyone thinks they have a pretty
good idea of what needs to be done. So if you're a senior police officer
listening to all this tosh, some of it from local councillors, I'm very
sympathetic to them shrugging it off."

    And so we're back to the small incremental changes: "Comstat (a computer
analysis approach to tackling crime) is a terrible name, but it enables new
detection methods, new geographic information systems, designing out crime with
tiny adjustments, such as changing licensing rules or bus timetables. You need
lots of links in a chain to make a crime, and you only have to cut the weakest
one."

    Then he thinks again, and says with a smile: "Of course, the toughest one is
to persuade the kid not to have a lot of testosterone." He doesn't yet have a
redesign solution for that one.

    Read Making Public Services Personal: A New Compact for Public Services at
www.ncc.org.uk/pubs/pdf/ policy-commission.pdf

    The CV

    Age 56

    Status Married, three sons

    Lives Notting Hill, west London

    Education Wallington County grammar school, Surrey; degree in psychology,
Queen's University, Belfast.

    Career 1972-75: reporter and presenter, The World Tonight and World at One,
BBC; 1975-86: various consumer and current affairs programmes; 1986-97:
presenter, Call Nick Ross, BBC Radio Four; 1984-present: presenter, Crimewatch
UK, BBC; 1997: named Broadcaster of the Year.

    Public life His many appointments include chairman of Jill Dando Institute
of Crime Science; president, HealthWatch; director, Health Quality Service;
board member, Royal College of Physicians Committee on Ethical Issues in
Medicine.


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2004


                             548 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                 March 30, 2004

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 15

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: DoH cash for gene therapy firm

BYLINE: Heather Stewart

BODY:


    Biotech group Oxford Biomedica is to profit from a government drive to
kick-start innovation in gene therapy, with a £500,000 research grant to test a
potential treatment for haemophilia.

    Oxford Biomedica was the only private sector winner from a £4m funding round
announced by the Department of Health yesterday, aimed at bringing the benefits
of genetic research to NHS patients.

    "It's a bold step for the Department of Health to be committing to use this
approach to treatment. They're usually a follower rather than a leader," said
Nick Woolf, Oxford Biomedica's head of corporate strategy.

    "Investment saves lives - that is why it is vital that we fund research into
the latest cutting-edge treatments such as gene therapy so that Britain remains
at the forefront of medical research," said the health secretary, John Reid,
announcing the funding.

    A DoH spokeswoman yesterday admitted that it was unusual for profit-making
firms to receive such grants. The government was committed to spending £50m on
gene therapy by 2006, she said.

    Haemophilia A, the target of Oxford Biomedica's research, affects about
400,000 people, who now have to be injected with a blood-clotting factor about
three times a month. Oxford Biomedica believes it can adapt its LentiVector tech
nology - which uses a virus to deliver genetic material into cells - to correct
the underlying defect stopping people with haemophilia producing their own
clotting factor. They would then probably only need to be treated once a year.
"It's as close to a cure as you can get," said Mr Woolf.

    Oxford Biomedica had put its haemophilia research on hold to concentrate on
developing treatments for cancer and central nervous system disorders such as
Parkinson's, which are closer to completion and where the potential market is
larger.

    "This grant will directly fund this programme, so we can take the research
off the shelf," said Mr Woolf. It could be two years before the treatment starts
clinical trials in humans, but the DoH cash will bankroll the project until
then.

    Multi-million pound funding from charities and other non-profit groups has
already boosted Oxford Biomedica's coffers as it moves towards bringing genetic
therapies to the market.

    Non-profit investors such as Cancer Research UK do not ask for a financial
return from their donations - they simply want to speed up the search for a
cure.

    Other beneficiaries of yesterday's government funding round included
researchers at Imperial College, London, studying Duchenne muscular dystrophy,
and a project on childhood blindness at University College, London.


LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2004


                             552 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               February 18, 2004

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 394 words

HEADLINE: Doctors in line for £6m cut as Ark floats

BYLINE: Heather Stewart

BODY:


    A pair of London doctors could share in a windfall worth up to £6m after the
biotech firm they founded is floated on the stock exchange next month.

    It is the first significant market launch for a British biotech firm for
three years. Ark Therapeutics, which made an abortive attempt to float in 2002,
plans to price itself at £110m to £135m. Professor John Martin and Dr Stephen
Barker, both vascular specialists from University College, London, and their
Finnish colleague and co-founder Professor Seppo Yla-Herttuala, a gene therapy
expert, could cash in options worth 4.5% of the company's value over the next
four years.

    The three doctors, who came up with the science behind Ark's products, will
remain in volved in its research and development operations after the flotation,
the company said yesterday.

    Ark already has one health product on the market - a dressing for foot and
leg ulcers called Kerraboot, which went on sale to hospitals in the UK last
November. But analysts believe its most promising potential treatment is
Cerepro, which will be used in conjunction with surgery to treat brain tumours.
Ark hopes to ask regulators to approve Cerepro by the end of 2007, and it
believes it could generate annual sales of £80m.

    Cerepro is injected into the brain to help prevent cancer spreading once a
tumour is removed and Ark says early trials suggest it almost doubles patients'
average survival time.

    Ark believes its portfolio of four products, which also include a pill to
cut muscle wastage in cancer patients, will help it to avoid the failures of
other firms in the sector in recent years. Biotechs once attracted attention
from investors keen to cash in on scientific breakthroughs in new areas such as
gene therapy, but many struggled to turn a profit.

    "There is some cynicism around about this industry," a spokesman for Ark
admitted yesterday, "but it's our job to overcome that. We have done a huge
amount of sounding out investors."

    He added that if the launch is successful, Ark should be able to bring all
of its products to market without having to come back and ask for more funds -
and it hopes to hang on to the marketing rights for its products, instead of
being forced to license them out to other firms, and lose a share of the
profits. The flotation is expected to be completed in March.


LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004


                             555 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                               February 17, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 616 words

HEADLINE: Gene cheats: the new risk posed to world sport

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science editor

BODY:


    Gene therapy that could one day treat muscular dystrophy could also be
hijacked by a new kind of genetically enhanced athlete, scientists warned
yesterday.

    Lee Sweeney, of the University of Pennsylvania, told the American
Association for the Advancement of Science in Seattle that an insulin-like
growth factor delivered by a virus into the skeletal muscles of laboratory mice
resulted in supermice with muscles 15-30% greater than normal. The muscular
strength stayed in sedentary young animals, older mice and even mice with severe
muscular dystrophy.

    "The prospects are especially high that muscle-directed gene transfer will
be used by the athletic community for performance enhancement, just as many
drugs are used and abused today," he said. "In many cases, policing such abuse
will be much more difficult than in the case of drugs, since detection will be
difficult."

    Rats injected with the same factor, known as IGF-1, grew bigger muscles.
When the rats were subjected to weight training, the genetically treated muscle
gained twice as much strength as the animal's uninjected muscle.

    The growth factor levels stayed high in the muscle, but not in the
bloodstream, which was important because too much IGF-1 could lead to cardiac
problems and cancer.

    The research was intended to help treat people with muscular diseases. But
as they advanced, such therapies would inevitably find their way into the
healthy population, preventing muscle weakness in old age, he said.

    Dr Sweeney spoke at a seminar organised by Richard Pound, chairman of the
World Anti-doping Agency, who said he was not worried about genetically enhanced
super-athletes at the Athens Olympics this year, or even in Beijing in 2008. But
by 2012, sports authorities could be facing a huge new problem.

    "We had meetings with geneticists two years ago. Lee Sweeney was there.
Exactly the kinds of things we were afraid we would hear, we heard, which was
that one of the first persons who approached scientists working on this was an
athletics coach, who said 'How can I use what you are doing to make my game
better?'," Mr Pound said.

    "The thought that you might be able to cure muscular dystrophy or diabetes
or something like that by gene transfer therapy some day is wonderful. What's
not so good is you might have an 8ft shot-putter who can throw a 16lb shot into
the crowd."

    He said he had asked the scientists to find a direct or indirect test or
some way of "marking" genetic treatments that could be detected.

    "As far as drugs are concerned in sport, we let the genie out of the bottle
in the 1960s and 1970s and we have been playing catch-up ever since. What we
would like to do with genetic developments is to be there at the start when the
regulatory and ethical frameworks are being set," Mr Pound said.

    Some cheating was self-regulating, he said. Athletes who took the blood
thickening agent EPO, to deliver more oxygen to the muscles, were at risk of
stroke as their pulse rates rose. The human heart simply could not pump blood
that thick. Athletes with overdeveloped muscles who exploded off the starting
blocks too sud denly might rip their tendons off their leg bones because these
had not developed at the same rate as the muscles.

    "There is some genetic selection anyway," he said. "If you are a 5ft 2in
Malaysian, you are probably not going to be a basketball star. And if you are a
7ft Chinese you are not going to be a very good badminton player. If two
basketball players marry, the chances are they will have tall children. I don't
think we are at the stage where a young couple says 'What will we have this
time, dear? A gymnast or a rower?'."


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004


                             561 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                January 22, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1249 words

HEADLINE: Life: Further reading: The revolution is not won yet: In the 1990s,
scientists felt that cures for incurable diseases were around the corner. Why
gene therapy has failed to deliver

BYLINE: Ian Sample

BODY:


    Few revolutions happen without misplaced hopes - and the fledgling genetics
revolution of the 1990s was no exception. If you believed the hype, as soon as
scientists mastered how to handle genes, humanity would be able to take on
nature at its own game. The inevitable curses of untreatable disease and even
ageing, could be tackled head on. And it would all be thanks to gene therapy, a
technique that would replace your duff genes with good ones, making the damaged
or decrepit all shiny and new.

    Of course, it didn't quite turn out that way. More than a decade of gene
therapy trials have so far failed to deliver. So what is going wrong?

    The first signs that gene therapy was going to be tougher than some
scientists made out appeared shortly after trials in humans began. In 1993, the
US food and drug administration called a halt to one trial for patients with
cystic fibrosis, a genetic disorder that leads to repeated and ultimately fatal
lung infections. Rather than improve their condition, some of the patients
developed inflamed lungs while on the trial. The setback was minor, though,
compared with what was to come some years later.

    In 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger became the first person to die from
gene therapy. Gelsinger suffered from a liver disorder that meant he was unable
to break down ammonia, but the condition was hardly life-threatening - he was
able to manage it by carefully controlling his diet. The trial he signed up for
at the University of Pennsylvania was designed to correct the disorder, but
after receiving a high dose of the treatment, Gelsinger suffered a huge
inflammatory reaction. His liver failed, followed swiftly by other organs.
Alarmingly, a subsequent investigation by the US national institutes of health,
found that other researchers had failed to report complications in their own
gene therapy trials. Gene therapy, which conceptually at least seemed an elegant
and obvious way of treating conditions medicine had no other answer for, was in
deep trouble.

    It's unsurprising that gene therapy ran into immediate difficulties. At the
time, most researchers used a technique that relied on a virus called an
adenovirus to get copies of "good" genes into the cells where they were needed.
The principle was simple: take a virus and strip out all the genetic material
that makes it dangerous. Then insert a gene or two that will fix the condition
you are trying to treat. Next, inject a few million of these engineered virus
particles into the body, where they do what viruses do best - invade your cells,
hijack their genetic machinery and dupe them into churning out whatever proteins
the virus's genetic material specifies. If all goes according to plan, the new
proteins will cure the condition you are trying to treat.

    So much for the principle. It turned out that adenoviruses were a bad
choice. They are the cause of around a fifth of common colds. "We've spent
millions of years evolving with these viruses and our immune systems are very
good at spotting when we're infected with them," says gene therapy expert Steve
Hyde of the University of Oxford. It's no great mystery then that some patients
on the trials suffered immune reactions.

    The realisation prompted scientists to change tack. Some looked for viruses
that would not cause a significant immune reaction, while others opted for a
different route altogether, wrapping genes in tiny parcels of fat that can
attach to cells in the body and, with luck, force some of their genes into the
cells.

    While scientists made certain progress, there were more upsets to come. A
gene therapy trial at the Necker hospital in Paris set out to treat children
with a devastating genetic disorder called x-linked severe combined immune
deficiency (x-SCID). The condition, dubbed "bubble boy syndrome", because of the
sterile environments those affected must be kept in, leaves children with so
poor an immune system that they can easily be overwhelmed by the most minor
infections. While the trial was largely successful, in that it was able for the
first time to cure the disease, two children at the Paris hospital developed
leukaemia as a result of the therapy. Scientists suspect that the virus used had
inserted its payload of genes right next to a cancer-promoting gene already in
the patients' cells, causing them to be switched on. While it remains the only
successful treatment for x-SCID, it is clearly not risk-free.

    George Annas, a bioethicist at Boston University, says such are the unknowns
for gene therapy now that its name should be changed. "The name is so
misleading. It's not a therapy yet, it's simply research," he says. "Would
people go on these trials if they were called research projects to transfer
genes?" Competition between small biotech companies that jealously guard details
of their trials is also a problem, he says. "Trials should be completely
transparent. Right now, scientists don't even know what's going on in other
labs," he says. The result is duplication of work, and more worryingly,
mistakes.

    Back in the lab, scientists have continued the search for ways of getting
genes into cells without causing inflammation or inadvertently switching on
cancer-producing genes. Next year, Oxford Biomedica, a company run by geneticist
Alan Kingsman, plans to start human trials of gene therapy for Parkinson's. The
condition is caused by the steady dying off of about 200,000 brain cells that
have the task of producing a chemical called dopamine. Just three genes are
needed by a cell to help it make dopamine. "We put those genes into 200,000
cells that don't die, and convert them into dopamine-making cells," says
Kingsman. If it works, the new dopamine-making cells could keep Parkinson's at
bay.

    Other trials will soon be in the pipeline, with the hope of finding
treatments for conditions as diverse as cardiovascular disease, a common cause
of blindness called age-related macular degeneration, and cystic fibrosis.

    The vast majority of trials approved in Britain are aimed at cancer, a
skewing of research funds driven by a government desire to cut its hefty NHS
bill and big pharma's eye for even bigger profits. While the focus is
unsurprising, the diversion of funds spells big trouble for those with genetic
conditions such as cystic fibrosis, which affect fewer people. To prevent its
gene therapy research from stalling, the Cystic Fibrosis Trust has been forced
to reallocate nearly £1m a year from funds that had been earmarked to provide
care for patients. "These are the kind of tough decisions we've had to make to
keep the gene therapy research going as fast as it can," says Rosie Barnes of
the trust.

    Despite the problems gene therapy has faced, confidence is still riding
high. This month, China is due to become the first country to fully approve a
gene therapy designed to treat head and neck cancers. "Gene therapy has
fantastic promise. It's bound to work - it's the way the body works," says Eric
Alton, a gene therapy expert at Imperial College, London. "It's just a matter of
time."

    www.sanger.ac.uk The Sanger Institute, the UK's leading sequencing
laboratory

    www.genome.gov The National Institute for Human Genome Research in the US,
which co-ordinates large-scale sequencing efforts there and around the world

    www.tigr.org The Institute for Genomic Research

    www.ensembl.org Contains databases that allow you to study any published
sequence in great detail


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2004


                             562 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2004 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                     The Guardian (London) - Final Edition

                                January 22, 2004

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 5

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Care for lung patients at risk

BYLINE: Ian Sample, Science correspondent

BODY:


    Medical care for patients with the fatal lung disorder cystic fibrosis will
be slashed this year because funding is being diverted to find lucrative cures
for diseases such as cancer, a leading charity has warned.

    The Cystic Fibrosis Trust said that the government's push to develop
ambitious gene therapies for cancer was endangering patient care and research
into cures for other diseases. "We're finding it difficult to compete," said
Rosie Barnes, of the charity. "Diseases that affect large numbers of people have
been prioritised because they are expensive for government and profitable for
pharmaceutical companies. But it's out of balance."

    Gene therapy could one day treat many diseases, but remains an experimental
technique. It replaces patients' damaged or defective genes.

    Cystic fibrosis affects about 7,500 people in the UK and is caused by a
single faulty gene. It leads to repeated and ultimately fatal lung infections,
and patients rarely survive into their 30s.

    Scientists believe gene therapy holds the most promise for treating the
disease. But figures released by the government's gene therapy advisory
committee (GTAC) this week show that of the 11 gene therapy trials approved in
the UK last year seven were aimed at cancer. In the past 10 years cancer has
dominated the trials.

    Ms Barnes said the trust needed £6.2m to keep its gene therapy research
going, but the government had made only £2.5m available. To make up the
shortfall, the trust had cut its annual donations to help the NHS provide better
care for patients.

    "We estimate that since Labour came to power we have given £10m back to the
NHS to help them support cystic fibrosis patients," said Ms Barnes. "We're now
£8.8m short of research funds, so clearly if we hadn't been supporting the NHS
all this time we would have been able to fund our research."

    guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2004


                             571 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                               November 14, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Mice trials offer fresh hope of curing diabetes: Treatment that
reverses disease in animals developed in US

BYLINE: James Meikle Health correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists in the US have raised fresh hopes of a cure for insulin-dependent
diabetes, a condition that affects about 17 million people around the world.

    They have succeeded in not only halting the disease in mice mimicking the
human condition but reversing it.

    Researchers at the Massachusetts general hospital, part of Harvard medical
school, are drawing up plans for trials on patients with type 1 diabetes, a
condition that requires regular self-administered injections to control blood
sugar levels.

    If the success from a series of experiments in animals can be replicated and
developed, the technique could make redundant a new - and still rare - treatment
that involves transplanting cells called islets from the pancreases of people
who have died.

    In patients with type 1 diabetes - about a quarter of the 1.4 million
diabetics in Britain - the immune system attacks the islet cells, producers of
the hormone that translates glucose into energy.

    Islet transplants are being performed at 10 centres in Britain, using the
treatment developed in Canada by British scientist James Shapiro.

    Recipients of the organs have to take anti-rejection drugs for the rest of
their lives. Not all donated pancreases are suitable for use in the islet
treatment and even if it works, only around 400 people a year in this country
might benefit. The success rate is not yet known.

    About 50 patients a year receive pancreas transplants, often combined with
kidney transplants for diabetics with established renal failure who are on
dialysis. The government hopes to treble that figure to 150 a year over five
years.

    The US researchers found that it was possible to stop the disease in mice by
injecting them with a naturally occurring protein called TNF-alpha.

    They said the protein "whipped the immune system into line" and stopped it
attacking healthy islet cells. During their research, they discovered that by
using cells from the spleens of non-diabetic mice, whose function had previously
been a mystery, they could teach immune cells to recognise the body's own
tissues, allowing the pancreas to produce new islet cells.

    Further studies by the team, published in the journal Science, suggest that
the pancreas of a diabetic mouse - once protected from "friendly fire" - starts
producing new healthy islet cells on its own, although this takes three times
longer than using donor cells from healthy mice .

    David Nathan, director of the hospital's diabetes centre, said the findings
"suggest that patients who are developing this disease could be rescued from
further destruction of their insulin-producing cells. In addition, patients with
fully establish diabetes possibly could have their diabetes reversed."

    He said a protocol for trials on humans had been developed, but the team
needed more grants before these could begin. It is understood the trials would
have to first test whether TNF-alpha could work in people as efficiently as it
did in mice.

    If so, further trials would be needed to establish whether human islet cells
regenerated sufficiently on their own. It might be that spleen cells from other
human donors would be needed - a resource which is in far greater supply than
donor pancreases.

    Denise Faustman, principal investigator of the research, said many experts
had questioned whether cells could be regrown in such a way. "By accomplishing
effective, robust and durable islet regeneration, this discovery opens up an
entirely new approach to diabetes treatment," she said.

    The experiments suggested that regrowth from an animal's own cells took
slightly longer than regeneration from donor cells, but was just as complete.
They also might offer routes for tackling other auto-immune diseases such as
lupus or Crohn's disease.

    Dr Eleanor Kennedy, research director of Diabetes UK, said the initial
results from Massachusetts were "potentially very exciting".

    Other promising research in the US and Britain is attempting to develop gene
therapies that could trick patients' livers into behaving like their pancreases,
although success might be a decade away.


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2003


                             572 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                               November 11, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1327 words

HEADLINE: G2: Health: Living with Leo: Two years ago, Mandy Rudczenkos son was
diagnosed with cystic fibrosis. In her latest progress report, she describes
Leos growing awareness of his condition and her hopes and fears for his future

BYLINE: Mandy Rudczenko

BODY:


    Leo is running around in the garden playing tree monsters with his brother
and daddy. He runs up to me as I sit enjoying the autumn sun. "Mummy, I'm
happy," he shouts. My heart bursts and breaks at the same time. I know it seems
morbid but I sometimes wonder how many autumns he will have. I also wonder
whether he will still be happy when he realises what is wrong with him.

    Leo was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at the age of six months, after being
very ill since birth. As CF results in too much mucus being produced in the
body, mainly the lungs and digestive system, he needs help to combat this. He is
now three and just about tolerates his daily regime of 12-14 digestive enzymes,
four doses of inhaler, physiotherapy morning and evening, antibiotics, laxatives
and vitamins. This treatment plan seems to keep him well and provides us with a
near-normal family life.

    He now accepts that he has to have his digestive enzymes with all meals.
These replace those that normally make their way from the pancreas to the
stomach, but Leo's gut is too clogged up with mucus. He does, however, get very
distressed about his bowels, which seem to swing from diarrhoea to constipation.
"Do poo Mummy . . . got tummy ache . . . lie on mat," often means it will take
him about half an hour to empty his bowels, aided by lying (and crying) on the
changing mat and large doses of TLC. When I am stroking his tummy I find myself
trying to predict the future and wondering how he will cope with this when he is
16.

    The prospect of him taking more control of his own health as he grows up is
both frightening and liberating. I am sometimes horrified by how much his life
expectancy depends on my ability and motivation to carry out his daily regime.
If he didn't get his enzymes, antibiotics or physiotherapy, his life expectancy
could be cut in half. Consequently, I seem to spend a lot of energy remembering
which medicine comes next, or how to persuade him to take it.

    Leo's treatment was seriously interrupted last year. I thought I would be
ultra-efficient and get a nagging little job out of the way. I knew the stool
wasn't high enough but thought I could reach to install a new battery into the
smoke alarm. I hadn't taken account of my reaction to the sudden beeping it set
off and fell. There I was with two toddlers downstairs, six weeks before
Christmas, with a broken wrist. Grandparents came to the rescue but this
couldn't be expected of them every day. I thought I would try social services.
This proved to be quite amusing as the social worker seemed to think the health
visitor should sort something out, and the health visitor seemed to think the
social worker should do it. I got by with scrounging lifts, but my main concern
was coping with Leo's treatment.

    I was amazed by how quickly I learnt to open his Creon capsules with my
teeth. Fortunately, the plaster cast was only on for four weeks, but Leo did
develop a cough and missed out on a lot of physiotherapy.

    Holidays have been a bit of a problem. I have been reluctant to go abroad
with Leo since he was diagnosed, and this anxiety was heightened by the Sars
scare. (If he caught the virus he would be unlikely to survive.) After a rather
disappointing caravan holiday in Cleethorpes, mainly due to cigarette smoke
throughout the "family-friendly" facilities, we plucked up the courage to go to
France in August.

    The ferry company said that Leo would not be covered by its usual travel
insurance but recommended a specialist. After completing a lengthy telephone
questionnaire for this specialist, I was speechless to be quoted £789 for one
week in France. I later managed to obtain insurance from a company recommended
by the Cystic Fibrosis Trust for £60.

    We would love to visit relatives in Australia but the flight could present
problems as Leo might need oxygen while travelling in a pressurised cabin. It
has recently emerged, through a survey done by the CF Trust, that airlines vary
in their approach to this special need. Some carry extra oxygen at no charge
while others can charge up to £500, although a four-litre canister of oxygen
costs less than £15.

    As parents of a child with a life-threatening illness we are aware of the
need to educate Leo and his brother, Oskar, about the condition. We always call
the medicines by their correct name, we refer to CF regularly, and we honestly
point out to Leo that if he doesn't have his medicines he could become very ill
and have to stay in hospital. But we sometimes slip into denial and tell
ourselves that Leo is very well now and will always be very well. Unfortunately,
that probably won't be the case. Having read about CF sufferers in the CF Trust
newsletters, it seems that their health tends to start to deteriorate around 30
years of age, resulting in a heart and lung transplant or retirement on medical
grounds.

    We are also aware of the impact of Leo's condition on family dynamics.
Oskar's justified jealousy at the amount of extra attention Leo gets was
recently crystallised into a single statement: "Leo hasn't got cystic fibrosis,
he's better now. I've got it now." In other words, "It's my turn to have all the
attention." We try to compensate in various ways, but sometimes I feel like
saying to Oskar: "When you understand what this is you won't be jealous of Leo."

    One ray of hope that kept us going for quite a while was the prospect of
gene therapy. Leo has been given a life expectancy of 40, but we were under the
impression that gene therapy would be sorted out long before that, effectively
giving Leo a "cure". Our understanding of how it works is that healthy gene
cells are somehow introduced into the lungs to counteract the unhealthy genes,
thus preventing over-production of mucus. However, our hopes have been dashed
since watching a Horizon programme about gene therapy, which featured the case
of a young adult dying as a result of being involved in research into gene
therapy. The problem seems to be the "vector", the agent that carries the gene
into the body. At present, viruses are used as vectors, with obvious problems
emerging - infection from the virus.

    At the end of the programme, my partner and I looked at each other and said:
"It isn't going to happen, is it?" We were both quite down for a few days, and
subsequently felt stupid for having pinned our hopes on a cure. More
realistically, medical treatments are improving at a great rate - 10 years ago
Leo would not have had access to the effective regimen he is on now. And the
Department of Health has allocated £2.5m over the next five years for CF gene
therapy research.

    Leo has recently had his third birthday party, an event which I found
emotive. Unaware of the implications of what is happening inside his body, Leo
is acting like any normal toddler. He has a tantrum if he cannot wear his Bob
the Builder shirt. He is rather put out by the fact that his older brother has
started "big school" but he can't go. He tries to boss me about and often
succeeds. Mealtimes are a nightmare as he doesn't stuff himself as much as he
used to. Combine this with the fact that he is supposed to eat 30% more food
than a non-CF child (to balance out the malabsorption) and you have a recipe for
mealtime stress. Parental anxiety about feeding CF children is quite common. I
recently spoke to Leo's dietician about the fact that he seems to want to be fed
rather than feeding himself. I confessed that I tend to follow him around with
spoonfuls of food in an effort to keep his weight up. It was tactfully pointed
out to me that the problem seems to be mine.

    Finally, I discovered something mind-boggling recently. Leo has CF because
my partner and I are both carriers of CF; my partner, Leo's father is my second
husband. I have discovered that my first husband is also a carrier of CF. I find
this oddly comforting - almost as though I was destined to have a child with CF.


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2003


                             574 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                                October 31, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1161 words

HEADLINE: Fashion doesn't end at 40: Don't despair. There is life after Topshop,
says Assumpta Black

BYLINE: Assumpta Black

BODY:


    In some ways, shopping is easier. Thigh boots, micro-skirts, crop-tops,
low-rise hipsters, "box-fresh" trainers - or indeed "street-stale" trainers -
and most of the garments on display in the majority of fashion magazines are
ruled out; unless the label "old slapper" has an edgy, postmodern appeal.

    Too many zips, buckles, flaps and laces, or injudicious amounts of leather
make you look like a superannuated dominatrix. Batwing sleeves? You didn't like
them last time round and, besides, you are moving into the era of batwing arms.
A preponderance of pink suggests Barbara Cartland rather than Reese Witherspoon.
An expanse of decolletage does not proudly declare sensuality: it yells
desperation. Time's winged chariot is clipping my bumper and my face is
concertina-ing like an Issey Miyake gown (Pleats Please? I'd rather not), but
feast your eyes on these babies in the balconette. Do they suggest Anita Ekberg
in La Dolce Vita? Or perhaps Margaret Rutherford in a Restoration bawdy house?

    At this point, what we're aiming for is Dressing with Dignity. But where to
shop? Topshop is generally best avoided, as is Miss (irritating appellation)
Selfridge. The clothes apart, both stores always bring to mind the quote
attributed to Ernest Thesiger about the first world war: "The noise, my dear!
And the people!"

    The last time I visited Topshop, as I queued to pay for a T-shirt (plain,
black), I was exhorted at full, vibrating volume - along with everyone else in
the store - "You and me baby/Ain't nothing but mammals/Let's do it like they do
it on the Discovery Channel". Dignity aside, it doesn't help the tinnitus. But
nor does one want to retreat to stores aimed at the middle-aged. Shopping might
be a more sedate experience, with a murmuring soundtrack from Classic FM, but
adopt the blue blazer and mid-calf tartan skirt of the pre-Calendar Girls WI and
you might as well give up and get a blue rinse. We want style, as well as
dignity.

    We have learned that shopping for clothes is more effectively conducted as a
painful but necessary series of lightning raids - trousers from Joseph, jacket
from Marks and Spencer - rather than as unfocused, weekend-long campaigns of
attrition. Websites (Boden, La Redoute) can be useful for basics, but their
chief advantage - an end to communal-changing-room misery - can also be a
disadvantage when the fuchsia appliqued skirt that looked so soignee in the
pictures actually makes you look like a veteran children's TV presenter. And you
have to pack it up, take it to the post office and send it back.

    But fashion is about more than simply getting dressed. Just because we are
too old to wear Luella Bartley or Alexander McQueen, it doesn't mean we are not
interested in their new collections. We enjoy the outer reaches of fashion, but
purely in a platonic sense. Like voyeurs at a suburban wife-swap party, we like
to watch. Occasionally, I feel the need to remind fashion-literate younger
friends, in the words of GK Chesterton's reminiscing donkey, "Fools! For I also
had my hour". As a convent schoolgirl, taught by nuns in floor-length black
habits with white wimples, I did my best to customise my drab purple uniform.
But there is only so much you can achieve when obliged to wear a straw boater.
After A-levels, inevitably, I rebelled and became a hardcore hippy.

    I went for my first job interview at a local newspaper wearing an
embroidered antique Bedouin robe, platform boots said to have once belonged to
Marianne Faithful, an ankle-length cloak and a fox fur (animal rights had not
been invented). Rows of tiny glittering stars were glued to my eyebrows.
Inexplicably, I got the job and went on to report on garden fetes, magistrates'
court hearings and meetings of the local Conservative association, dressed as a
backing singer for the Incredible String Band or, as my father put it, "like
something out of the bloody Arabian Nights". At one point, I had a flirtation
with punk but after a bleak new year's party at a Sex Pistol's Finsbury Park
flat, I realised I could never carry off the black- bin-liner and safety-pin
look with any conviction.

    Then there were the transitional years. I switched jobs to work on a paper
where a quiet decorum in dress was an unspoken requirement, and I found that,
gradually, this informal code was matched by a shift in personal preference. I
turned from clothes that announced bohemian non-conformity - "Hey! I may have a
nine-to-five office job, but I'm really an electric gypsy with a passion for
sex, drugs and rock'n'roll!" - in favour of a costume that, I hoped, whispered
discretion, taste and confidence - "Psst. Don't look now but I'm efficient and
sophisticated. And what I do in my free time is my own business." Nicole Farhi
and Agnes b became my Carole Caplins, figuratively speaking.

    These days a more careful, and eclectic strategy is required. Agnes and
Nicole may themselves be style role models for the older woman but,
understandably, they still want to sell their clothes to a younger market and it
would it be unwise to make a random sweep of their rails. Those long white
flounced skirts of summer, so alluring on a sulky, slender 25-year-old, can turn
us instantly into Miss Havishams.

    Key fashion concepts to avoid include irony (put me in a cutting-edge Prada
interpretation of a 1950s nylon housecoat and the only accessory that works is a
vacuum cleaner). Any attempt at wit - T-shirts with slogans (Sugababe, Hello
Boys), bows, diamante poodles, fluorescent fun fur - and the joke appears to be
on me. I like my clothes to have no sense of humour whatsoever. Vintage, once a
wardrobe staple, is tricky when you have a vintage of your own to contend with.
And as for the distressed look, we get enough of that at home without paying for
it.

    The role model now is Catherine Deneuve. Chic, timeless and even, post-60,
sexy. Not achievable, I fear, without surgery and extensive gene therapy. But we
can aspire. Then again, how about this for a look - denim miniskirt,
orthopaedic-style shoes and blond hair pulled up in bunches? On many of us, this
would summon instant images of Bette Davis as the emotionally arrested child
star in What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? But last week, in this outfit,
49-year-old film director Jane Campion looked more glamorous, intelligent and
heureux dans sa peau than any botoxed Bond Street contessa. So, as those young
fashion editors insist on telling us, there are no rules, just a few personal
guidelines.

    Looking through my wardrobe the other week, I had a moment of fashion
epiphany. All those black trouser suits, black jackets, black skirts, those rows
of white shirts . . . I realised I had, sartorially speaking, been heading back
to the convent. Slowly, over the past few years, I have been metamorphosing into
a nun. All I need is a veil and a starched wimple and I can also eliminate the
troubling question of what to do with my hair.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2003


                             576 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                          The Guardian - Final Edition

                                October 17, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 7

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Doctors discover why gene therapy gave boys cancer

BYLINE: Ian Sample Science correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists have discovered why a pioneering gene therapy used to treat boys
born with a rare disease of the immune system gave two of them cancer.

    The two children were diagnosed with leukaemia last year, almost three years
after they received the experimental gene therapy at Necker hospital in Paris.

    Five other patients have been treated for the immune deficiency disease at
Great Ormond Street hospital in London using the same technique.

    News of the leukaemia cases stopped the trials in France but Great Ormond
Street continued trials after Norman Nevin, chairman of the gene therapy
advisory committee, concluded that in many cases the potential benefits of the
therapy outweighed the risks.

    The two children have since received treatment for their cancer and are in
full remission.

    The disease, x-linked severe combined immuno-deficiency (x-SCID), affects
only boys and is caused by a genetic muta tion which impairs the development of
the immune system.

    If a suitable bone marrow donor cannot be found gene therapy is the only
alternative to a life in an isolated room or "bubble" which must be kept
sterile.

    Gene therapy works by using a stripped-down virus to smuggle a good copy of
the defective gene into bone marrow cells collected from the patient. When the
infected cells are injected back into the patient they collect in the bones and
start churning out new immune cells into the bloodstream, creating a
fully-functioning immune system.

    In 2002 Rhys Evans became the first boy in Britain to undergo the treatment.

    Experts from four countries have been brought together to find out what went
wrong with the treatment of the two children who developed cancer. In both cases
the therapy corrected the faulty gene but also switched on a cancer-causing
gene, the team reports in the journal Science today.

    "This is a wake-up call for people doing work on gene therapy," said Terry
Rabbitts of the MRC laboratory of molecular biology in Cambridge, who took part
in the investigation.

    "We have to take a clear look at this and work out what we can do to make
the treatment better."

    Scientists have always known that gene therapy comes with a risk of causing
cancer because they cannot tell where the virus will insert the good copy of the
gene that is needed. If it is inserted next to any of the numerous
cancer-causing genes it could trigger cancer in the patient.

    Doctors at Necker hospital are working on ways of making the therapy safer.
Treating only older children, injecting fewer modified bone marrow cells into
patients, or using different viruses in the therapy could all help reduce the
risk.

    "The bottom line is that gene therapy works, there is no question about
that. It works too well to stop trying it," said Alain Fischer at the Necker
hospital, who led the study.

    His team hopes to restart trials next year.

    guardian.co.uk/medicine


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2003


                             592 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 2, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Education Pages, Pg. 60

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: Education: Accidental hero: It's 75 years since Alexander Fleming
discovered penicillin. John Crace charts the development of the antibiotic that
revolutionised medicine in the second half of the 20th century

BYLINE: John Crace

BODY:


    Seventy-five years ago tomorrow, the British chemist Alexander Fleming
(above) discovered penicillin. The discovery was all the more dramatic because
it was accidental. While working on influenza, he noticed that colonies of the
bacterium Staphylococcus aureus failed to grow in those areas of a culture that
had been accidentally contaminated by the green mould Penicillium notatum. Even
when diluted 800 times, the culture still eradicated the bacteria and further
investigation showed it also killed many of the bacteria that infected humans.

    Although Fleming recognised the therapeutic potential of penicillin (above
right), it was not until the late 1930s that a group of biologists working in
England, including Sir HW Florey and EB Chain, purified the substance and
established its effectiveness against infectious organisms and its lack of
toxicity to humans. By 1941 an injectable form of penicillin was available for
medicinal use. Despite the development of hundreds of different antibiotics in
recent decades, penicillin remains important in antibiotic therapy. Small
amounts of the antibiotic were first grown in fermentation bottles. During the
second world war need for the drug spurred development of better production
methods; these days highly productive strains of penicillium are grown in a
cornsteep liquor medium in fermentation vats.

    Penicillin

    All penicillins work in the same way, namely, by inhibiting the bacterial
enzymes responsible for cell-wall synthesis and activating other enzymes to
break down the organisms' protective walls. Among the bacteria sensitive to
penicillin are those that cause throat infections, pneumonia, spinal meningitis,
gas gangrene, diphtheria, syphilis, and gonorrhoea. Penicillin can cause
allergic reactions, such as skin rashes, hives, swelling, and anaphylaxis, or
allergic shock.

    Resistance

    Some strains of previously susceptible bacteria have developed a specific
resistance to penicillin and some new strains of bacteria are growing faster
than scientists can develop antibiotics to treat them. It is thought that the
over-prescription of antibiotics may be inadvertently encouraging the
development of new new infections. In 1999 the government launched a campaign to
reduce the number of antibiotics being prescribed unnecessarily. However, last
year more than 36m course of antibiotics were prescribed in the UK alone.

    Anaesthetics - Halothane gas

    The science of how anaesthetics work has always been a mystery. Recent
research into the widely used anaesthetic halothane suggests it blocks the
function of the thalamus and mid brain which coordinate sensory signals before
they are sent to the rest of the brain, thus rendering the patient unconscious.

    Vaccines - Active immunisation

    Vaccines stimulate the production of antibodies - the body's own
protectionfrom invading organisms.

    Pandemics of the millennium

    The Black Death

    1328-50

    Asia/Europe

    60 million die - up to 50%of the population in some areas

    Syphilis

    1493-98

    Europe/Asia/Africa

    Millions die from disease possibly originating in

    the Americas

    Smallpox

    1518-70s

    Mexico

    Up to 90% of the

    population dies from Old

    World disease

    Cholera

    1817 Asia/Russia

    Millions die

    Cholera

    1826

    Asia/world

    Millions die

    Bubonic Plague

    1894 China/World

    6 million die in India alone

    Spanish Flu

    1918-19 Worldwide

    25-30 million die

    Smallpox eradicated

    1975

    Worldwide

    First major disease to be

    defeated by immunisation

    Aids/HIV

    1981-present

    Worldwide

    Some 10 million people

    are now HIV positive

    Medical milestones

    1000 Arabia

    Canon of Medicine published

    1050 Italy

    Salerno medical school established

    1527 Switzerland

    Chemical treatments introduced

    1628 Britain

    Circulation of the blood described

    1658 Netherlands

    Red blood cells discovered

    1676 Netherlands

    Microbes detected

    1796 Britain

    First modern vaccination -against smallpox

    1844 US

    Nitrous oxide used as an anaesthetic

    1860 France

    Pasteurisation developed

    1867 Britain

    Antiseptic operation performed

    1895 Germany

    X-rays discovered

    1901 Austria

    Blood groups discovered

    1922 France

    Tuberculosis vaccine developed

    1928 Britain

    Penicillin discovered

    1932 Germany

    Synthetic anti-bacterial drugs developed

    1950 US

    Successful kidney transplant

    1953 Britain

    DNA structure discovered

    1967 South Africa

    First heart transplant

    1984 US

    Gene gun to alter cell's genes developed

    1990 US

    Gene therapy used

    1991 Britain

    Artificial lung implanted

    Curriculum links

    Science KS3

    Sc1 Scientific enquiry

    1c) About the ways in which scientists work today and how they worked in the
past, including the roles of experimentation, evidence and creative thought in
the development of scientific ideas.

    History of Medicine KS4


LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2003


                             593 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 1, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 769 words

HEADLINE: Ageing baby boomers set to rock society: Government faces backlash
over treatment of elderly as pensions loom for radical generation

BYLINE: John Carvel: Social affairs editor

BODY:


    The British political landscape is about to be rocked by changes caused by
the ageing of the baby boomers, the generation that has persistently challenged
conventional behaviour patterns, the thinktank Demos warns today.

    Those born in the UK between 1945 and 1965 - into the post-war recovery -
number about 17 million and make up nearly a third of the total. They have been
the first generation to grow up in a strong consumer society, bombarded with
advertising all their lives and led to expect the satisfaction of their needs.

    Another view of this group - in general more affluent than the previous
generation - is that a significant number within it backed movements such as
anti-racism, women's liberation and environmentalism, were in the vanguard of
the sexual revolution, and had a disrespect for authority and conservative
values.

    It is assumed they will not respond as placidly as their parents and
grandparents to being sidelined after retirement into possible poverty and a
sense of powerlessness.

    In the first detailed exploration of the age group's likely response to
ageing, Demos says: "The government is risking a baby boomer backlash if it
doesn't deal with the demands of a generation who plan to grow older very
differently from their parents."

    Its report on "the new old" says the group can be expected to use its power
at the ballot box to insist on quality and choice in public services.

    The baby boomers are unlikely to accept the government's moves to nudge up
the retirement age unless they are allowed greater flexibility in later life to
readjust the work and life balance.

    "The baby boom generation has the potential to rewrite the political
agenda," Demos says.

    Flashpoint issues may include euthanasia, the rationing of genetic therapy,
transport, green space, pension rights, protection from financial shocks, and
access to health and social care.

    It is likely there will be calls for "granny creches" at work to help people
juggle jobs and their care of older relatives. Demos calls for opportunities for
"elderpreneurs" to fulfil lifelong ambitions to start up businesses or social
enterprises, including low-risk equity release plans underwritten by the
government.

    In a list of 11 challenges for policymakers the report also demands a
rethink on all housing developments, with the emphasis on making them
"elder-enabled" to break up "grey ghettos" and promote multi-generational
living.

    But the report is unable to answer a key question. Will the baby boomer
pensioners use their voting strength to see to their own interests at the
expense of their children and grandchildren? Or will they move into a new phase
of radicalism, pushing for wider social change?

    Demos says the defining character of the "new old" will depend on whether or
not their individualism or social activism wins the day.

    It identifies three directions in which they may go:

    * The selfish route: individualists and consumer society pioneers will unite
around the pursuit of fulfilment and enjoyment of their accumulated wealth, with
little regard for the needs of the less well-off.

    * The path of civic defender: liberal activists will act as a civic bulwark
against the erosion of the public realm (which their individualism and
consumerism helped unleash), and create conditions for radical and progressive
politics.

    * Invisibility: the fragmented generation will fail to coalesce or wield any
collective influence, but get absorbed into other currents of social change.

    The report says the challenge for future governments will be to persuade the
baby boomers to continue to embrace the radicalism that has made some of them
leaders of social change at every stage of their lives.

    Preparation of the report was supported by Age Concern England.

    Its director general, Gordon Lishman, said: "A new generation of 17 million
older people are marching towards retirement with a clear set of demands. The
boomers are unlikely to put up and shut up."

    He said if there was a failure to listen on priority issues, political
parties "could be punished at the ballot box".

    Julia Huber, co-author of the report, said: "Future governments will have to
deal with the baby boom generation. Attempts to encourage people to continue
working without offering something in return will lead to a backlash."

    Paul Skidmore, the other author, said: "The welfare state could reach
breaking point if the baby boomers use their political muscle to force
governments to prioritise their own public services at the expense of society as
a whole."


LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2003


                             594 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 26, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1318 words

HEADLINE: Health: The therapy: Why we gambled on gene therapy Rachel and Stephen
Reid's son was saved by a pionering treatment which has since been linked to
leukaemia. They tell Sophie Petit-Zeman why they believe the benefits outweigh
the risks

BYLINE: Sophie Petit-Zeman

BODY:


    The Halloween of 2001 brought a very personal horror to Rachel and Stephen
Reid. They were told that their second son Christopher, who was just nine months
old, would not live past his first birthday without treatment. The options were
stark: a bone-marrow transplant involving medication with ghastly side effects
and a one in three chance that he would die within three years, or pioneering
gene therapy which had at that point been tried on only a handful of children
worldwide.

    Rachel says: "It was in some ways an easy decision. They told us the risk of
anything going wrong with gene therapy couldn't be quantified, but was perhaps
one in a million."

    Christopher is now two, a blond, blue-eyed toddler, and one of 16 people
treated with the technique for a rare immune deficiency called X-SCID. It is
commonly known as "bubble baby syndrome" because of the isolation in which
affected children live; lacking immune systems of their own, they are fatally
vulnerable to infection.

    The reason that Stephen and Rachel have gone public with Christopher's story
is that he has been given the all-clear, while two of four children treated
similarly in Paris have developed leukaemia. The Reids want to speak out against
critics who say this makes the method too risky.

    Cancer was indeed the "unquantifiable risk" that the doctors explained to
them before Christopher was treated. "What's happened in Paris is awful, but as
far as we're concerned, the treatment was still absolutely right for
Christopher," says Rachel. "Every day with him is a bonus; he is being
fantastically well monitored and we have 100% faith in his doctors."

    But didn't she feel let down, even deceived, when she first heard about the
French children? "It was awful, yes," she says. "Christopher was in Great Ormond
Street Hospital for several months after treatment and his doctors said they
wanted us to know, before it hit the press, that a child like Christopher had
leukaemia. We were in shock."

    Six months later, the Reids were called back by the doctors and told about
leukaemia in a second child on the French trial. But their optimism remained
unshaken. "We reminded ourselves that no new technique is without its hiccups -
that the first heart-transplant patients died," says Rachel. "I remember saying
to Steve that we had to put it to the back of our minds, that we couldn't go
through every day waiting for Christopher to get leukaemia."

    So, can the Reids find comfort in the possibility that the children with
leukaemia in France developed it for reasons unconnected with the treatment?

    Professor Christine Kinnon, head of the molecular immunology unit at the
Institute of Child Health in London, suggets they can. The unit developed the
technique, and remains the only UK centre to use it, so far treating four
children and one adult. "We cannot be certain, but the leukaemia probably did
result from gene therapy," she says. "When the 'good' gene is inserted into
bone-marrow cells (see box) it hitches a ride on a virus which inserts it
randomly. There's always a chance that it could be put in near to, and trigger
the activity of, a cancer-causing gene." The French children apparently became
ill 30 months after their treatment. Kinnon's team treated their first child
only two years ago. Yet she is "cautiously optimistic" that subtle differences
between the virus used in Paris and that in the UK will reduce the risk of
cancer-causing effects in her patients, and she stresses that all of them are
thriving.

    Having seen the risks so starkly illustrated in the Paris trial, would
Kinnon treat more children now, with the cause of the leukaemia unresolved and
unidentified? "It has always been and remains offered as a last viable option,"
she says. "To treat a child now, we have to seek permission, and we would if
parents wanted us to follow that route." She also points out that, while the
Paris leukaemia cases are worrying, both children are in remission. Had
bone-marrow transplants been chosen for all of those who had gene therapy, four
or five deaths would have been likely.

    It would be too cruel to ask the Reids what choice they would make now, if
faced with the options of 2001. Rachel is due to give birth to a daughter, and
the genetics of X-SCID mean that while there is a 50% chance that, like her
mother, she will be a carrier able to pass it on to any sons, she will not
herself be affected. Rachel says that if she is a carrier, "Perhaps in 20 or 25
years' time, when it's relevant, they'll have found out more and will be able to
stop her from passing it on, or to cure it."

    Kinnon agrees, but is pessimistic about more immediate prospects for
progress. Last month, the government unveiled its white paper on genetics, Our
Inheritance, Our Future. The health secretary, John Reid, said of the pounds 50m
strategy: "Our vision is for the NHS to lead the world in taking maximum
advantage of the safe, effective and ethical application of the new genetic
knowledge and technologies for all patients as soon as they become available."

    Do his words belie a passivity about research and development, suggesting
that we will follow while others lead? Kinnon says that the pounds 3m allocated
to research on gene therapy for single gene disorders "is totally insignificant"
at a national level and could be used up in her centre alone.

    "Our progress is now limited by money more than any other factor," she says.
"We've only done what we have here thanks to our own Jeans for Genes charity
which has raised over pounds 15m since 1996."

    Rachel also credits Jeans for Genes with being instrumental in saving
Christopher's life, and Kinnon is not alone in her scepticism over the true
value of government money. A survey of the research community found that while
many welcome the white paper because it puts genetics in the spotlight, they
also say it needs more money to make a real difference.

    There has long been controversy about funding priorities in genetics. Some
say it is fairer to target resources at genetic counselling and care for those
affected by genetic disease than make heavy investment in gene therapy which has
limited success, remains relevant to small numbers of patients and is undeniably
expensive. It costs pounds 100,000 to treat a child like Christopher
(bone-marrow transplants cost many times more) without accounting for the
research and development which make it possible.

    The white paper has also been criticised for making its largest investment
(pounds 18m) in upgrading laboratories, while also making provision for training
90 new scientists to staff them. But it remains unclear who will train these
scientists, and whether the salaries on offer will attract and retain them.

    Such wrangles will be played out between the corridors of power and halls of
academe. But they matter, ultimately to people like the Reids. And it is hard to
believe they matter as much as the stunning smile on the face of the little boy
from Derby who has emerged from his bubble and is catching up on his life.

    As Rachel says: "He'd got used to living with doctors and nurses for company
and no other children because of the infection risk. He didn't walk until he was
20 months old and only in the past six months has he really started to progress
with talking and making friends."

    Sophie Petit-Zeman is writing a book, Snakes & Ladders, with Great Ormond
Street Hospital, about professional, patient and family experiences of
healthcare. Jeans for Genes - www.jeansforgenes.com; 0800 980 4800

    * Bone marrow cells were removed from Christopher's hips

    * They were enriched in the laboratory, to isolate "stem cells" - the parent
cells of the immune system

    * The stem cells were infected with a virus carrying a good copy of the
missing gene

    * After two weeks, Christopher's immune system began to function


LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2003


                             596 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 11, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 17

LENGTH: 606 words

HEADLINE: Leading article: Labour's 2020 vision: The future will not arrive
without a debate

BODY:


    Modern politics is often accused of being too preoccupied with tomorrow's
headlines than with the possibilities and problems presented by the future. Many
politicians cannot easily avoid the blame here - becoming absorbed by relatively
trivial domestic concerns or failing to take tough decisions that yield benefits
for voters not yet born. So it is encouraging to see that the Labour party,
currently buffeted by events, peering into the distance and asking what lies
beyond the next few general elections to the year 2020. The 26-page report by
Forethought, Labour's internal thinktank, is an ambitious attempt to analyse the
deeper trends - environmental, technological and demographic - that underpin the
fortunes of this nation. The result is surprising not for how much Britain will
change, but how unexpectedly.

    The trends that one sees in society today - manufacturing jobs replaced by
ones in the service sector; citizens acting increasingly like consumers; more
land being eaten up by urban sprawl - will continue. Whether these trends can be
viewed as good things depends on how optimistic one is prepared to be. Another
8.5 million households by 2021 with the attendant increase in traffic is either
a sign of a vibrant economy or one where resources are stretched too thin.
People working longer and harder might be good for productivity and output, but
invariably the toll on humans is high. No wonder that rates of chronic disease
and mental illness are forecast to increase. In terms of biotechnology, gene
therapy could become one of science's greatest boons but gene testing may also
see some people become uninsurable because of nature not nurture. These
contradictions are left unspoken and unresolved.

    Labour's report appears to be saying the trajectory of progress has been
determined, it is only the speed that needs to be set. The stresses and strains
on society are unexplored. The report is unable, or perhaps unwilling, to ask
whether Britain will be able to cope with the changes being asked of it. This
may be because the nation's social organisations and institutions are so
obviously unequal to the challenges posed by the technological, consumer and
environmental revolutions of the next two decades. Witness the public's
opposition to GM food, retailed as a scientific miracle but viewed as an
unacceptable by most people. Forecasting what will definitely happen is
impossible given the unpredictability of human nature. But politicians must
consider the future when weighing their decisions. Democracies can only advance
progress if there is a debate about the future and a recognition of the forces
likely to shape it.

    The power of foresight is among the modern world's most valued skills - sold
today as "being able to stay ahead of the curve". But attempts to anticipate the
future often just interpret the present. Labour's report notes that more
children than ever before are educated at home. But this does not mean in the
year 2020 sitting rooms will be turned into classrooms. Nor is it true that
consumers who boycott products today on ethical grounds will do so tomorrow -
not only does morality alter, but so do the marketing strategies of
corporations. At least Labour has begun a discussion. Politicians have a
difficult role on the nation's stage. Too often they play the part of Cassandra
- able to say what happens next but cursed so that no one believes them or
listens to what they say. Partly because of unfulfilled promises, politicians
are losing the ability to catch the public's ear. They must regain it if the
country wants to know where it is going.


LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2003


                             597 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 9, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1186 words

HEADLINE: From 1984 to 2020: a vision of our future: Technology explosion but
country to be more divided

BYLINE: Patrick Wintour, Chief political correspondent

BODY:


    A sometimes chilling and occasionally fiercely optimistic vision of Britain
in 2020 has been presented to Labour policymakers, warning of a massive
population explosion in the south, an end to the traditional hospital and a
continued role for the UK army as peacekeepers in an increasingly unequal world.

    The vision, drawing on government documents and fresh research, suggests the
UK is going to benefit from an explosion in technology, especially medical
science, but will face difficulties handling the impact of growth and regional
disparities.

    The paper, prepared by Liam Byrne, a Labour thinker attached to the Social
Market Foundation thinktank, looks both at how Britain has changed since 1984,
and how Britain will have changed by 2020.

    The aim is is to get ministers and party activists to look beyond the
horizon of the next white paper or factional scrap at party conference.

    Growing population

    It suggests Britain's population will grow more slowly over the next 18
years than since 1984, peaking in 2023 at 61 million - 4% more than today
compared to 11% growth since 1981 - before then declining.

    Despite lower birth rates and ageing population, Britain will remain the
youngest country in the G7. By 2020, 30% of the population will be over 60 - up
from 20% today and only around 1 million people will have any recollection of
the second world war. By 2025 a third of the population will be over 65, placing
great strains on the NHS.

    Demand for residential care homes will grow by 23% by 2020. These retirees
will be increasingly demanding: they will have higher expectations of the
ability of the public services to meet their needs immediately.

    Current estimates suggest that 3 million will be seriously undersaving for
their retirement. In response, people will simply work longer - already 8% of
men and 9% of women choose to work past state retirement age.

    In one of the most taxing changes, reflecting the decline in marriage, the
number of households will grow by 8.5m to 24m, but the pressure will be
concentrated in small parts of the country.

    "East Anglia may experience a 40% rise in house numbers on 1989 numbers; the
east Midlands will need 24% more houses, the south-west 26%, the south-east 18%,
and Yorkshire and Humberside 15%."

    This larger population will be more mobile. By 2010 with urban peak traffic
rising 23% from 1996 levels.

    With Britain's households forecast to spend most of their income on services
for the first time within five years, voters will expect more from government as
their exposure to efficient service economy grows.

    More informed consumers

    Ominously for ministers, the paper predicts public service consumers will
also become better informed, less trusting and less deferential. Already there
are 46 UK health con sumer magazines as opposed to 13 in 1993. Complaints to the
General Medical Council have risen from 18 a week to 86 a week in just five
years.

    The demand for more convenient and flexible services will contribute to
longer working hours. Hours, far from falling, will rise, producing a group of
better-educated, harder-working individuals wanting more choice to meet
individual needs.

    The trend away from manufacturing will continue with only 14.5% of the
workforce expected to work in manufacturing and 18% as managers.

    New technology

    Mr Byrne predicts that computers will be 4,000 times more powerful than
today. "By 2010 industry expects to manufacture computer chips with transistor
components that are five atoms wide and connections that switch on and off a
trillion times a second.

    He says: "Workers will use computers that effectively act as their agents
performing increasingly complex tasks on their behalf. At home, technology will
be streamlining many routine tasks; fridges may well be able to order more food
before you run out and home entertainment systems will watch out for new films".

    By 2010, genetic screening is forecast to be in wide-scale use, and by 2015
the practical use of gene therapy will be extended to the treatment of 30% of
currently life threatening diseases. Biotechnology medicines will help patients
grow new arteries, treat brain tumours and slow the progression of Parkinson's
disease.

    Bioengineering will help doctors move beyond the transplantation of organs
to creation of artificial organs, including artificial hearts by 2010 and
artificial lungs by 2015.

    Surgery too will change. By 2014 some 50% of surgical techniques will be
carried out by minimal intervention techniques and 10% of surgical intervention
will be carried by robotic techniques.

    The traditional hospital system will also need to be rethought as remote
diagnostic equipment develops and home-based care services expands dramatically
along with self screening and self diagnosis. Only public acceptability will
slow the progress of new possibilities with pesticides, disease resistant crops
and disease resistant farm animals. Already, trust in science as a neutral force
is declining.

    However, the paper argues the root to improved productivity and better lives
in the next 10 to 15 years lies less in inventing new technologies as opposed to
finding ways to exploit existing knowledge.

    The report concludes science and the rise in global trade will mean that by
2020 just two working days will provide the same world economic output as was
created through the 12 months of 1900.

    The world becomes less certain

    Internationally, a world of continuing and possibly worsening inequalities,
is forecast, putting increased migratory pressure as young people from the
developing "water- stressed" world seek opportunities in the developed world
created by economic growth and shrinking labour forces. By 2015, the world will
also be predominantly urban.

    National governments will find it increasingly difficult to meet these
demands acting alone, and will instead find themselves bypassed by "a new
ecology of politics" in which people seek to exercise power directly either as
consumers or members of lobbying groups.

    Global governance within institutions such as the European Union, the UN and
World Bank will grow in importance.

    The paper also warns the conflict for resources will mean there will be a
greater premium on preserving stability within nations. "UK armed forces look
set to continue to perform non-war fighting roles, including civil aid,
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping."

    Number crunching:

    61m Estimated peak size of the UK population in 2023

    8.5m Growth in households, taking total to 24m, due to decline in marriage;
consequent demand for extra homes

    30% Segment of the population that will be over 60 in 2020, up from 20%
today. Despite this, Britain retains the youngest age profile of the G7
countries

    23% Rise in demand for residential care home places

    3m Number of people who will not have saved sufficiently for their
retirement

    10% Surgery done with robotic techniques by 2014

    2 days The amount of time it will take for world economic output to match
output in all of 1900


LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2003


                             601 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 23, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Sport Pages, Pg. 26

LENGTH: 126 words

HEADLINE: How to abuse the system

BODY:


    HCG

    What it's for: to treat infertility in males. Found in pregnant females.

    What athletes use it for: to increase testosterone. To help them recover
from injury.

    Human gene therapy

    What it is used for: to develop new body parts for transplants.

    What athletes use it for: not on the market yet but set to be the next big
thing. Athletes already looking for the formula.

    EPO

    What it's for: to treat seriously ill kidney patients.

    What athletes use it for: to boost oxygen-carrying red blood cells and
increase stamina.

    Human growth hormone

    What it is used for: to treat underdeveloped children.

    What athletes use it for: to increase muscle mass and strength. Very popular
because it is almost undetectable.


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             602 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 23, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Sport Pages, Pg. 26

LENGTH: 992 words

HEADLINE: Drugs in sport: Internet opens the highway to ruin: Designer steroids
are now only a mouse click away

BYLINE: Duncan Mackay

BODY:


    Go to any search engine and type in the words "performance-enhancing drugs".
It will list hundreds of websites where you can learn about what to take, how to
avoid being caught and even how to buy banned substances by mail order.

    Where once getting hold of illegal anabolic steroids meant visiting a dodgy
gym in a bad area of town, now it is as quick and simple as ordering the latest
Harry Potter book.

    You want the EPO you keep reading they are using in the Tour de France? No
problem. Like to try some human growth hormone which the world's top sprinters
are rumoured to be taking? Easy. Fancy some anabolic steroids to help build up
your pecs? Enter your credit card number and we will ship them to your home
address.

    This week's case concerning the Great Britain rugby league international
Keiron Cunningham is only the latest in a series of drug scandals involving some
of the biggest names in sport. The man rated the best hooker in the world joins
a long list of iconic stars to have been implicated in a doping controversy.

    If past history is any guide, however, the biggest winner will probably be
the manufacturer of HCG, the drug for which Cunningham tested positive after it
was given to him without his knowledge.

    "We couldn't ship the stuff out of the warehouse quick enough after all the
publicity involving British athletes and (the anabolic steroid) nandrolone a
couple of years ago," said a salesman for one company, who wished to remain
anonymous.

    "People suddenly thought it was a magic elixir. It is the same with EPO and
the Tour. We don't stock it because it's a prescribed drug, but if we did we
would make literally millions judging by the number of inquiries we get about
it. Sunday cyclists seem to think it's going to turn them into a world champion
overnight."

    Although most are banned in Britain and by the International Olympic
Committee, hundreds of these performance-enhancing substances are just a
mouse-click away on the internet, which has made them more readily available
than ever.

    Some are relatively harmless, others can have serious effects on a
competitor's reputation and health.

    One of the leading drug advice sites on the internet, for example, warns of
the dangers of taking HCG. It could lead to "reinforcing already existing breast
growth in men" and "mood swings and high blood pressure".

    At a press conference in London tomorrow, UK Sport's head of drug-free
sport, Michele Verroken, will announce the results of the latest drugs tests for
the quarter ended June 30 2003. There will be details of competitors who thought
they could outwit the dope-busters, failed and were caught.

    Much more worryingly, there will not be any information on those who thought
they could get away with it and succeeded. For the drug war is a race where the
cheats always try to stay one step ahead of the authorities.

    Today, the industry is increasingly hi-tech: a complex, super-specialised
smorgasbord of "designer" drugs. The relative few cases in Britain involving HCG
- Cunningham is among only a handful to have tested positive for the drug - may
make it seem to be the cutting edge of doping technology.

    In fact, those in the know already consider it pass e and are now using
another drug, clomid, which offers the same benefits but is harder to detect.

    Another example of how the cheats can steal a march on the dope-busters came
during the 2000 Sydney Olympics when there were rumours some competitors were
using an anabolic steroid called ganabol, which the IOC did not have a test for.

    Scientists were baffled because the drug had been discarded by laboratories
years earlier on account of its high toxicity. But in clinical tests in 1967
involving rats, ganabol had been shown to develop huge muscle growth, making it
attractive to competitors in the power events such as swimming and sprinting.

    The fact that some athletes had been using it was confirmed in 2001 by
Charlie Francis, Ben Johnson's former coach, when he wrote about ganabol in an
article for Testosterone Magazine.

    "This drug was brought to the attention of the drug testers in 1984, but as
it wasn't in commercial production a test wasn't developed for it," Francis
wrote.

    "Once athletes became aware of this loophole, a market quickly developed for
the drug . . . By the time a test was developed, the word was out and the
athletes moved on to other products."

    Ganabol is generally considered to be among the first of what are known as
designer steroids, where the drug has its chemical structures modified so it is
undetectable in urine tests but maintains its performance-enhancing qualities.

    In his 2001 article, Francis claimed clandestine labs around the world were
already working on finding the next designer drug that cannot be detected in
time for the 2004 Athens Olympics. Few doubt they have succeeded.

    The top names may have moved on but coming behind them will probably be a
whole lot of eager new customers, armed with a computer, access to the internet,
a credit card and warped sense of ambition, only too willing to click on for the
chance to emulate their tainted idols.

    How to abuse the system

    HCG

    What it's for: to treat infertility in males. Found in pregnant females.

    What athletes use it for: to increase testosterone. To help them recover
from injury.

    Human gene therapy

    What it is used for: to develop new body parts for transplants.

    What athletes use it for: not on the market yet but set to be the next big
thing. Athletes already looking for the formula.

    EPO

    What it's for: to treat seriously ill kidney patients.

    What athletes use it for: to boost oxygen-carrying red blood cells and
increase stamina.

    Human growth hormone

    What it is used for: to treat underdeveloped children.

    What athletes use it for: to increase muscle mass and strength. Very popular
because it is almost undetectable.


LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2003


                             608 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 3, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1667 words

HEADLINE: Life: Cover story: If this year's Tour de France is 100% clean: then
that will certainly be a first.

BYLINE: Matt Seaton and David Adam

BODY:


    One hundred years ago, the first Tour de France was completed by its winner
Maurice Garin at an average speed of 16mph (26 kmph). Considering that stages
then were often hundreds of kilometres long and run continuously through day and
night, it was an amazing achievement. Today, of course, an averagely fit cyclist
on a touring holiday would have little trouble matching Garin's pace.

    Bike technology has improved: first, steel frames became lighter, with
derailleur gears, better brakes and stronger wheels; then, more recently,
aluminium, titanium and carbon-fibre components have shaved still more valuable
grammes off the bikes that racers have to push over the passes of the Alps and
Pyrenees.

    Diet and training methods, too, have evolved out of ignorance and
superstition into sciences in their own right. In recent years, isotonic drinks,
carbo-loading, heart-rate monitors and power cranks (which measure a cyclist's
output in wattage) have brought to the starting line a new breed of clinically
prepared athletes.

    So it is hardly surprising that speeds have increased since Garin's day. By
1959, when the great Spaniard Federico Bahamontes won, the average speed was up
to 22mph, a figure that was scarcely improved upon for several decades. But by
the late 1990s, the peloton (main field of riders) had accelerated dramatically,
past 25mph. To put this in perspective, an elite amateur race on a flat circuit
might expect to average that speed for an hour or so; Tour professionals sustain
that pace for three weeks and the best part of 4,000km (2,500 miles).

    How on Earth is it done? The answer, according to five-times Tour winner,
Jacques Anquetil, is that no one can expect pros to race "on mineral water
alone". In the 1960s, Anquetil's little helper was l'amphet (amphetamine), but
in pharmaceutical products - as with bike manufacture and training methods - the
technology has moved on. That 1998, in which the Tour recorded its fastest ever
average speed, nudging 26mph, was also the year of the greatest doping scandal
was certainly unfortunate . . . but could you call it a coincidence?

    The amphetamines of Anquetil's era worked by acting on the brain, enabling
riders to ignore the pain of effort and so push themselves harder. They were not
strictly performance-enhancing because they did not alter the cyclist's
physiological ability. That came later, in the 70s, with the appearance of
anabolic steroids. Clenbuterol, nandrolone and epitestosterone made cyclists
more muscular and stronger, but again performance gains were modest. Muscle mass
is a mixed blessing for a cyclist: useful perhaps for explosive sprints, but of
limited value for long mountain climbs where aerobic capacity is more important.
An odd side-effect of steroid abuse was that "road rash" - the deep grazes
sustained in a crash - took longer to heal. In 1988, Pedro Delgado tested
positive for probenecid, which interferes with chemicals the kidneys secrete,
and aroused a suspicion that he was using it as a masking agent for steroid use.
Probenecid had been banned by the International Olympic Committee (IOC), but not
yet by the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI). Delgado's victory in the Tour
that year stood, despite near-universal scepticism.

    By then, steroids were being overtaken as the dope de choix by the most
significant development in the history of performance-enhancing drug use: a
synthetic version of erythropoietin (EPO), a hormone naturally produced by the
kidneys that stimulates red blood cell production. More red blood cells mean
more oxygen-carrying capacity and higher aerobic threshold - the holy grail for
cyclists. Training at altitude for several months has similar benefits but they
are eaten up with the first races of the season and the body returns to normal -
only EPO will go on working all season long.

    A normal elite athlete will have a haematocrit (a measure of the blood's
oxygen carrying capacity) level of around 44%. With altitude training, this
might rise to 48%. With EPO, levels of over 50% became obtainable. But there are
risks: the blood can become so thick that heart failure can occur. EPO has been
implicated in the deaths of as many as 20 elite athletes, most of them cyclists,
in recent years. "In the past, the anti-doping system was more reactive than
proactive," says Olivier Rabin, science director of the Montreal-based World
Anti Doping Agency (Wada). "If you go back to the abuse of anabolic steroids in
the 60s and 70s, it took (until the early 80s) to get a reliable testing process
in place. In the case of EPO, it was prohibited very soon after it came on the
market around in 1987 - the IOC banned it in 1989."

    But banning a substance is little use without a reliable test. With EPO, it
was not until the Sydney Olympics in 2000 that such a test was in place (the
problem was to distinguish between natural and synthetic versions of EPO).
Before then, all the UCI could do was demand blood tests that permitted riders a
haematocrit level up to 50%. The message appeared to be that they could use EPO
with impunity - provided it was medically regulated and in moderation. Finally,
in 1998, humble customs officers succeeded in busting the sport where its
governing body had failed: the Festina team soigneur was picked up on the
French-Belgian border with a carload of EPO and other banned substances days
before the start of the Tour.

    L'affaire Festina rocked the sport: cyclists were pulled in for questioning
by gendarmes during the race; several teams pulled out in protest. In its wake,
the IOC convened a conference on anti-doping that established Wada. Wada's
strategy now is to be much more aggressive in pursuing tests.

    "We maintain regular contact with the pharmaceutical industry so that we
learn about substances that are not yet available," says Rabin. "Where
blood-doping products are concerned, we have a programme to identify substances
that are still in development and derive tests for them."

    EPO must now be seen by cyclists as a risky option, but even a rigorous
testing regime may not be 100% reliable. The surprise third-placed rider last
year, Lithuanian Raimondas Rumsas, has just tested positive for the drug. But he
did not last year when his wife was stopped by customs with a large supply of
EPO. Rumsas claimed it was for his mother-in-law and, at the time, escaped
penalty. As the French press remarked, with that kind of help, Rumsas's
mother-in-law could probably win the Tour.

    If cycling is entering a post-EPO era, does that mean this year's Tour,
which starts on Saturday, is clean? Probably not. The performance benefits of
blood-doping products especially will prove just too tempting. Actovegin, a
serum extracted from calves's blood, is one substance that was tipped to be the
new EPO. In 2000, a French TV crew filmed rubbish being discarded by a member of
Lance Armstrong's US Postal team that included packaging for Actovegin. The team
was investi gated, but said it was for treatment of skin abrasions and a
non-competing team member with diabetes; the squad was cleared. Little is known
about its properties but Rabin is adamant that it is of no use in blood-doping.

    There have been rumours for some years about the use of human growth hormone
(HGH). Acting rather like steroids (and so beloved of bodybuilders), its value
to cyclists is limited as far as performance goes, but it undoubtedly aids
recovery, particularly from injury. Little is known about the potential health
hazards of HGH abuse. The anecdotal evidence, though, is comic: one well-known
French rider was said to have had to change his shoe size mid-season due to his
HGH habit.

    Meanwhile, new blood oxygen-carrying technologies are emerging. Scientists
in Cambridge have chemically modified human haemoglobin with amino acids from a
crocodile's, in a process that could yield a high-quality artificial
haemoglobin. Another route might involve the intravenous injection of artificial
haemoglobin derived either from bovine sources or by genetic engineering, or of
perfluorocarbons (chemicals similar to Teflon) which can function very like
haemoglobin by dissolving oxygen and delivering it to body tissues. Inert
chemicals, they would be practically unmeasurable in blood and urine tests; only
gas chromatography of expired air might detect their presence.

    For some time now, in fact, Wada has been warning that we are on the verge
of seeing the first genetically modified athlete. Several pharmaceutical
companies are developing ways to give patients a new copy of the gene that
produces EPO. The techniques are not yet ready for human trials, but when they
are, cyclists will probably be among the first to abuse the process, says Bengt
Saltin, head of the Muscle Research Centre at Copenhagen University and an
expert on drugs in sport. "For this Tour de France, it's not an option, but it
will be a real threat within the next five or 10 years." Animal tests have shown
the gene can be easily inserted, and that it readily produces EPO that, unlike
the synthetic drug taken by the Festina team, would be impossible to distinguish
from a cyclist's own. The problem is that the gene works too well. Baboons given
EPO gene therapy had to have their blood regularly diluted to keep them alive
after their haematocrit level soared from 40% to 75% in under three months.
"When it comes to the EPO gene, they know how to do it and it works well in the
monkeys, but they have no way of shutting it off," says Saltin.

    Wada is already working on ways to detect rogue gene therapy. "Always the
objective is to get one step ahead of the cheats," says Rabin. "I don't want to
say that in two or three years there will be no more doping, but we are
certainly winning some battles."

    Matt Seaton's cycling memoir, The Escape Artist, is out in paperback from
Fourth Estate priced pounds 6.99. To order a copy from the Guardian book service
p&p-free, call 0870 066 7979.


LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2003


                             609 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  July 3, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Madrid fertility conference: Scientists hit out at creator of
'she-males'

BYLINE: Ian Sample Science correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists have created human embryos which are part-male and part-female.
The embryos, which survived for six days, were made to test a treatment for
genetic diseases.

    Experts at the European Society for Human Reproduction and Embryology
meeting in Madrid yesterday rounded on the team that created the " she-male"
embryos, denouncing the work as flawed, pointless and damaging to the public
image of fertility specialists.

    Norbert Gleicher, a fertility specialist at the Centre for Human
Reproduction in Chicago, claimed that creating "chimeric" people - those made
from more than one fertilised egg - could be a way to cure children born through
IVF of genetic diseases.

    If genetic screening showed an IVF embryo to have a disease, there was a
chance, he said, that injecting it with cells containing a good copy of the
damaged gene could prevent the disease from developing. For the technique to
work in most cases the "good genes" would have to get to the right part of the
body.

    To create the "she-male" embryos, Dr Gleicher and his team took
three-day-old female embryos and injected them with up to three cells from male
embryos.

    Of the 21 new embryos created only 12 developed normally. In these cases the
male cells had spread evenly inside the entire embryo.

    Dr Gleicher told the meeting that although his results were mixed they
showed the technique might work. "I'm by no means saying this is clinically
ready for application," he said.

    "The principal purpose was to see whether transplantation of cells at this
stage would work, and we have convincing evidence that the answer is yes."

    Dr Gleicher said that introducing just 15% of cells to a growing foetus
might be enough to cure it of some genetic diseases.

    There are few effective treatments for genetic conditions such as cystic
fibrosis and Huntington's disease but scientists last year successfully used
gene therapy to treat a disease caused by a genetic defect, severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID). People affected by it have such poor immune systems
they have to be kept in sterile environments.

    Professor Lynn Fraser, a medical ethics specialist at University College
London, said that although human chimeras had been born naturally, creating them
for research was dubious. "In the UK, the production of chimeric embryos to make
babies is expressly forbidden," she said.

    Prof Fraser said that according to the human fertilisation and embryology
authority, which governs fertility treatment in Britain, researchers could apply
to do studies on chimeric embryos but they would be unlikely to get approval.
The situation in the US was more vague because regulations differed from state
to state.

    She said there were practical problems with Dr Gleicher's experiment.
"There's no way of ensuring that the cells will colonise the organ or region of
the body where they are needed," she said.

    "If it's a gene that functions in the brain and you wind up with most of the
normal cells in your gut, it won't work."

    Professor Alan Trounson, a fertility expert at Monash IVF Clinic in
Victoria, Australia, called Dr Gleicher's work "flawed" and said that it could
damage the reputation of fertility researchers around the world. "It could cause
some harm because it's difficult to argue why that experiment's been done," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2003


                             613 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 26, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 7

LENGTH: 152 words

HEADLINE: Like father, like sons

BYLINE: Catherine Bennett

BODY:


    It is to be hoped that the newly announced expansion of gene therapy does
not come too late to help Jeffrey Archer's sons, William and James, who, it is
increasingly feared, have inherited their father's fondness for cheap tricks.
Until last week, when it was revealed that the boys had covertly taped a dinner
party conversation for their own purposes, it seemed possible that even if
Archer's fondness for cheating, in life as well as art, were not a one-off
mutation (his father having also been a practised dissembler), this hereditary
flaw had, at least, skipped a generation.

    Sadly, the willingness of the Archer boys to deceive old family friends into
incriminating another friend now suggests a reappearance of this inherited
disorder, from which they must long to be freed. Either that, or there must have
been some very in-depth conversations during visiting hours at Hollesley Bay.


LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2003


                             616 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 25, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1021 words

HEADLINE: On the edge of a genetic revolution to map out medical future at
birth: pounds 50m project brings benefits and risks, prime minister warns

BYLINE: Tim Radford, Science editor

BODY:


    The government is to spend pounds 50m to bring the genetic revolution into
the mainstream of the National Health Service - starting before birth, and
tracking patients through youth and maturity.

    The initiative will begin with wider antenatal screening. But soon babies
could have their genetic profiles recorded at birth, to spell out their
individual inherited risks of disease later in life.

    This could lead to a new kind of "bespoke medicine", made possible by the
completion of the human genome project with its 3bn-letter genetic code spelled
out in DNA. "It will make an enormous difference to the way we deliver health
care in this country," Tony Blair said. "It will also raise a whole series of
ethical issues. There are tremendous opportunities, but some risks."

    Genetics had the potential to bring immense benefits for patients, John
Reid, the health secretary, said as he introduced a new white paper yesterday.
"Above all, genetics promises a more personalised approach to healthcare with
interventions tailored to each person's own genetic profile. This science
therefore encourages us to develop the personalised NHS suitable for the 21st
century that the government is committed to creating."

    Mr Reid said the NHS was uniquely suited to capture the benefits of the
genetics revolution: it provided a bulwark against the inequalities of private
insurance-based health systems, which raised the spectre of a "genetic
superclass" of the well and insurable, and an underclass of the unwell and
uninsurable.

    "As our understanding of genetics increases, the case for private health
insurance as an alternative to the NHS weakens," he said. "Thus scientific
advance increasingly underpins the moral values which have long lain at the
heart of the National Health Service."

    Some of the new money will go into training 50 new genetics counsellors, and
90 new technicians for genetics laboratories. It will also pay for the upgrading
of NHS labs and the funding of specialist projects, such as the search for
people at risk of familial cancer, or the identification of people at risk of an
early heart attack because of an inherited gene for familial
hypercholesterolaemia (FH).

    Around pounds 15m will go into six genetic "knowledge parks" in which the
NHS, university and private sector researchers co-operate on new treatments and
new diagnostic tests. But the full benefits of the genetic revolution will
depend on public confidence.

    "We want to engage in a genuine dialogue on genetics issues," the white
paper says. "We recognise that developments in genetics will present new ethical
and social challenges. We need to be alert to the potential adverse
consequences."

    The white paper also proposes:

    * Extending antenatal screening in England for Down's syndrome, sickle cell
anaemia and thalassaemia by the end of 2004.

    * More money to search for new treatments for genetic diseases and inherited
disorders.

    * Asking the Human Genetics Commission to consider the case for screening
babies at birth, and storing their genetic profiles, to provide doctors with the
knowledge to individually tailor their healthcare - and to report by the end of
2004.

    * New legislation to outlaw "DNA theft" - the testing of genetic data
without a person's consent for paternity testing, for example.

    Six out of 10 Britons could, before the age of 60, develop a disease that is
at least partially determined by the DNA they in herited. In the next few
decades scientists are likely to learn how individual genes, or groups of genes,
dispose people to cancer, heart disease, diabetes and a host of other conditions
- and how some versions of genes can protect against disease.

    There could be around 10,000 disorders caused by mutations in single genes.
These affect 5% of the population, and cost health and social services an
estimated pounds 2bn a year. Genetic tests exist so far for about 200 of them.
The research opens the way for new treatments: more than 600 trials have already
begun worldwide. Licensed gene therapy medicines could be available within five
to 10 years.

    Genetic makeup also determines response to medicines. One patient in 14
suffers adverse drug reactions, costing the NHS pounds 380m in England alone. So
the new science of pharmacogenetics - matching prescriptions to the genetic
makeup of the patient - could save money and limit suffering. The white paper
promises funding for the first university chair of pharmacogenetics.

    Around 100,000 people in Britain have inherited high cholesterol levels,
placing them at risk of early heart disease. The British Heart Foundation called
the white paper "a green light for lifesaving progress". Steve Humphries, chief
executive of the London genetic knowledge park, welcomed the money for FH and
said: "By early treatment we could prevent hundreds of heart attack events a
year."

    Alistair Kent of the Genetic Interest Group said: "pounds 50m is a drop in
the ocean, but it's an important drop that can help provide the infrastructure
that will allow the NHS to determine which people can benefit most from these
new therapies."

    Helena Kennedy, head of the Human Genetics Commission, welcomed steps to
make it an offence to test people's DNA without consent, and "other steps to
address fears of genetic discrimination".

    But there were dissenting voices. Graeme Laurie, a law lecturer at the
University of Edinburgh, said there could be problems defining which forms of
genetic data would be protected by the new law. Tom Shakespeare, of the
University of Newcastle, warned that the achievements of gene therapy and
pharmacogenetics might not match hopes and expectations.

    And the pressure group Genewatch UK said no legal safeguards were proposed
to prevent insurers or employers abusing genetic test information. "The
government has put the interests of industry above those of people," said Helen
Wallace. "We face a future of creeping genetic discrimination unless steps are
taken now. There is a shocking lack of safeguards for people taking genetic
tests."

    guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2003


                             626 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  June 5, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 7

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: Life: Dispatch: Modified viruses may cause cancer

BODY:


    A new study led by geneticist Mark Kay at Stanford University, California
has shown that a modified virus used in gene therapy techniques to treat
haemophilia and cystic fibrosis could cause the same problems that led to cancer
in a different trial last year.

    In gene therapy, doctors use a gutted virus as a "vector" to transfer
corrective genes into a patient's cells. But if the vector stitches itself into
a cell's genes, it can cause the cell to mutate and become cancerous.

    Last year two children who had gene therapy for severe combined
immunodeficiency disease (Scid) developed leukaemia. Scientists trying to
establish what triggered the cancer agree gene therapy was the cause.

    Kay's study focused on a vector made from an adeno-associated virus - an
organism that does not cause disease in people, but which can be engineered to
infect human cells. It showed that the vector used in the haemophilia and cystic
fibrosis gene therapy trials can integrate into mouse genes. This suggests it
could cause the sort of cellular defects that led to cancer in the Scid
patients. But other researchers caution that the vector from the Scid trials,
which was based on a retrovirus, is different from the adeno-associated vector.
For instance, they do not integrate into human DNA at the same rate.

    "Adeno-associated vectors have a better safety profile than retroviral
vectors," says David Russell, a geneticist at the University of Washington. "But
we really can't say yet that adeno-associated vectors won't cause cancer."


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2003


                             629 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 20, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 189 words

HEADLINE: National roundup: Boys' gene therapy to continue

BYLINE: James Meikle

BODY:


    Doctors at Great Ormond Street hospital, London, are to continue gene
therapy treatments for baby boys with a potentially fatal bone marrow disorder,
despite two children on a parallel programme in France developing leukaemia.

    Treatments were suspended between January and last month, but safety
advisers believe the benefits of the experimental therapy still outweigh the
risks if families opt for it for their sons after appropriate counselling.

    Four babies and an adult in Britain have undergone the treatment in the last
two years. The hospital said yesterday they were all well and being monitored.

    Trials at the Necker hospital, Paris, on about a dozen patients, were
suspended last year after one developed leukaemia. News of a second child in
France developing a form of blood cancer early this year led to another safety
review here.

    A working group of members from two government advisory committees, on gene
therapy and the safety of medicines, has called on the government to commission
new research into the safety of using engineered viruses to deliver corrective
genes.

    guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2003


                             631 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                  May 7, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: Cold virus rids mice of brain cancer

BYLINE: Tim Radford, Science editor

BODY:


    In an experiment that may have implications for cancer treatment, American
and Spanish scientists have used the common cold virus to eradicate brain
tumours in mice.

    They report today in the Journal of the National Cancer Institute that they
chose an adenovirus - a virus of the respiratory tract - which targets only
cancerous cells, and which spreads like a wave through malignant glioma, the
most lethal form of brain cancer.

    They injected it into laboratory mice implanted with human glioblastoma
tumours. Untreated mice died in three weeks, but treated mice survived for more
than four months. When they examined the survivors, investigators found only
empty cavities and scar tissues where the brain tumours had been.

    "We believe this therapy has a lot of potential, but one that needs much
more study," said Juan Feyo of the University of Texas MD Anderson cancer
centre. "We've never seen this kind of response before with any other treatment
tested in either animals or humans."

    The US National Cancer Institute is to produce a drug to test in humans late
in 2004. The virus, known so far by the clumsy name of Delta-24-RGD, replicates
only in cancer cells, not healthy tissue.

    It reproduces itself by killing its host cells and moving on to contaminate
other tumour cells. When there are no more cancer cells to infect, it dies.

    As there is no successful treatment for malignant glioma, the researchers
have in effect turned an unstop pable infection into a weapon against an
incurable disease.

    "Cancer can be devious, in that it does everything possible to evade
destruction. But viruses are equally tricky in their quest to invade cells and
propagate," said Frederick Lang, one of the investigators. "In this experimental
war between cancer and a viral therapy, the virus won. Of course, we hope to
obtain similar results when patients are tested, but we cannot predict such
success based on animal studies."

    Viruses hijack their hosts' DNA to multiply. Cancer is above all a DNA
disease, and the cancer genome project in Cambridge has found more than 100
genetic mutations associated with cancer. The reasoning is that if humans can
identify a cancer cell by its DNA, then so can a virus.

    Researchers have proposed an altered HIV virus for gene therapy in
haemophilia, cystic fibrosis and heart disease. Other teams have experimented
with bacteriophages - viruses that prey on bacteria - to defeat
antibiotic-resistant infection. Cell biologists experimented with an altered
virus to deliver growth factor to wasting muscles, and mutant common cold
viruses have been used to shrink tumours in prostate cancer and head and neck
cancer.

    But most experiments have been with mice, and most are rated only
"promising" so far. The cooperation between the University of Texas, the
University of Alabama at Birmingham, and the Catalan cancer institute in
Barcelona, Spain, has achieved more than that.

    guardian.co.uk/medicine


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2003


                             633 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 24, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 12

LENGTH: 913 words

HEADLINE: Life: Last word: Why I'm not ashamed to experiment on animals: There
is really no alternative if saving human lives is your priority, says cancer
researcher Nick Wright

BYLINE: Alok Jha

BODY:


    Until the early 20s, diabetes was a major killer. About 2% of the population
of the UK had it and around half of them needed insulin to survive. Researchers
were already focusing their efforts on studying the pancreas but a treatment for
the condition finally came when two Canadians identified insulin by
experimenting on a dog's pancreas. Since then, many hundreds of thousands of
people have been kept alive all over the world by insulin injection.

    Using animals for scientific research is a necessary part of today's world.
It is also one of those issues that is likely to be forever bubbling up into the
news, as it has done this week. Despite any ill-informed perceptions to the
contrary, it is not something that is done lightly.

    If you want to use animals for your work in the UK, you start by getting a
personal licence. This is granted by the home secretary, who has to be happy
that that you are responsible and suitably qualified. As a condition of this
licence, you undergo training in animal research techniques.

    Then you need a project licence. This sets out in detail every type of
animal you're going to use, every procedure you will put them through. If the
animal is likely to suffer any pain, you need to justify why that work is
necessary. This assessment goes to your institution's ethical committee. This is
usually chaired by somebody from outside your organisation and contains lay
members to make sure you are doing things properly. Only when they are content
does it go on to the Home Office. They then conduct a further review and if they
are happy then you can go ahead.

    But why use animals in the first place? It is certainly possible to do a
certain amount of work in vitro - that is grow things in test tubes and petri
dishes. As for the ability to graft and reconstitute tissue, that can only be
done in a living organism such as an animal or human being. In my own research
group at Cancer Research UK, we're interested in the earliest stages of how
tumours grow in the human intestine. To study this, we use mice which have been
genetically modified to develop cancers which are very similar to the conditions
that affect people. We can make serial observations of the earliest stages of
these tumours - something which would simply not be possible in a human subject.

    Everybody in my line of work subscribes to the refinement of animal
experimentation - using the minimum number of animals and using them to a
greater effect. These are the so-called three Rs - reduction, refinement and
replacement. No one will want to use an animal where a simple test in a
laboratory will do, and by far the biggest bill which researchers have if they
do this sort of research is for their animals. At present, however, non-animal
models are just not good enough.

    I respect and understand, although disagree with, people who for a
philosophical view disagree with the fact that you should use animals for
research. What people like myself would get very vexed about is those who purvey
false facts about animal experimentation to a public which doesn't necessarily
understand the issues. The situation is also not helped by celebrities who say
that they are against research using animals but then the minute they get
something wrong with them are off to the doctor to use animal-based products.
The more people we can get to read about the successes of animal
experimentation, then I think the more we'll get people to understand that it is
absolutely necessary.

    Another good example of why ani mal research is necessary is the ACE
inhibitor - a drug used all over the world now for treatment of high blood
pressure and heart failure. The foundations for this were laid in the late 30s
by researchers who were able to show that if you clipped off the blood supply to
the kidney in rats, these rats had increased blood pressure. This lead to
isolation of a hormone in the kidney called angiotensin and later on to the
discovery of the enzymes which make this hormone and then to inhibitors.

    Animal experimentation will also have a huge part to play in understanding
the human genome. We have about 30,000 genes, and we do not know what they all
do. A very powerful way of working things out is to get a human gene, insert it
into a mouse and see what happens.

    A good example is the identification of the gene responsible for
Hirschprungs disease. This is a very distressing condition where the nerves of a
new born baby's bowels are absent. To treat it, the baby has to have a painful
series of operations. A mutation in a gene called "ret" was suspected of causing
this disease and scientists knocked this gene out of mice to test their theory.
This resulted in mice with an almost exact copy of Hirschprungs. Now that the
gene has been identified, we can go ahead with developing gene therapy to treat
the illness.

    There is, of course, always the issue of animals being mistreated. There are
widely publicised instances of animals being abused in the experimental setting
but in my 28-year career working with animals, I have no personal experience of
it. Anybody who treats an animal badly should be sacked and prosecuted under
criminal law. Animal experimentation has underpinned many of the treatments
available today and I am happy to stand up and be counted as a researcher who
uses animals.

    Nick Wright, warden of Barts and the London School of Medicine, and head of
pathology at Cancer Research UK


LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2003


                             636 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 22, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 457 words

HEADLINE: Stem cells help heart patients

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science editor

BODY:


    Fourteen patients with severe heart failure have been treated with their own
stem cells - and appear to be improving, according to scientists.

    The patients are at the Hospital Procardiaco in Rio de Janeiro. Each had 2
million stem cells, drawn from their own bone marrow only four hours earlier,
injected into the damaged areas of their hearts. The doctors repeated the
treatment 15 times. After two months, they had significantly less heart failure
and less angina, and their hearts were able to pump more blood.

    "These patients were desperately ill," said James Willerson, chief of
cardiology at the Texas Heart Institute in Houston, who led the study. "They had
a relatively high risk of dying, and had no other forms of therapy available
because their heart failure was so severe."

    Stem cells are part of the body's repair machinery. Embryo stem cells enable
a human to grow from a single fertilised egg to 100 trillion cells of 300
different kinds in just nine months. Adult stem cells provide new skin, bone,
muscle, blood as needed for the next 70 years or so. Britain has authorised
research into embryo stem cells as a potentially powerful treatment for hitherto
untreatable diseases. But this kind of research is blocked in the US, and
researchers have instead been experimenting with adult stem cells.

    Stem cells from bone marrow have already been used to treat leukaemia.
Florida University reported that stem cells from umbilical cord blood could
restore brains damaged by stroke - in rats. A British biotech company is
preparing to treat stroke-damaged victims with injections of human foetal stem
cells. And US tissue engineers have used fat stem cells to make new muscle
tissue.

    The Brazilian patients were treated with bone marrow mononuclear stem cells
which carried a particular "marker" protein on their surface: these were chosen
because scientists believed they had a good chance of turning into blood vessel
cells.

    In heart failure damaged heart muscle cannot pump enough blood to serve the
body's needs. So the scientists threaded a catheter into the heart's main
pumping chamber, and identified the damaged region: stem cells were then
injected into these areas. One control patient died two weeks into the study,
reported in the journal Circulation, and one of the treated patients died 14
weeks in. The others showed significant improvement. Either the injected stem
cells formed new muscle and blood vessel cells, or they stimulated their
development.

    "If our findings are confirmed in larger trials, this procedure could lead
to an effective treatment for severe heart failure, and perhaps to a new form of
gene therapy," said Prof Willerson.

    More at guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2003


                             638 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 21, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 505 words

HEADLINE: US researchers claim gene therapy could cure diabetes

BYLINE: James Meikle, Health correspondent

BODY:


    The race to find genetic therapies to cure diabetes heated up yesterday as
researchers announced they had rid mice of the disease by tricking their livers
into producing insulin.

    Experiments by US scientists employed a gene called neuroD to make mice's
livers behave like healthy human pancreases and produce the hormone insulin that
is vital to converting glucose in blood into energy.

    The team used an adenovirus, one of a family of viruses responsible for
colds, coughs, and other infections, but which had its toxic properties removed,
to carry the gene into the liver. But the gene alone only partially corrected
the disease.

    The new beta cells producing insulin and other hormones were aided by adding
a special growth factor called Btc. This combination cured diabetes in mice for
at least four months, according to the scientists at Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas.

    Lawrence Chan, who headed the team, said the treatment was still "further
from people than I would like". The main stumbling block was the virus that
acted as carrier for the gene. He expected safer ones to be available within 10
years: "We want to use the safest vector possible."

    The research, reported last night in the online edition of Nature Medicine,
comes just four months after British scientists announced a gene breakthrough.
Researchers at the University of Bath, funded by the Wellcome Trust and the
government-financed Medical Research Council, suggested that within a decade
their work could lead to similar tricking of human livers into behaving like
pancreases.

    They used a different gene, a superactive version of one called Pdx, to make
human liver cancer cells grown in bottles behave like pancreatic cells.
Modification of cells in tadpoles from the African clawed frog were also made to
create insulin-producing cells and other cells with enzymes to digest food. The
British team have held out the hope of diabetic patients eventually being cured
by a one-off injection that allows their bodies to effectively convert part of
their liver into a new pancreas.

    About 1.4 million Britons have diabetes, nearly a quarter of type one, the
form which requires regular, often daily, insulin injections, the remainder type
2 which can normally be controlled by diet and exercise.

    The condition is a complicating factor in obesity and heart disease, in
addition to its own threats of coma, blindness and poor quality of life.

    The scale of the problem is growing rapidly, with an estimated 300 million
people having diabetes worldwide in 20 years, putting strains on many countries'
health budgets.

    The hope is that gene therapy might offer an alternative to another
promising but still rare treatment which is undergoing trials in Britain. This
involves transplanting cells from other people's pancreases into patients. But
patients, even if freed from insulin injections, would have to take
anti-rejection drugs for the rest of their lives and there is a shortage of
potential donors.


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2003


                             641 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 19, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Saturday Pages, Pg. 13

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: Review: Science: DNA trouble: Anti-GM rhetoric fails to convince
Johnjoe McFadden

BYLINE: Johnjoe McFadden

BODY:


    Science, Seeds and Cyborgs

    by Finn Bowring

    320pp, Verso,

    pounds 19

    Fifty years ago this month, James Watson and Francis Crick un-veiled a
double helical structure fashioned from sticks and wire that would change the
world. With the completion of the human genome project also due this spring,
2003 is the year of DNA. News attracts hype so we are daily subjected to
preposterous tales of genetic tests that will predict the day we die or gene
injections that will convert our couch-potato children into perfectly toned
athletes. It is not surprising then that the year's DNA-fest should be peppered
with a dash of scepticism such as Finn Bowring's Science, Seeds and Cyborgs

    Bowring begins with an attack on reductionism in molecular biology. This is
a worthy aim as the overreaching claims of many geneticists and sociobiologists
need reining in. Yet he wheels out the variability of "single gene disorders"
(like cystic fibrosis) to undermine molecular biology's supposedly central claim
of a simple relationship between genes and disease. The problem is that modern
genetics doesn't make such a claim. Much of the post-genome action is about
unravelling the gene-gene and gene-environment interconnections that are
responsible for this variability. By erecting and demolishing a straw man,
Bowring misses the opportunity of providing a timely attack on the real dangers
of genetic determinism.

    Bowring is on safer ground when he attacks biotechnology corporations and
the capitalist system. Nobody likes the Big Bad Corporate Wolf, and few would
dispute that biotechnology's principal motive is profit. But that doesn't
explain why poor Brazilian farmers are smuggling and planting GM seeds. Whereas
authors like Mark L Winston ( Travellers in the Genetically Modified Zone ) talk
to farmers and biotechnologists, Bowring's analysis seems entirely desk-bound
and doesn't shift from his ideologically based starting position.

    But it is on health, safety or ethical issues that he goes very badly
adrift. Instead of a rigorous examination we get a mixed bag of truths,
half-truths and inaccuracies. For example, Bowring claims: "According to Ho and
her colleagues there is persuasive evidence to suggest the rapid growth in
genetic engineering has played a significant role in accelerating the emergence
of drug- and antibiotic-resistant infectious disease." Drug resistance is a very
serious problem. If genetic engineering is to blame, we need to know and do
something about it. But citing the views of anti-GM activists is no substitute
for hard facts. Two decades of research have not revealed a scrap of evidence to
support this claim.

    But, to Bowring, all health interventions are dismissed as profiteering.
Sickness is mere "ordinary suffering" (a truly chilling phrase) that has been
redefined as illness so pharmaceutical companies can make profits. Even
Alzheimer's is redefined as "communication impediments and behaviours which
challenge our abilities to comprehend".

    To underpin his anti-science rhetoric Bowring attempts to build an ethical
system based on an illusory natural order and the slippery concept of human
dignity. But he lacks the intellectual rigour of authors such as Fukuyama ( Our
Posthuman Future ), and (unlike Fukuyama) fails to come up with any clear policy
proposals. He resurrects the metaphysical "telos" (form or purpose of life) to
argue that biotechnology, in contrast to traditional farming practices, lacks
respect for an animal's telos (though why ending up roasted on a spit should be
part of anyone's telos is not explained). Surrogacy is condemned on the
profiteering "babies for sale" ticket, yet though he condemns gene therapy as an
insult to the autonomy of the human foetus, he ducks taking a similar stand on
the more politically sensitive issue of abortion.

    Science and the left needn't follow different paths. Marx and Engels were
both enthusiastic followers of scientific advances. But the new eco-left seems
intent on following Lysenko's example of rewriting science to fit their
ideology. As DNA enters its second half-century, society urgently needs to
consider the implications of gene technology. Sadly, Science, Seeds and Cyborgs
will contribute little to that debate.

    Johnjoe McFadden is professor of molecular genetics at the University of
Surrey and author of Quantum Evolution (HarperCollins). To order Science, Seeds
and Cyborgs for pounds 17 plus p&p call Guardian book service on 0870 066 7979.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2003


                             644 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 14, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: Discovering how to read the book of life

BYLINE: Tim Radford

BODY:


    More than 350 biomedical advances - diagnostic tests, drugs, treatments and
vaccines - have begun clinical trials since scientists began to "read" the
instruction book of life that is the human genome.

    The international effort that comes to an end today was supposed to take 15
years. It took 13. It was supposed to cost Dollars 3bn (pounds 1.9bn). It
probably cost little more than Dollars 500m.

    It was launched in 1990 by an American scientist, James Watson, one of the
team at Cambridge University which 50 years ago this month deciphered the double
helix molecule of DNA.

    This enormous molecule, divided into 46 chromosomes - 23 inherited from each
parent - exists in almost every cell of every living creature. Its four chemical
bases spell out a code for the machinery of life.

    Even before Bill Clinton, Tony Blair, the human genome organisation, and a
rival commercial enterprise led by an American, Craig Venter, jointly announced
the "first draft" in June 2000, there had been dramatic advances.

    A handful of boys born with severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome were
able, because of gene therapy, to lead almost normal lives for more than two
years. A larger group of sufferers with a particular form of chronic leukaemia,
for whom all other treatments had failed, tested a new drug based on genetic
knowledge - and went into remission.

    Humans were not the only beneficiaries: by 2000 around 380 genetic diseases
had been identified in dogs. Labradors inherited sleeping sickness, golden
retrievers were prone to muscular dystrophy.

    A kidney disease in Persian cats turned out to be hereditary.

    Some early hopes for the genetic revolution have, so far, been disappointed.
The project grew out of the search for the precise gene mutations that lead to
diseases such as muscular dystrophy and cystic fibrosis. These have been found,
but successful treatments seem as remote as ever.

    But the geneticists now have the raw data for the complex blueprint of life;
the next step is to work out how the pieces fit together to turn one fertilised
egg into a structure of 100 trillion cells, of 300 different kinds, in just nine
months, to be born as a human -and why that human is victim of a range of
different afflictions.

    Jane Rogers, head of sequencing at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute in
Cambridge, said: "The working draft allowed researchers to kickstart a multitude
of biomedical projects. Now they have a polished end product which will assist
them even more." Professor Kay Davies of Oxford University said the full
catalogue of genes would offer a clearer route to new therapies.

    It takes 10 years and more than pounds 100m to get a drug from laboratory to
patient. The rewards of the DNA revolution are still years away.

    But, parallel with the human research, scientists have sequenced the DNA of
laboratory animals, as well as vital crops such as rice.

    For years, they have been collecting the DNA of important tiny organisms -
yeast, the malaria parasite, and the microbes that cause pneumonia, meningitis,
leprosy, bubonic plague, tuberculosis, and syphilis.

    The research has opened up new branches of science, such as functional
genomics, to find out how genes do what they do; or bioinformatics, to handle
the databases of the human and mice genomes. It has triggered huge new research
initiatives.

    The human genome describes only one representative human, so universities,
drug companies and hospitals have begun to identify the millions of mutations
that make one human different from another.

    The marriage of DNA and silicon has accelerated: the first "gene chips"
already test for the risk of illness; a new kind of DNA chip is about to go on
the market to help specialists identify which drugs, in which doses, would be
right for particular individuals suffering from clinical depression.

    But there are bigger ambitions. The UK medical research council, the NHS and
the drug companies have backed the UK Biobank, in which researchers will collect
the DNA of 500,000 volunteers and then follow their life histories, to see the
link between genes and destiny. The completion of the human genome turned out
not to be an end, but a beginning.

    The project, ignored by the then Tory government when proposed in the late
1980s, was backed in Britain by the Wellcome Trust, a charity. But by 2000 the
genome had become a political reality, and this week the leaders of the six
governments in the human genome project - China, France, Germany, Japan, the UK
and the US - issued a statement of congratulation upon its completion.

    More at guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2003


                             651 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 15, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Saturday Pages, Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1205 words

HEADLINE: SATURDAY REVIEW: Science: The gene genius: Brenda Maddox on the
Martian stringbean who, 50 years ago, discovered DNA

BYLINE: Brenda Maddox

BODY:


    Watson and DNA: Making a Scientific Revolution by Victor K McElheny 380pp,
John Wiley, pounds 18.99

    DNA: The Secret of Life by James D Watson, with Andrew Berry, 336pp,
Heinemann, pounds 18.99

    Writing an autobiography is a delicate exercise for a man who has already
given his "life" to the world and continues to expand on it. When, in April
1953, at the age of 25, James Dewey Watson, with Francis Crick, announced their
discovery of the biological secret of heredity, he feared that nothing in his
future would ever match that moment.

    He was wrong. In the past half century, Watson has moved from being the
instigator of the DNA revolution to being its commanding general. Now, in time
for the 50th anniversary, he has told the dramatic story again and, more
importantly, has brought up to date the continuing consequences of the
discovery, from genetic fingerprinting to gene therapy, to the possible redesign
of the human race. Written with Andrew Berry, DNA: The Secret of Life is lucid
and fully accessible to anyone with a science sixth-former's attention span.

    Simultaneously, a biography has appeared, more attuned to the general
reader. Victor Mc-Elheny brings a clear eye to the hard-to- explain combination
of Watson's abrasive personality and unremitting achievement.

    A distinguished American science reporter for the Boston Globe and New York
Times, McElheny sat as an undergraduate at Watson's feet at Harvard. He makes it
clear that for many years he has enjoyed the great man's friendship. He traces
Watson's rise and rise, from the gauche American wandering around Cambridge's
Cavendish laboratory from 1951 to 1953, to the presidency of Cold Spring Harbor
laboratory on Long Island, to world pundit on the double helix and chief
celebrant of this spring's 50th anniversary celebrations. (Crick, at 86, is in
poor health and chooses to avoid "circuses". He remains at home, near his
laboratory at La Jolla, California.)

    Despite their friendship, this is not a hagiography. One of Watson's
remarkable qualities is his thick skin. He no more cares what people say about
him than he cares about their reaction to what he says. With a reputation as a
verbal loose cannon, Watson is quite accustomed to controversy and walk-outs
from his lectures. He caused outrage in Berkeley, California, in 2000, when he
suggested (as he had in London a few months earlier) that fat people are sexier
and happier than thin ones. (A slide of a thin Kate Moss and a gibe at Jackie
Onassis illustrated his thesis.) Politically incorrect? "Nice," Watson responds,
"is what you do when you have nothing else to offer."

    His looks and manner tell a lot. McElheny, as a young Harvard man, saw in
the lecture room a "Martian stringbean with wispy hair", who delivered his words
in a stage whisper to the blackboard. Watson arrived at Harvard after his
discovery (the importance of which was slow to be recognised) with Crick at the
Cavendish laboratory in Cambridge in the spring of 1953. This was that the DNA
molecule, which carries the genetic information from old cells to new, is
composed of two anti-parallel chains linked by bases paired in a code.

    At Harvard, as at Cambridge, Watson was in want of a wife - or even of a
date. Even winning the Nobel prize with Crick and Maurice Wilkins in 1962 did
not enable him to attract the long-desired "popsie". He had, however, written
the seminal text- book, Molecular Biology of the Gene , in 1965.

    His fortunes changed in 1968, when he was 40. Almost simultaneously, he
published The Double Helix , a brazen, tactless account of the race for the
discovery, and he married a pretty Harvard undergraduate half his age. The
marriage has lasted, and his wife, an architectural historian, has helped him
transform Cold Spring Harbor not only into a world centre for molecular biology,
but also a gem of a preservation of an old whaling village. The Double Helix ,
meanwhile, has sold more than a million copies, been translated into more than
two dozen languages and is considered one of the defining books of the 20th
century.

    After causing near-mutiny in the Harvard biology department, Watson went off
to direct Cold Spring Harbor. In 1988, he took on the extra responsibility of
directing the Dollars 3bn Human Genome Project. To little surprise, he quit this
federal post in 1992, after falling out with his superior, Dr Bernadette Healy,
director of the US National Institutes of Health. "She's bright, but she didn't
know anything," Watson said of his former boss.

    As a biographer, McElheny presents the science in this amazing story with
effortless lucidity and sets out clearly Watson's success as scientific
impresario. He understands power and wields it well. But his loose tongue may
have made him too risky for major universities and it is not surprising that he
has flourished best in his own kingdom by the sea.

    The boyhood of Jim Watson may be the best part of the story. He was born in
1928 to a modest but bookish family on the south side of Chicago. His father was
a bill collector, his mother a secretary and administrator, and a Catholic of
Irish and Scots ancestry. She brought up Jim and his sister Betty as Catholics.

    Confirmed at the age of 12, Jim almost immediately abandoned Catholicism for
birdwatching. He was convinced, he explained later, that the church was "just a
bunch of fascists that supported Franco". Also at 12, he tasted the heady
delights of fame, as he became one of America's "Quiz Kids", little know-it-alls
who entertained the nation on a Chicago-based radio programme. This public test
of random knowledge was ideal for young Watson, whose favourite reading was the
World Almanac

    The key to the Watson enigma probably lies in the University of Chicago, for
which the then president, Robert Hutchins, founded his Laboratory School, a
progressive high school which tipped pupils into his university at the age of
15. Watson thus had his bachelor's degree by the time he was 19.

    He went on to Indiana University, where he had acquired a doctorate by the
time he was 23, along with the conviction that the gene was the thing to study.
Soon, his single-minded determination propelled him into the Cavendish
laboratory at Cambridge where, in 1953, alongside Crick, he worked out the
"copying mechanism" that passes genetic information from old cells to new.

    Those who believe that Crick was the genius of the famous duo must ask
themselves what Crick, then in his mid-30s, still without his PhD, would have
done if Watson had not come along.

    McElheny has done a good job, producing a warts-and-all portrait of not only
a bold scientist but a gifted administrator, a shrewd operator and a
self-examiner. "I never was an adolescent," Watson says, apparently neither
complaining or boasting. "I went straight from child to adult." McElheny has
filled in many of the missing pieces in the puzzle of the Quiz Kid who never
grew up.

    Brenda Maddox's books include Rosalind Franklin: The Dark Lady of DNA . To
order Watson and DNA : Making a Scientific Revolution for pounds 16.99, or DNA:
The Secret of Life for pounds 16.99, both plus p&p, call Guardian book service
on 0870 066 7979.


LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2003


                             658 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 28, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 643 words

HEADLINE: Television: TVreview: Break-in at Tiffany's

BYLINE: Gareth McLean

BODY:


    I love a Tiffany, but I don't know whether I'd hunker down in a mausoleum
for one; we know from Buffy that hanging about in graveyards does not to lead to
hugs and puppies. The great man's stained glass windows may be quite beautiful
in an art nouveau way, but the view through them would still be punctuated by
tombstones. The peace and quiet, on the other hand, would be fantastic.

    Peace wasn't the appeal for Anthony Casamassima, who decorated his house
with urns and statues stolen from places with names like Cypress Hills and Salem
Fields. He had a "thing" about cemeteries, and combined his hobby (being weird)
with his job (being a thief). It was from a Salem Fields mausoleum that he stole
a nine-foot Tiffany window and earned himself a place on Art Crime (BBC4). It
wasn't that he was nasty, argued one of the lawmen who collared him. He was just
"somebody who needed some kind of medical help."

    Like the windows, Art Crime was a colourful story. Not only was there
Casamassima, we had a Russian thief and informant named Alexei, a cop called
Carmine Esposito who was more used to dealing with car theft, "one of the best
attorneys in the county of Queens" and a wide-eyed assistant DA who didn't seem
to need to blink. Best of all, there was Alastair Duncan, the leading expert on
Tiffany and, by all accounts, a bit of what my mum would call a snotter. He was
not appearing here to share his knowledge with us, as you expect experts to do,
but because he was caught up in the plot. Having bought the stolen window from
Casamassima (and then sold it on to a Japanese businessman for a hefty profit),
he was the story. Now there's something you don't get on Arena.

    Art Crime was one of those stories that leads to giddy talk of film rights
and the perfect A-list star to play the snobbish Duncan and his scuzzy
partner-in-crime. While the amount of money involved was fairly small (the
window is valued at pounds 500,000) and the artist is probably best known for
his lampshades and their imitations in pizza restaurant around the world, the
tale of the Tiffany Tomb Raiders had that special sparkle. Most Tiffany-related
things tend to.

    In Kate Atkinson's short story, Dissonance, the protagonist Rebecca saves a
man's life at a concert. It's an experience she finds discombobulating. "She
wasn't sure she wanted the gift of life. Or the gift of death. She didn't want
that kind of power, she didn't want to be like a god."

    Horizon (BBC2) told the story of the medical miracle that never was. Gene
therapy was supposed to cure every disease on the planet. By engineering viruses
and rewriting DNA, scientists would eliminate everything from Aids to arthritis.
Humanity could emerge from the shadow of illness and thrive. In short,
everything would be beautiful and some rather clever people would go down in
history, after becoming exceedingly rich, obviously.

    Instead, the engineering and the rewriting went wrong, people died from
diseases inflicted by the scientists and the shadow - momentarily dispelled by
bright, shiny hope - grew darker. The clever people, though ruthless, weren't as
clever as they imagined and, crucially, the viruses were smarter. That's what
millions of years of evolution do for you.

    A story of scientific advancement and human failing, of hubris in a lab
coat, Horizon: Trial and Error was moving, dramatic and terribly informative: a
more modern Prometheus. And, in Dilly Barlow, it had the mother of all
narrators. A class act.

    How strange is The Daily Politics (BBC2) exactly? Not only has a word
dropped off the end of its title, it has Andrew Neil perched on a grass-green
plastic sofa on top of a magenta carpet in front of a purple backdrop. The
effect is akin to finding gristle in an ice-cream sundae. Granted, it's
something to chew on, but it's not what you ordered.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2003


                             670 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2003 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 16, 2003

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 13

LENGTH: 542 words

HEADLINE: Cancer scare halts gene trials: Blow for new treatment of immune
system disease

BYLINE: James Meek Science correspondent

BODY:


    Gene therapy trials at Great Ormond Street hospital aimed at treating a rare
immune system disease have been halted after a second child on a parallel French
programme developed a leukaemia-like illness.

    In the US, the food and drug administration stopped 27 gene therapy trials
after hearing the news from France.

    The announcement that two out of nine children given gene therapy in France
had developed a form of blood cancer was a blow for this emerging field of
medicine, since the French treatment was considered the first and only
unequivocal gene therapy success story so far.

    The disease being treated is x-linked severe combined immuno-deficiency
(x-linked SCID) syndrome. Sufferers, always male, inherit a mutated gene which
means their immune systems do not work; in the absence of a bone marrow
transplant or gene therapy, their only hope of survival is to live in sealed,
germ-free "bubble".

    A spokesman for Great Ormond Street hospital, in London, said yesterday that
all patients in the British gene programme - three children and one adult - were
well.

    "We are discussing the French news with the families and cannot comment
further until we have done so," Stephen Cox said. "However, no further gene
therapy will be carried out until we have further information to assess any risk
to patients.

    "Every family on the trials was briefed on the possibility that gene therapy
might cause cancer, but two patients out of the dozen or so on the French trial
is clearly a matter for concern. It would be highly premature to reach any
conclusion until we have the full facts."

    Last April a Welsh child, Rhys Evans, appeared to have been cured of
x-linked SCID in the first successful gene therapy application in Britain.

    Then, in August, came the report from France that one of its patients had
developed a leukaemia-like illness.

    Yesterday Necker hospital in Paris, France's equivalent to Great Ormond
Street, issued a statement: "Very recently, the principal investigators have
detected, in a second patient, an abnormal and monoclonal proliferation of
T-lymphocytes, characteristics of which are very close to the case reported in
the first young patient."

    An uncontrolled proliferation of lymphocytes, or white blood cells, is the
central symptom of leukaemia.

    Necker hospital said both patients were responding "satisfactorily" to
chemotherapy.

    In France, the trials were halted after the first case, but the gene therapy
advisory committee in Britain ruled at the time that London trials should
continue, since the alternatives for treating the disease were so limited. Now
it faces a tougher decision.

    Without gene therapy, parents of SCID boys - three or four such children are
born each year - face a search for compatible bone marrow for a transplant. The
mortality rate from non-compatible bone marrow transplants is high.

    Eleven children were enrolled for gene therapy at Necker hospital, but only
nine were given the full treatment, which involves using a virus to insert a
working version of the mutated gene into the patient's cells. The danger is that
the virus inserts the gene randomly among other genes, leading to a risk of
cancer.

    SocietyGuardian.co.uk/cancer


LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2003


                             677 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 11, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 369 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy hope for Parkinsons disease

BYLINE: James Meek, Science correspondent

BODY:


    Researchers in the US are to treat Parkinson's disease sufferers with gene
therapy for the first time, it was announced last night.

    The experimental treatment, cleared by the US food and drug administration,
follows publication yesterday in the journal Science of a successful trial in
rats with a Parkinson's-like condition.

    In gene therapy, scientists use modified viruses as benign burglars - the
viruses break into cells and insert an additional gene.

    Parkinson's disease affects about 120,000 Britons. Its cause is unknown but
it is more common in older people. In people with the disease, cells in the
brain producing dopamine, which mediates nerve cell activity, begin to die.
Sufferers develop tremors and spasms, and find it increasingly difficult to
control their muscles.

    The gene therapy approach, developed by scientists from the US and New
Zealand, involves placing a small amount of gene-carrying virus into the damaged
brain area. The gene the virus carries, called GAD, is a biological order
encoded in DNA, an instruction for cells to produce a substance which changes
their role from excitor of brain activity to inhibitor.

    In rats, this has the effect not only of protecting against Parkinson's
symptoms, but of stopping dopamine-producing neurons from dying. "It's not just
inserting a replacement for a missing or mutated gene, for a genetic disorder.
This is more profound," said one researcher, Michael Oshinsky, of Thomas
Jefferson University, in Philadelphia. "We're changing the brain's circuitry as
treatment for a disease."

    But there is no guarantee that what has worked in rats will work in humans.
Recently, a shadow fell over gene therapy when a child with a rare, inherited
failure of the immune system, the only disease for which the therapy seemed to
provide a straightforward, unambiguous cure, developed leukaemia. The case, in
France, highlighted one of the most serious flaws - that there is no way to
control where among the tens of thousands of genes and non-gene stretches of DNA
the virus plants the gene. Fears are that if genes are inserted in the wrong
place, the outcome will be cancer.

    More health news at guardian.co.uk/medicine


LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2002


                             682 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 4, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: 'Gene cure' trials continue despite French suspension: UK experts say
ethics outweigh risks in bone marrow therapy

BYLINE: James Meikle Health correspondent

BODY:


    Trials of pioneering gene therapy for boys born with potentially fatal bone
marrow disorders will continue in Britain, despite the suspension of a similar
scheme in France which was linked to a child developing leukaemia.

    Advisers overseeing the experimental treatment in Britain have decided it
would be wrong to stop, as children might die without the therapy.

    Since last year, three children and an adult have had therapy at Great
Ormond Street hospital in London, and are said to be doing well.

    Norman Nevin, chairman of the gene therapy advisory committee, said: "We
accept there is a safety risk with this treatment. However, because other
treatment options are so limited for these children, we decided on ethical
grounds that approval should continue."

    The treatment has so far proved a life saver for those who cannot get a
matching bone marrow transplant.

    Marie Evans, mother of Rhys, the first boy in Britain to receive the
treatment, said that it had saved his life. "We have just celebrated his second
birthday, a miracle."

    The therapy, first developed at the Necker hospital , Paris, where 11
children have been treated, involves sparking the immune system into life by
removing bone marrow cells from the patients' hip bones. The cells are purified
and infected with an engineered virus containing a corrective gene, a copy of
which the child patients lack.

    The cells are returned to the patients. The altered bone marrow generates
immune cells which pass into the bloodstream. But a boy aged three who received
the therapy when six months old developed leukemia.

    Scientists believe the corrective gene might have been inserted close to
another gene, implicated in the development of leukaemia, and disrupted it.
However, they are investigating other causes, including the possibility that the
child might have developed leukaemia independently.

    France's public health agency yesterday announced that the trials at the
Necker had been "suspended as a precaution until investigations into the causes
have been completed". The therapy trials have so far been judged the most
successful in adapting genes to treat hitherto incurable conditions. The
research has been recovering from the unexpected death of an 18-year-old in the
US being treated for an inherited liver defect.

    Engineered viruses are being used in about 140 patients in 14 trials in
Britain, to see if gene therapies can stem various forms of cancers and other
diseases. These will now be even more closely monitored to check for side
effects.

    The condition suffered by the boys involved in the Great Ormond Street and
Necker trials is known as X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome.
Their bodies are unable to develop to build up an immune system to fight off
infections.

    Children suffering the condition used to be known as "babies in the bubble"
because of the anti infection measures needed, although most such children are
now cared for in rooms sealed just by air locks.

    Bobby Gaspar, a consultant immunologist at the hospital, suggested the risk
of patients developing leukemia was between one in 10m and one in 100m. "We are
pleased we can go ahead with these gene therapy studies. It is an extremely
severe condition. We have to do something. These children will die in the first
year of life."

    Special report on genetics at guardian.co.uk/genes


LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2002


                             688 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 11, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 330 words

HEADLINE: HIV harnessed to save lives

BYLINE: Tim Radford

BODY:


    The Aids virus - which has so far infected 40 million people and created an
estimated 11 million orphans around the world - is being harnessed to save
lives. The very qualities that make it so dangerous also make it potentially a
unique tool to help transplant patients, cure genetic illnesses and treat
neurodegenerative diseases.

    "We have tried to domesticate the plague," Keith Snell of the University of
Cambridge told the British Association science festival yesterday.

    HIV is an unusual virus: it can smuggle itself into human cells, incorporate
its own DNA into the human chromosomes, and replicate itself undetected by the
immune system. This same talent, once the lethal genes have been stripped out of
the virus, could also be used to deliver new genetic treatments to places that
other drugs could never reach - the brain and spinal cord, the liver and
skeletal and heart muscle.

    "We now have a method to deliver genes to these tissues and with which we
can begin to plan genetic therapy to treat such diseases as haemophilia, heart
disease, cystic fibrosis etc," he said. "We are developing techniques with which
we can help protect transplanted organs such as liver and heart from either
infection by viruses or from rejection by the immune system."

    Viruses were much more efficient at delivering genes than anything humans
could devise. "The reason we use HIV - and we wouldn't use it unless we had to -
is that HIV has a completely unique characteristic, in that it is able to insert
genes into cells that are not dividing."

    These were the brain, liver and muscle cells, all major targets for the
treatment of genetic diseases.


   * As many as one in four new HIV infections in the UK could show drug
resistant strains of the virus, Deenan Pillay, of the public health laboratory
service antiviral susceptibility reference unit, told the PHLS annual conference
in Warwick yesterday.

    Special report on Aids at guardian.co.uk/aids


LOAD-DATE: September 12, 2002


                             691 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 6, 2002

SECTION: G2; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 722 words

HEADLINE: G2: Television: TV review: In for the kill

BYLINE: Gareth McLean

BODY:


    Studying for a degree in armchair detective work (specialising in
forensics), you learn all sorts. The human body's rate of decomposition and the
effects of submersion in water and/or proximity to a heat source, for example.
How to establish the length of an axe murderer's arm by measuring the arc of
blood spatters left on a wall behind his or her swing. How people who fake knife
attacks on themselves often slash in too-straight lines, betraying a lack of
struggle with their "assailant." And there's the worrying fact that there are at
least four serial killers on the loose in the UK at any one time. These things
worm their way into your brain from shows as diverse as CSI and that classic
forensic science series, Indelible Evidence.

    While no Indelible Evidence, Trail of Guilt (BBC1) was a decent attempt to
bring the cleverness of forensic science to a mainstream audience, even if it
was a little True Crime for my liking. Indeed, given that we are now so
well-versed in such matters, Trail of Guilt could occasionally have been
mistaken for patronising. These days, it doesn't do just to say "DNA" a lot. We
want more minutiae, more precision. If you are going to make entertainment about
the savage killing of a young mother - and that's a whole other issue,
especially when you use what looks like official police video footage of the
crime scene - it has to be meticulously done.

    Trail of Guilt did introduce us to forensic phonetician, Dr Elizabeth
McClelland. With a touch of the Miss Jean Brodie about her, this well-spoken
Scot analysed a mysterious phone call that alerted the police to the murder of
one Sandra Poole. Using her knowledge of how ethnicity determines the pitch and
range of the voice and how younger people have adopted the Australian question
intonation (saying a statement like it's a question?), she then helped the
police to catch a killer. That the killer was wearing his victim's knickers when
he was arrested was an added bonus for the police, but that didn't detract from
the fascinating nature of Dr McClelland's work. While not enough to sustain a
drama series, a forensic phonetician deserves at least a small recurring role in
Waking the Dead.

    Apparently, people have been having sex for centuries. More than that,
they've been enjoying it. As Sex BC (Channel 4) revealed, the ancient Egyptians
were particularly fond of nooky despite all that sand. Their creation myths
credited incestuous sex with forming the world, Rameses II received a wife and a
dozen concubines for his 15nth birthday and, every year, the pharaoh would
masturbate into the Nile to guarantee his kingdom's fecundity. (And if that's
not sufficient pressure to put you off entirely, I don't know what is.)

    Then there's the small issue of phallocentrism. In ancient Egypt, there were
penises everywhere. From graffiti in caves through paintings and friezes to
"erotic" papyrus, you couldn't move in downtown Thebes without some erection or
another catching your eye. An Egyptologist who resembled Indiana Jones's stay-
at-home brother explained that archaeologists had even found a box of wooden
phalluses of various sizes that may have been used in fertility rites. How the
pharaohs dealt with splinters, he didn't say.

    After a while, this got a little tiresome. Sex BC really only contained 15
minutes of worthwhile information, after which it resorted to restating theories
("potent sexuality was a religious duty"), spreading on the hyperbole ("sex was
everywhere!") and relying on visuals which were akin to some softcore porno
remake of the Fry's Turkish Delight advert. Sex BC was more than a little short
on the eastern promise.

    How will future generations look back on us and our current fondness for
cosmetic surgery as demonstrated in Under the Knife (ITV1)? Will they, in their
enlightened state, stare in disbelief at the self-inflicted butchery, fuelled by
self-loathing and insecurity, undergone in pursuit of an unattainable
perfection? Or will they, with nanoprobes regulating their bodies from the
inside and gene therapy having eliminated ugliness, shake their heads at our
lack of sophistication? Whichever, I can't imagine they'll be injecting their
members with fat from their thighs to boost their egos. And there was you
thinking that the Egyptians were mad.


LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2002


                             694 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 30, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 305 words

HEADLINE: Foetal therapy takes a step forward

BYLINE: James Meikle Health correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists yesterday strengthened the prospects of treating genetic
disorders in foetuses as early as 10 weeks old after isolating and treating stem
cells from foetal blood.

    Conditions linked to abnormalities in nerves, bone, cartilage and muscles,
which at present are irreversible, might be prevented long before birth by gene
therapy in the womb, according to the researchers at Imperial College, London.

    They have successfully inserted a marker gene into foetal cells and proved
it responds to manipulation, although they cautioned that treatment in humans
was still several years down the line.

    Screening methods for Down's syndrome and other chromosomal disorders can
already spot abnormalities in foetuses within about three months of conception.
But big improvements in ultrasound equipment and needles to collect blood from
pregnant women would be needed as well as further advances in knowledge about
the sort of genetic transfers necessary to tackle different diseases.

    The researchers, who reported the latest developments in the British Journal
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, suggested that cells could eventually be removed
from foetuses at eight weeks, worked on in the laboratory, and retransfused back
into the foetuses within two weeks.

    The cells circulate in the blood of foetuses only between about eight and 14
weeks after conception, suggesting a biological function of spreading the
building blocks of the body as fast as possible.

    Pioneering treatment begun in Paris and followed at Great Ormond Street
hospital and the Institute of Child Health, London, has seen recycling of
children's stem cells, taken from their hip bones and modified before
transfusion back into their bodies.

    Nick Fisk, one of the researchers, said the latest success was only "a very
small step".


LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2002


                             696 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 17, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 407 words

HEADLINE: TV dinner served up as key invention: Brainwaves that rocked the world

BODY:


    FIFTY INNOVATIONS THAT CHANGED THE LAST 50 YEARS:

    1952 First fare paying passengers in a jet airliner

    1953 CinemaScope

    1954 TV dinner

    1955 Non-stick saucepan

    1956 TV remote control

    1957 Sputnik carries the first living creature into space

    1958 Ultrasonic image of unborn child

    1959 Mini rolls off the production line

    1960 Implanted pacemaker

    1961 The Pill goes on the market in the UK (far right)

    1962 TV satellite relays live pictures

    1963 Cassette tape and birth of portable music machines

    1964 Home kidney dialysis

    1965 Packet switching - essential for the internet

    1966 Satellite provides the first whole-earth viewing of the weather

    1967 Breathalyser used on drivers

    1968 First supersonic airliner, the Soviet T-144

    1969 Moon landing

    1970 Watches with liquid crystal displays go on sale

    1971 CAT scan

    1972 Pocket calculator

    1973 Cars with airbags

    1974 Barcodes on supermarket products

    1975 Birth of the home computer

    1976 VHS and Betamax

    1977 Maiden voyage of space shuttle

    1978 Birth of Louise Brown, baby conceived by IVF

    1979 Graphical-user interface developed

    1980 Ghetto blaster and Sony Walkman

    1981 Compact discs on sale

    1982 Video keyhole surgery

    1983 Synthetic human insulin cleared for sale

    1984 DNA fingerprint

    1985 First registered dotcom

    1986 Laptop computer

    1987 Prozac goes on to market

    1988 First internet worm unleashed, disabling 10% of computers on the
fledgling network

    1989 Toaster becomes the first machine to be controlled over the internet

    1990 First gene therapy, on a four-year-old girl with an immune system
disorder

    1991 Internet browser developed

    1992 Text messaging

    1993 Global Positioning Satellites

    1994 Genetically modified tomatoes

    1995 Toy Story is the first entirely computer generated feature film

    1996 'Deep field' photographs of our universe show how it looked 10 billion
years ago.

    1997 Dolly the sheep is the first mammal cloned from an adult cell

    1998 First section of the international space station launched

    1999 Electronic, reusable paper invented

    2000 Scientists discover how to remove genes from pigs, paving the way for
xenotransplants.

    2001 Microchips inserted into the damaged retinas of three blind men to
restore their sight.

    2002 Iris scanners installed at airports for security

    A revolutionary idea - the compact disc


LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2002


                             725 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 4, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 65 words

HEADLINE: Pioneering gene treatment gives frail toddler a new lease of life:
Gene therapy in action

BODY:


    1) Bone marrow cells removed from hipbone.

    2) Bone marrow enriched to isolate parent cells of immune system.

    3) Cells infected with virus containing corrective gene.

    4) Cells take up gene, a normal version of which is missing in this boy.

    5) Cells returned to baby boy.

    6) After two weeks the immune system starts developing to protect the baby
from infection.


LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2002


                             734 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 16, 2002

SECTION: The Guide, Pg. 12

LENGTH: 931 words

HEADLINE: The guide: Gene therapy: Wes Anderson has made a comedy about
depression, loneliness and drug abuse. And as if that isn't enough, it features
an all-star cast led by Gene Hackman. Joe Queenan is royally entertained

BYLINE: Joe Queenan

BODY:


    Back in the 1970s, when Sammy Davis Jr was at the height of his
annoyingness, he used to introduce overwrought Anthony Newley songs by saying,
"Man, if this don't turn you on, you ain't got no switches". Although I am loath
to ever find myself on the same side of an issue as Sammy Davis Jr, much less
reduced to pilfering his jaded Rat Pack lingo, there are certain songs, books,
paintings, hallucinogenics and films of which it truly can be said, "If this
don't turn you on, you ain't got no switches". Such a film is Wes Anderson's The
Royal Tenenbaums. Which is a roundabout way of saying that when a close friend
of mine recently announced that she had seen the motion picture and didn't know
what all the fuss was about, I immediately decided it was high time she stopped
being a close friend.

    The Royal Tenenbaums is the kind of movie they don't make any more. Not that
they ever did. A bizarre redemption tale, told in the form of a bizarre
children's story narrated by Alec Baldwin, The Royal Tenenbaums deals with an
ageing reprobate (named Royal Tenenbaum) who believes that he will soon die and
wants to patch things up with the family he deserted many years ago. Played with
consummate glee by Gene Hackman, Tenenbaum is a philanderer, a con artist and a
bastard. As an attorney he is so dishonest that his very own son (Ben Stiller)
had him disbarred after he stole bearer bonds from his kids' safety deposit
boxes. Now he seeks to atone for all the damage he has done to his wife and
three children by coming back home and living with them. In theory, this will
facilitate his going gently into that good night with a clear conscience and an
unfurrowed brow.

    His plan, while laudable, is fraught with peril. His adopted daughter
(Gwyneth Paltrow) is a terminally depressed playwright who once fled home to
meet her real family - a bunch of Indiana-based rednecks - and promptly lost
half of one finger in an ill-advised log-splitting adventure. She bolted in part
because Royal never failed to introduce her as "my adopted daughter, Margot".
She despises her father. His eldest son (Stiller) is a cupidious neurotic who
made his first fortune by breeding Dalmatian mice as a boy. He has never
forgiven his father for deliberately shooting him with a BB gun when he was a
child, and for failing to ever meet his wife, much less attend her recent
funeral. He also hates his father. A third child (Luke Wilson) is a once
promising but now over-the-hill tennis player who fell under the disastrous
sartorial and tonsorial influence of Bjorn Borg as a youth and is desperately in
love with his adopted sister. While he does not actually hate his father, he
might just as well, since everybody else seems to.

    The cast is rounded out by the statuesque Anjelica Huston, Royal's
long-suffering wife, who thinks Royal is a scoundrel and a pig; Danny Glover,
Huston's dignified African-American suitor whom Royal treats like a porter; and
Bill Murray, Paltrow's hopelessly outclassed husband, who, like many
psychiatrists, badly needs therapy. Finally, there is Owen Wilson (brother of
Luke), who co-wrote the screenplay with his high school chum Anderson. Wilson,
whose career has been a mix of the good (Meet The Family), the bad (The
Haunting) and the indifferent (Behind Enemy Lines, Shanghai Noon) sometimes
tries too hard to be funny. But here he does a splendid job as an addled
drug-abusing childhood friend of Stiller, Paltrow and Bjorn to be Wilde.
Masquerading as a sagebrush novelist, with his Comanche war paint and fringed
buckskin jacket, Wilson is a non-stop sight gag. Like Murray and the
tennis-playing brother, Wilson is also in love with the morbid, chain-smoking
Paltrow. It's anybody's guess why.

    The Royal Tenenbaums is told in a series of demented vignettes. In one
scene, Hackman abducts Stiller's two young boys and takes them to play craps. In
another scene he persuades an elevator operator to pretend to be an oncologist,
with surprisingly effective results. Hackman also has an enigmatic relationship
with Huston's Hindu butler, the mysterious Pagoda, who has stabbed Hackman at
several junctures during their tumultuous relationship, and is likely to do so
again.

    In the end I have only one criticism of the film; as was the case with
Rushmore, Anderson has a tendency to limp toward the finish line and to wrap
things up in an unexpectedly sentimental way. But this is mere quibbling. In an
age of moronic, deeply cynical, mass-produced comedies like The Waterboy,
American Pie and Black Knight, The Royal Tenenbaums is an authentically
intelligent, highly original film. Anderson is one of the most innovative
American directors to come along in years.

    He certainly gets good performances out of his cast. Particularly delightful
is Paltrow's turn as the bleary-eyed, chain-smoking catatonic who is the object
of so much inexplicable affection, and Luke Wilson's solid work as the
hard-serving brother afflicted by another kind of love that dare not speak its
name, or at least not speak it intelligibly. Still, the highest praise of all
must be reserved for Hackman. At a time when some of his peers (Jack Nicholson,
Clint Eastwood, Dustin Hoffman) seem to be running out of gas, Hackman has been
logging in with one outstanding performance after another. Slowly but surely,
the public is coming to realise that Hackman is one of the finest actors in the
history of motion pictures. If his performance in The Royal Tenenbaums don't
turn you on, man, you ain't got no switches.

    The Royal Tenenbaums is out now.


LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2002


                             746 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 8, 2002

SECTION: National News: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 531 words

HEADLINE: Help for paralysed as TV fantasy becomes reality

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science editor

BODY:


    Yesterday's television fantasy is becoming tomorrow's reality. New bionic
man may not be blessed with superhuman strength, but one day the injured may be
able to move their paralysed limbs by the power of thought - and a tiny
implanted computer.

    Synthetic tissues could begin to merge with flesh to restore failing organs,
artificial blood could carry oxygen from the lungs, cochlear implants could
directly stimulate "hearing" in the brain, and cameras implanted in the retina
could restore some vision to the blind.

    Mechanical helpers could keep failing hearts beating, artificial livers
could prolong patients' lives and artificial tendons might tether wasting muscle
to bones. The catch is that the Six Million Dollar Man will cost nearer Dollars
6bn - and the tissue engineers who will repair tomorrow's humans have a long way
to go.

    William Craelius, a biomedical engineer at Rutgers University, reports in
Science today - in a roundup of the science of tissue engineering and artificial
implants - that the pace of miniature electronics could turn Captain Hook's
metal menace into something more touchy-feely. He has already developed an
artificial hand and mechanical fingers which can be coupled to surviving nerve
endings.

    "At this pace, within the decade, the processing for complex bionic activity
will be implantable in the brain or elsewhere in the body," he said. "Human
machine-communication could soon lose its distinction as the number one obstacle
to bionics."

    However, Larry Hench and Julia Polak of Imperial College, London, foresee a
new era in "biomaterials" - implants which will switch on genes and get failing
tissues growing again. Surgeons have been fitting patients with metal, glass and
ceramics for decades. But half to a third of skeletal prostheses and artificial
heart valves fail within 10 to 25 years, bringing sufferers back for surgery.

    The London tissue engineers have tested a bioactive material which
"activated" important genes in bone cells that grew on it. "In the future we may
only need to implant the carefully calculated chemical ingredients of the
biomaterial, rather than a finished biomaterial itself, in order to repair
tissue," Professor Hench said.

    Scientists in Washington and Los Angeles are working on auditory brainstem
implants to restore at least some hearing in people without a functioning
auditory nerve. The first could be fitted into a human later this year.

    German scientists at Tubingen believe that electronics might help the blind
see. Normal vision requires tiny natural instruments which pick up light waves
and convert them to signals to the brain. A tiny camera and processing unit
could send information to a chip on top of the retina, which would convert the
data to delicate electrical impulses and stimulate the optic nerve. Patients
have already been fitted with artificial hearts, but two researchers in
Cleveland, Ohio, argued in Science that small, magnetically suspended blood
pumps in the arteries and veins could be powered through skin by batteries. They
could be combined with stem cell transplants or gene therapy to speed up the
healing of the heart muscle.


LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2002


                             755 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 25, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 683 words

HEADLINE: Television: TV review: The fat of the land

BYLINE: Gareth McLean

BODY:


    Rather sweetly and most unusually, last night's Horizon (BBC2) had a fairy
tale air about it. Its investigation into what makes us fat and the consequent
possibility of a miracle drug to fight obesity was almost as densely populated
with curious characters as any kingdom imagined by the Brothers Grimm. There was
Fidgety Jeff who can't get fat, the twins who were born to be thin, the mouse
that couldn't stop eating and the Padded Lilies, a water-ballet troupe
reminiscient of the hippos in Fantasia. There was certainly a muffin man
involved somewhere along the line - and, I suspect, a doughnut girl and a burger
king - though he didn't actually make an appearance in the documentary. There
was even a princess who eventually escaped from her prison (21-stone Glenda had
lost a heap of her weight and had gleefully discovered her cheekbones again) and
the whisper of the forging of a magic bullet to slay the big, bad, blobby
bogeyman.

    It was the rumour of this holy grail that drove Horizon's Fat Busters
onwards. Necessarily, it kicked off with some scary statistics - obesity doubles
your risk of heart disease, it increases your risk of developing diabetes
sevenfold and leaves you 40 per cent more likely to develop cancer, it will
affect one in four of the population by 2010 - and an awful lot of footage obese
people waddling down the street. What followed then was a curious mix of obese
people maintaining they are genetically predisposed to being the size they are -
and scientific support for their belief - followed by the dismissal of the
notion that genes and not pies make you fat.

    While members of the Padded Lilies told genuinely dreadful stories of how
previously they had had their teeth wired together, were prescribed speed to
subdue appetite or endured electric-shock aversion therapy and maintained they
were born to be big, it was a little difficult to accept their accounts when
Glenda went on a diet and promptly lost three and a half stone. It was equally
hard to believe the assertion that obesity was "a global problem" since it is,
in my experience, most unusual to see an obese person in a developing country.

    Such is society's loathing of fat and the inevitability of non-obese people
who are uncomfortable with their bodies snaffling any miracle drug to lose those
pesky love handles, narrator Siobhan Redmond's assertion that "scientists have
the evidence they need to completely overturn the way we view obesity" was hard
to take. Indeed, she didn't seem overly convinced herself. "Obesity is not
necessarily a failure of character," she murmured, "but an inescapably
biological inheritance." Handy word, "necessarily".

    (You can also bet that the self- same pharmaceutical companies whom Horizon
presented as benevolent goodies working for the good of all humanity will be
preying on those insecurities and marketing their jagged little pills
accordingly.)

    Whatever the causes of obesity - genetics or greediness - or the drug
companies' motives for researching the subject, one thing no pill will do is
change our attitudes. We'd like to dress up our disapproval or disgust of
overweight people as concern for their health but really it's nothing more than
blind, fearful prejudice. Whether it's ex-Pop Idol Fat Rik or Shallow Hal, fat
people will remain the butt of society's jokes.

    While genetic engineering perhaps makes eugenicists of us all, so
fat-busting drugs make us all body fascists. As if we weren't already. So let us
say "Hurrah!" Everyone in the future will be thin and beautiful. What a relief.
In three, possibly four, generations, ugly fatness will have been wiped out
completely and it will be the greatest scientific achievement of the century, if
not any century. Of course, I say "everyone" but what I mean is everyone who can
afford the drugs, the surgery or the gene therapy. And really, that is everyone,
since poor people don't count because they're, well, poor and that's the biggest
ugliness there is, for which there is no remedy. It's the way of not just this
world but the brave new world too.


LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2002


                             758 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2002 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 4, 2002

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 5

LENGTH: 319 words

HEADLINE: Volunteer patients recruited to test cancer-busting viruses

BYLINE: James Meikle Health correspondent

BODY:


    Cancer patients are being recruited for the first British run trials of
man-made tumour busting viruses.

    About 20 volunteers will be involved in the early stages of the experiments,
testing the safety and short term efficacy of the treatments, which researchers
hope might eventually be able to combat 95% of cancers.

    They believe that injecting genetically modified viruses into the
bloodstream will provide an alternative to radiotherapy and chemotherapy, which
can lose potency as cancerous cells develop resistance.

    The tests, by scientists working for the Hammersmith Hospitals NHS trust at
Imperial College, London, involve mod ifying viruses to work against tumours
which have an inactivated version of genes that usually work against cancer.

    Work is already advanced in the US on altering the adenovirus, a common
cause of respiratory and eye infections, to fight cancers with an inactive P53
gene, including cancers in the head and neck, ovaries and bowel, and those
trials have involved British patients.

    However, the new research will involve using viruses to tackle a far wider
range of cancers. They should kill the cancer cells but spare normal ones. "The
idea is that if you make particular changes to one or two genes in native
viruses you can make them less infective to normal cells but as infective or
more infective to tumour cells," said Nick Lemoine, one of the researchers.

    He and David Kirn, head of the viral and genetic therapy programme at the
Hammersmith trust, outline the potential for the treatments in the latest Lancet
Oncology medical journal.

    Dr Kirn said: "Viruses have evolved over millions of years to express many
of the qualities required for the ideal anti-cancer weapon.

    "Viruses will target and infect very specific types of cell, multiply, cause
cell death, and release more viral particles to go on and infect other target
cells."


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2002


                             764 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                December 1, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Sport Pages, Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1063 words

HEADLINE: Drugs in sport: The gene genie is out of the bottle: Doping's next
wave is already on us - and it could kill sport, reports Jon Entine

BYLINE: Jon Entine

BODY:


    It is sport's doomsday scenario: a new wave of performance-enhancing drugs
whose use is utterly undetectable. And, according to the scientists and world
doping experts who met at a special conference in London yesterday, that
doomsday is already nigh.

    The key, they say, is genetic manipulation. By the Athens Olympics in 2004,
dozens if not hundreds of athletes are expected to have experimented with the
rapidly emerging range of gene-altering drugs. Unfettered by fears of being
caught they will, according to the experts, shatter the accepted limits of human
performance.

    "I think genetic engineering may have already started," said the former
Norwegian speed-skating champion Johann Olav Koss, a doctor and member of the
International Olympic Committee's World Anti-Doping Agency. "We can't be naive.
We must be realistic."

    In recent years geneticists have made major advances in gene therapy. This
involves injecting the body with artificial genes which then produce therapeutic
proteins that can limit the spread of disease and ease chronic pain. The
technique, while still being tested experimentally on humans, has already been
used successfully on animals. But that is not the end of the story.

    "While the information from genetic science will lead to better disease
treatments," said Bruce Lynn, a neurophysiologist at University College London
and one of the organisers of yesterday's conference on genetics and their role
in sport, "it will also present the sports industry with a Pandora's box."

    In today's billion-dollar sporting arenas, there is a huge incentive for
drug cheats to stay a step ahead of the testers. Everyone from a struggling
footballer to a Kenyan-chasing British distance runner could see their prospects
brighten with an injection of the right genetic cocktail.

    So while the IOC last year approved a test to detect the use of
erythropoietin (EPO) - a synthetic hormone that increases the production of
oxygen-carrying red blood cells and hence the performance of endurance athletes
- scientists have already perfected a virtually undetectable injectable version.

    According to Peter Schjerling, a research geneticist at the Copenhagen
muscle research centre: "If direct injection is used, the DNA will only be
present in that specific muscle. Therefore a positive test would require a slice
of actual muscle tissue. It would have to be at the exact spot of the
injection."

    In other words as soon as a regulatory mechanism is perfected, the insertion
of a single gene into a leg muscle could turn the body into an EPO factory for
months, with almost no chance of being nabbed by the doping police.

    Already eyebrows are being raised, not least by some of the results at last
week's Chinese Games. There a 15-year-old, Guo Lingling, finished second in the
women's 400 metre hurdles; another 15-year-old, Yu Guoping, was a close second
in the 50km walk, a gruelling event lasting almost four hours; and, just 11 days
past his 14th birthday, Li Huiquan won the 800m in a world-class time.

    There is no hard evidence to suggest these unprecedented performances were
the result of genetic manipulation. But considering China's well documented
history of coaches and competitors being involved with performance-enhancing
substances, whispers abound. The questions will only increase as the list of
genetically engineered drugs grows each day, promising miracle effects for
sprinters and endurance athletes alike.

    Researchers at London's Royal Free hospital and UCL's medical school
recently tested muscle-building engineered vaccines on mice. Dubbed
mechano-growth factor (MGF), a protein which makes muscles grow and repair
themselves, the vaccines were found to increase muscle mass by as much as 60%
within a month and with no exercise.

    "We call them the Schwarzenegger mice," said a Harvard medical school
professor, Nadia Rosenthal, who has run similar experiments. "I'd be totally
surprised if it was not going on in sports. Those with terminal cancer and Aids
want to know 'What will keep me alive?' Athletes want to know 'What will help me
win?'"

    But there is a cost, and not just the potential disintegration of sport as
we know it. Many drugs have dangerous, or even toxic, side-effects. Use of
human-growth hormone leads to enlarged organs and uncontrollable bone growth in
the face and hands; inserted genes could spin out of control, leading to
thickening blood, strokes, heart attacks and death.

    Moreover, once a gene for a growth factor has been inserted, the muscle
nucleus could continue to churn out elevated quantities of the growth factor
forever.

    But, inevitably perhaps, the scientists are working on this too. A Stanford
university molecular pharmacologist, Helen Blau, has demonstrated that a gene
could be introduced to stimulate growth hormone in the bloodstream, and then be
switched off with the use of an oral antibiotic.

    "An athlete could be genetically engineered to have a gene which increased
their strength as they trained but then was shut off when required," Blau said.
"It could be a future concern for the Olympics."

    With all of these Frankenstein-like scenarios, a ban on genetic engineering
of athletes on both medical and ethical grounds appears necessary and urgent.
Certainly the IOC president Jacques Rogge talks tough. "Genetic manipulation is
there to treat people who have ailments, not to treat a healthy person," he said
recently. "I am very clear on this."

    But few scientists see the issue so starkly. There is a hazy and debatable
line between "health restoration" and "performance enhancement". Imagine, for
instance, an athlete using genetic modification to help overcome congenital
asthma or some other genetic abnormality.

    Even embryonic gene manipulation, which is further over the horizon, may not
necessarily disqualify future athletes. As the Olympic 100m champion Maurice
Greene has noted: "What if you're born with something having been done to you?"

    "It could be like bodybuilding is today," said Mats Garle, director of the
doping control laboratory of Huddinge University Hospital in Sweden. "If you
want to compete at the top level, you might have no choice but to take anabolic
steroids. Or worse."

    Jon Entine is the author of Taboo: Why Black Athletes Dominate Sports and
Why We're Afraid to Talk About It


LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2001


                             770 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 18, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 15

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: Health: That's my boy: In April, Mandy Rudczenko described the shock
of discovering that her baby had cystic fibrosis. So how are they doing now that
Leo is a year old?

BYLINE: Mandy Rudczenko

BODY:


    As I write, Leo is dozing off in his cot, sounding quite breath-less after a
hard day's climbing the furniture. He also has a fruity cough which is a bad
sign - I am taking him into hospital tomorrow to be checked over. Today, between
playing and eating, Leo has had three doses of inhaler, three 15-minute sessions
of physiotherapy, nine doses of digestive enzyme, four doses of antibiotic and
three other medicines. He also sometimes needs three doses of laxative as his
bowels get blocked with mucus. Keeping on top of this regime sometimes feels
like a mental assault course, but Leo takes it all in his stride.

    Now one, Leo is enjoying a diet which includes chocolate cake, cheese
straws, lashings of butter, fatty lamb (which he loves) and the odd vegetable,
of course. Consequently, his weight is now above average - the dietician has
compared his build to that of a sumo wrestler.

    He needs a high-fat diet because he has difficulty digesting food,
especially fat. I have been reliably informed that beefburger and chips (plus
some vegetables) will be his square meal. So how do I square this with cooking
for his two-year-old brother who is quite happy eating broccoli and carrots?

    Apart from the scares we have when Leo gets a cold or a cough, he is doing
very well and is enjoying babyhood to the full. The impact on us as a family has
probably been greater than we realise, though. Stress levels seem quite high,
with me debating whether to go on Prozac (as suggested by the health visitor -
who has been to see me once, at my request).

    I have found myself sometimes being obsessed with wanting to know how long
Leo will live. The life expectancy of people with cystic fibrosis (CF) is a big
issue. Ten years ago, children with CF rarely survived into adulthood; some
internet sites now estimate 30 years; Leo's consultant reckons 40 is more
realistic, given the right treatments.

    He also gives us great hope because he feels sure that in 10 years' time,
gene therapy will be available to correct the faulty gene (we don't quite
understand how this works), reducing the lung damage. These figures play on my
mind all the time and it is when thinking about this issue too much that I start
to go mad. Virtually every day I think: "I'm 41 and I am still planning things
for my future - Leo might be dead by this age." Or maybe I'm always
procrastinating and hopefully Leo will be more focused about what he wants to
get out of life. I dread the day I have to sit down and explain the implications
of his illness: "Well sweetheart, you might only live until you're 40." But he
will probably be his usual laid-back self and say: "Blimey mum, that's ancient."

    We are finding out more and more about CF - although there are times when we
don't want to know anymore about it. Having been for genetic counselling we now
know that we both carry a CF gene, and unfortunately they decided to pair up
when Leo was in the making. Consequently, Leo has two faulty genes which cause
his body to produce too much mucus, mainly in the lungs and digestive system. To
produce a child with CF is quite rare - one in every 2,500 babies, but we were
surprised to find out that it is quite common to be a carrier - one person in
25.

    Having the disease affects people differently, some people are affected more
severely than others - we are dying to know how "severe" Leo is but it seems it
is too early to say.

    On a day-to-day basis Leo needs help with two main things to stay alive.
First, we need to do everything we can to prevent him from developing a chest
infection, which grows more easily in the extra mucus in his lungs. Any chest
infection will cause irreparable lung damage and this is usually what shortens
life expectancy. The second thing we have to take care of is Leo's digestive
system which is bunged up with mucus. He can't digest food properly and so has
to take enzymes when he eats. The treatment for preventing chest infections
involves antibiotics, inhalers and physiotherapy; he has immediate access to the
hospital if he develops a "fruity" cough. The treatment for his poor digestion
involves enzymes with all food, a high-fat diet, and laxatives when constipated.

    Although all of these things may only take a few minutes on their own, when
we added up the extra time involved in looking after Leo we were amazed to reach
a figure of approximately two hours per day, on top of the time it ordinarily
takes to care for a baby of his age. No wonder we are stressed out and worn out.

    It was recently announced by the public health minister, Yvette Cooper, that
all babies will now be screened at birth for CF. Believe it or not, only
approximately 18% of babies were offered this procedure, depending on the region
in which they lived.

    I had been told that the test only costs 50p so I rang the screening policy
team at the department of health who said it was "quite a cheap test" but they
had not been sure of the benefits of early identification in children until now.
Trials conducted in Wisconsin in the US (published in Paediatrics) have shown
that weight gain is an important factor in how babies do, but the government
wanted to wait for "high-quality evidence" before offering universal screening
because they had to balance the benefits of early identification in infants with
issues such as anxiety caused by false positives.

    I came off the phone and started giving Leo his bottle, felt his now chubby
legs and sobbed. Policy- making seems so far removed from the realities of
people's lives - before his diagnosis Leo was passive, lethargic, had no
appetite and often looked like death warmed up. How can there be any doubts
about the benefits of early identification?

    The good news is that Leo has been granted the higher rate of disability
living allowance, because he needs "attention with bodily functions". The snob
in me never imagined myself to be involved in receiving long-term state benefit.
I am not sure what we are supposed to spend it on. I feel like phoning the
benefits agency and saying: "Please miss, can we spend it on a holiday?"

    For more information about CF, call the Cystic Fibrosis Trust on 020-8464
7211


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2001


                             777 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               September 20, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Online Pages, Pg. 11

LENGTH: 772 words

HEADLINE: Science: Science update:

BYLINE: Tim Radford

BODY:


    A wind from the south Australia is to build a 900kW wind farm at the Mawson
base in Antarctica. It will supply 80% of the fuel needed for heating, lighting
and cooking at the base, according to the journal Chemistry and Industry. Right
now, the Australians ship 800,000 litres of diesel to the ice every year. "We
will only have to resupply the station with diesel every five years, say, rather
than every year," says Peter Gill, project engineer. It should also reduce the
risk of oil spills and save the nation pounds 110,000 a year. The turbines will
have to be tough: temperatures drop to -36degreesC, winds gust to 250km and
hour. Meanwhile, a refrigeration system at Mawson "keeping food fresh for up to
a year" has just won an award from the Institution of Engineers, Australia.

    New tales of blind mice

    You don't cut off the tails of blind mice: you may, however, inject genes
into the tail veins if you want to do something about diabetic retinopathy or
macular degeneration, say researchers at Johns Hopkins Wilmer eye institute in
the US. They found, in two studies, that gene therapy cut new blood vessel
growth by up to 90%. One test involved a gene for endostatin, which inhibits
blood vessel growth, the other substan, which increases cell survival. The genes
were injected either intothe tail veins or directly into the eye. Human patients
can be treated surgically, but this does nothing to alleviate the underlying
stimuli for the damaging blood vessel growth, according to Peter Campochiaro,
professor of ophthalmology. "Many patients still end up with severe loss of
vision." The two afflictions are the leading causes of blindness in young and
older people in the developed world. "While the substances we tested need
further study," he says "the results demonstrate that gene therapy might provide
a promising approach for treatment."


LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2001


                             783 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 30, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 11

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: DNA tests 'to predict decline in fertility'

BYLINE: James Meikle Health correspondent

BODY:


    Young women may in future be able to have a DNA test to predict when they
face the menopause and so help them to calculate the chances of raising a family
later in life, researchers said yesterday.

    Such information would allow women to plan their lives with greater
confidence and delay childbirth without worrying about the possibility of never
having a baby.

    Researchers in Utrecht and Wageningen in the Netherlands believe there is a
strong genetic influence on fertility after studies showed that women with a
family history of early menopause were more likely than others to follow suit.
They experienced declining fertility long before that.

    After studying the health and reproductive histories of thousands of women,
hundreds of them sisters, the team reported in the the journal Human
Reproduction that the age of menopause in the sisters might be 85% determined by
their genes, although environmental factors including smoking might be involved.

    They are reluctant to offer a perfect mathematical formula to determine the
exact age at which a women might stop menstruating, but said trends were
evident.

    Scientists in Utrecht are now trying to identify several genes thought to be
involved in controlling the menopause, which usually occurs in women around the
age of 50, but can take place between 40 and 60. They are studying material from
pairs of sisters who have undergone early or late menopause, and expect to have
the results in five years.

    Jan-Peter de Bruin, of Diakonessen hospital in Utrecht, said: "If we do
succeed in isolating the responsible genes, it is a distinct possibility that
women in the future will be able to have a DNA test that will predict their age
of menopause. "Women invest a lot of years in education and work to obtain a
professional career. It would be an advance if we can, at least, discriminate,
from this group, those who are at risk of early reproductive failure."

    He did not hold out much prospect of gene therapy correcting factors that
may lead to early menopause, because of the number of different genes involved.
But the team had previously found that lower rates of fertility, infertility and
irregular periods often preceded menopause as women's numbers of eggs fell.

    If researchers could understand what triggered egg-developing follicles and
slow down the rate at which they left the ovaries, the flow of eggs that could
be fertilised might last longer.

    Dr de Bruin said: "Probably the onset of decreasing fertility and the end of
fertility is also triggered by earlier thresholds in the numbers of eggs, so the
genetic factors that determine the age of menopause are likely to be the same
factors that determine the rate at which the eggs decrease.

    "This means that the women destined to have an early menopause are also
likely to be destined to become sub-fertile at an early age.

    "If our hypothesis is correct, then it would be sensible for a woman to make
herself aware of the age at which her female relatives have reached menopause:
if she wants a family, it could help her decide whether it is wise to postpone
motherhood too long."

    But he warned against women assuming late menopause meant they could safely
delay. Menopausal ages between relatives could still vary greatly, and even
"normal" women face rapidly declining chances of becoming pregnant after the
mid-30s, and an increasing chances of developing foetuses with chromosomal
abnormalities.


LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2001


                             788 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 2, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 301 words

HEADLINE: Oxford Biomedica seeks suicidal cells

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    Gene therapy firm Oxford Biomedica is to accelerate development of a new
treatment for prostate cancer, which works by inducing tumour cells to kill
themselves.

    The company, which revealed a 38% increase in its half-year losses to pounds
3.6m, also announced it close to sealing tie-ups with US biotech firms
Millennium and Biogen to help identify useful genes.

    Chief executive Alan Kingsman identified the group's prostate cancer
therapy, ProCaStat, as one of its most promising products. He said: "It's the
first product we're taking into the clinic using this particular type of
technology. We're hoping it will set the scene for a number of others."

    ProCaStat works by injecting a gene into the body which activates a drug
specifically in the prostate, in a much more targeted approach than traditional
cancer treatments. Clinical trials are to begin next year.

    The company is in talks with 15 biotech companies about providing services
to help identify genes which are active in particular diseases. Discussions with
Millennium and Biogen have progressed to "feasibility studies", with deals
possible later this year.

    Mr Kingsman, a former Oxford University scientist who co-founded the company
with his wife Susan, said Oxford Biomedica was enjoying new-found wealth
following a pounds 35.5m fundraising exercise earlier this year. "We've always
gone hand to mouth with a fundraising every year," he said. "We now find
ourselves in a position not many biotech companies are in - we've got four
years' cash in the bank."

    Biotech analyst Julie Simmonds of Beeson Gregory re-affirmed her "buy"
recommendation, saying she expected the firm's funds to pay for more staff,
deals and an increase in the business's scale over the coming months. The shares
rose 3.5p to 33.5p.


LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2001


                             794 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 30, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 27

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: ML Labs cuts drug portfolio

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    ML Laboratories, the biotech firm controlled by flamboyant Manchester
millionaire Kevin Leech, is planning to slash its drug development portfolio in
a last-ditch attempt to regain stock market credibility.

    The company said it was planning an "increased degree of specialisation" as
it announced an 86% surge in half-year losses and revealed setbacks to products
for HIV-Aids and cancer.

    ML's biggest shareholder is chairman Mr Leech, who owns Land's End, John
O'Groats and the Needles Pleasure Park.

    Mr Leech, who has a 48% stake in the company, has lost money on internet
investments and ML has been running short of cash.

    To counter its funding difficulties, ML has secured a cash injection of
pounds 17.5m from US investment firm Paul Capital, which will fund trials of
Adept, the company's gel to prevent post-operative adhesions.

    ML's chief executive, Stuart Sim, said: "By concentrating on a smaller
number of areas, we'll reduce our research and development spending and move
closer to profitability."

    Analysts have criticised the firm for becoming a "biotech incubator", with
scores of unrelated projects. Merchant bank NM Rothschild is advising the
company on its strategic options.

    ML said it was yet to decide which projects to sell. Industry experts
believe the company's gene therapy arm, Cobra, would be better off with backing
from a larger organisation, while its Extraneal kidney dialysis solution could
be sold to its development partner, Baxter Healthcare.

    An attempt to float the firm's Clickhaler asthma inhalers arm failed earlier
this year. The company revealed yesterday that it was struggling to recruit
patients for trials of its HIV-Aids treatment, Viraldon, which involves
inserting a tube into the stomach, and a drug for prostate cancer has been
disappointing in clinical tests.

    The shares, 190p last year, edged up 1.5p to 72.5p.


LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2001


                             812 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 26, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1432 words

HEADLINE: The biotech buzzword is fusion: Born of cloning and enthused by genome
mapping, Europe's euros 75bn industry is forging alliances to take on US rivals

BYLINE: Andrew Clark and Terry Macalister

BODY:


    In bright spring weather, Amsterdam's canal-side cafes proved tempting for
Europe's leading biotechnology entrepreneurs, in town this week for the annual
Bio-Deal conference. The mood among delegates was relaxed - there were even some
attempts at jokes. Michael Ade, director of German company Ingenium, recited the
names of his firm's menagerie of deformed mice - Sumo was genetically altered to
be vastly overweight, while "Arnold mighty mouse" and "Claudia beauty mouse"
were luckier recipients of Ingenium's gene fiddling.

    "These are murine Adams and Eves," he said. "If you take the Bible
literally, those two are the first examples of cloning."

    Such quips are not to everyone's taste. The public is deeply sceptical, if
not angry, about using animals as drugs factories, and biotech is struggling to
win popular approval generally. In a Eurobarometer survey last year, only 41% of
the 16,000 people polled agreed that biotech would improve the quality of life
over the next 20 years.

    Those within the industry are in confident form, however, having enjoyed
unprecedented success in 2000. Ernst & Young's annual snapshot of life sciences,
published yesterday, calculates that European biotech raised 6.5bn (pounds 4bn)
last year, against 1.1bn in 1999, and the total capitalisation of public
companies in the sector leapt 108% to 75bn.

    "European biotech had a great year in 2000," says the report's lead author
Glenn Crocker. "Every record which could have been broken has been broken.

    "We have now got a fundamentally sound industry, with a set of companies
which are actually delivering products - which is, of course, what they're there
for."

    Setting the pace

    Britain is setting the pace, accounting for five of the continent's top 10
biotech companies. Celltech and Shire are in the FTSE 100 index, producing both
medicines and profits. Of Europe's 105 public biotech companies, 48 are in
Britain. Germany has a larger number of private companies but most of these are
small, early-stage enterprises.

    Last year's surge was driven by enthusiasm about the human genome project,
which mapped the body's genetic structure for the first time. Biotech also
gained on the back of the dot.com boom, as anything hi-tech became fashionable.
The recent downturn in the stock market has depressed valuations, although
biotech has suffered less than internet enterprise.

    Despite this healthy picture, alarm bells are just beginning to ring. There
is increasing concern that US biotechnology is pulling away from Europe's. Mr
Crocker says: "By and large, you could have an almost identical biotech company,
and it will be valued at almost twice as much in the US as in Europe."

    In the conference hall at Amsterdam's luxury Krasnopolsky Hotel, overlooking
the city's Dam Square, there was an audible intake of breath when one British
firm, Vertex, mentioned that it had more than Dollars 700m (pounds 476) cash in
the bank after choosing to float in New York, rather than London.

    "We're an Oxbridge company," explained vice-president Iain Buchanan. "We're
based in Cambridge, Massachusetts and Oxford, in the UK."

    Vertex's bank balance outstrips the wildest dreams of its European rivals.
America is operating on a different scale - one US firm, Amgen, which has made a
fortune from kidney drug Epogen, is capitalised at more than 70bn - as much as
the entire European biotech industry.

    In order to bridge this vast transatlantic gap, European firms are keen to
form alliances, gaining strength in numbers and critical mass. This week's
Bio-Deal conference was typical - executives took turns to give 25-minute
presentations showcasing their products and technology, in the hope that someone
in the room may be a compatible partner.

    Antibodies

    British firm KS Biomedix was first up, detailing its method of capturing
antibodies from sheep, while Pharmagene explained its technique of testing drugs
in human tissue, rather than using animals.

    A German company, Micromet, then explained its "Bites" - bispecific t-cell
engagers, which activate helpful t-cells in the blood in the area of cancer
tumours. "Bites promise to reshape immunotherapy," said vice-president Christian
Itin.

    Some companies were explicit in their needs - gene therapy specialist
Austrian Nordic declared that it wanted a partner to inject precisely 9.7m.
Thrombogenics, which takes advantage of Belgian government grants because it
carries out research in Flemish-speaking areas, urged someone to step forward to
fund phase-three trials of its drug for heart attacks.

    Nearly every speaker kept to the conference's 25-minute limit for
presentations - a reflection, according to one delegate, of increasing
professionalism in the industry.

    There were few questions from the floor, because the real business of the
event was behind closed doors - in a corridor of "partnering rooms", where
executives could meet in private to thrash out deals.

    Most companies can boast a relatively healthy financial position, having
taken advantage of last year's boom to raise funds from investors. Ernst & Young
reckons 60% of firms have at least four years' cash in the bank, while 87% have
at least 12 months' money.

    This means they can be selective, with less need to sell their science to
multina tional pharmaceutical corporations. Biotech pundit Mike Ward says: "The
reasons people are looking for partners are much less defensive. The desperate
need for cash is no longer there - it's more strategic." One delegate commented:
"A year ago, the attitude was that any old deal would do the job. Now, people
can afford to be more discerning."

    The number of tie-ups between biotech companies leapt 41% to 539 last year -
including 54 mergers or acquisitions, and 403 strategic alliances. Yet for many
in the industry, that is still not enough.

    Mr Crocker suggests that the only way for Europe to reach a level comparable
to the US would be to form a hi-tech stock market along the lines of New York's
Nasdaq. The continental equivalent, Easdaq, has failed to take off.

    He says: "Pooling resources has got to be the way forward. Europe is far too
fragmented.

    "There are some people who might ask whether it matters that the US is
extending its lead. It certainly matters to governments, and it matters to
employees."

    One of Britain's best known biotech entrepreneurs, Sir Chris Evans, shares
that concern. He told the Institute of Directors in London yesterday that there
was no reason why Britain could not catch up with the US - but it would take at
least 20 years. "We have got a quality of science that is on par with America
but what they have is a huge venture capital community, entrepreneurial
management and a fantastically vibrant stock market in Nasdaq," he said.

    Dot.com bubble

    Venture capital firms in the US were ploughing in two to three times as much
cash at ever stage of development: "While our companies might raise Dollars 70m
they will raise Dollars 470m at one go."

    Now chairman of the incubator Merlin Bioscience, Sir Chris complained of the
British view that biotech was little different from the dot.com bubble. A young
broker, he said, had refused to support his plan to back a biotech venture into
a dot.com shell, which had already raised pounds 40m but had no operations. The
broker said that biotech was no different from internet businesses. "That young
broker did not know his arse from his elbow. I hope he is in the audience," he
told Britain's leading directors.

    Three years ago, the biotech world was rocked by the near-collapse of
British Biotech, one of the industry's standard-bearers. This year, Dolly the
sheep's creator, PPL Therapeutics, faces a funding crisis. But the background is
very different - this time, confidence in the industry is much less fragile.
Rather than battling to stay alive, companies are competing to create the first
pan-European biotech multinational.

    Biotech by numbers

    Market capitalisation of leading European biotech companies, to end 2000

    Serono. . . . . . . . . . . . . .Switzerland. . .16.4bn

    Elan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Ireland. . . . . . .13.9bn

    Qiagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . .Netherlands. . .5.4bn

    Celltech. . . . . . . . . . . .UK. . . . . . . . . . . .5.1bn

    Shire. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .UK. . . . . . . . . . . .4.3bn

    Actelion. . . . . . . . . . . .Switzerland. . .2.3bn

    Galen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .UK. . . . . . . . . . . .2.1bn

    Cambridge Antibody. .UK. . . . . . . . . . . .2.09bn

    Source: Ernst & Young


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2001


                             817 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 19, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 17

LENGTH: 615 words

HEADLINE: Health: The trouble with Leo: Mandy Rudczenko , above, knew her baby
was ill. But she was completely unprepared for the diagnosis: cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Mandy Rudczenko

BODY:


    At four months of age, Leo started producing oil out of his bottom - it
flowed out like pure sunflower oil when I changed his nappy. At first I thought
I'd been eating too many curries. "Has anyone else witnessed this?" asked the
health visitor. They hadn't. I was alone with the image of it - and the worry.

    When Leo was born he weighed 9lb 9oz. "A real bruiser," announced the
midwife proudly. "What is she so proud of," I remember thinking. "She hasn't
just gone through 22 hours labour to have him sucked out with a sterilised Dyson
attachment." I spent the next few days smugly telling everyone that Leo would
soon outgrow his carrycot.

    At three months, Leo weighed 10lb 3oz and had plenty of room in his
carrycot. Other babies were getting bigger, but Leo seemed to be shrinking and
my heart was breaking.

    All his symptoms were put down to a bout of brochialitis at the age of five
weeks. This meant an eye-opening stay in hospital; breastfeeding two hourly with
no meals provided. The consul tant was convinced Leo would "sort himself out",
and said he had "seen a lot worse". I lay awake at night, raking up my limited
knowledge of biology to try and work out what could be wrong - worms? In my
heart of hearts I knew something wasn't right. I reported the oily nappies to
the GP, who said: "Classic symptoms of cystic fibrosis . . . but don't worry,
I'm sure it's nothing serious." Yes, I did go home and worry my socks off and
yes I did go home and grab every book with any fleeting reference to CF. That
was a mistake: ". . . but now CF sufferers can live up to the age of 30 . . .";
". . . are generally unhealthy . . ."; ". . . all males are sterile . . ."

    I cried on the phone to various people, who all reassured me he must be OK -
no babies had slipped through the Guthrie heel prick test (done at birth) for
years. I relayed my horror to the consultant who called Leo "fatty" and offered
to arrange a "sweat test", which is the diagnostic tool for CF. The technician
cheerily informed me that they assume the results will be normal; any problems
and the whole world is phoned. I walked away and knew they would phone.

    Finally, Leo is getting the treatment he needs and is starting to outgrow
his carrycot. Everyone is being very positive, the medical team are the best
thing since sliced bread; but every now and again my heart breaks.

    From a factual point of view, CF is an inherited disease which results in
too much mucus being produced in certain organs in the body, mainly the lungs
and the digestive system. Hence Leo's constant cough and his "oil-rig" bottom -
the mucus was stopping him from absorbing fat. The oil became apparent at four
months when I introduced bottle feeding; apparently the fat in powdered milk is
harder to digest than in breast milk.

    CF is the UK's most common life-threatening disease, affecting more than
7,000 people. Genetically, both parents must be carrying the defective gene that
causes CF, but even then you must be unlucky: you then have a one in four chance
of your child being born with the disease.

    I sometimes wonder: "What if we had had sex the night before or the next
night?" The sexual lottery might not have thrown up CF . . . But I've also come
to realise that Leo's genetic combination also contains . . . Leo. His placid,
patient, smiley warmth.

    We have seen the funny side: "life begins at 40", "he won't have to worry
about a pension". We have to be positive for his sake; in 10 years' time, gene
therapy may mean a more normal life expectancy - Leo can then expect what most
of us take for granted.

    For more information, call the Cystic Fibrosis Trust on 020-8464 7211.


LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2001


                             820 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 18, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 149 words

HEADLINE: Gene bank swollen

BODY:


    Gene therapy specialist Oxford Biomedica has lured several new European
institutions on to its shareholder register, taking in a total of pounds 32.5m
from its latest fundraising despite choppy markets.

    The company announced last month it had secured pounds 27m in a placing of
shares underwritten by Beeson Gregory. An additional open offer raised pounds
5.5m, well short of the maximum pounds 10m but hailed as a good result
nonetheless.

    Alan Kingsman, the chief executive, said: "We certainly didn't expect to get
the whole lot in the current market. We're absolutely thrilled with what we've
got."

    The result is that Oxford Biomedica has four years' cash in the bank, enough
to see it through to profitability, according to the more optimistic forecasts.

    The company's shares slipped 2.5p to 54p.

    PPL Therapeutics last week pulled its proposed fundraising.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2001


                             826 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 12, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Woman's skull drilled during radical gene therapy to fight Alzheimer's

BYLINE: James Meek Science correspondent

BODY:


    An ex- teacher, aged 60, has become the first person to be given gene
therapy to fight the effects of Alzheimer's, in a procedure which involved
drilling a hole in her skull and injecting cells inside her brain.

    The woman, who has not been named, underwent the 11-hour operation last week
at a hospital attached to the University of San Diego in California. She was
discharged two days later, but it will be at least a month before scientists
know whether the procedure has been effective.

    The operation was masterminded by neurologist Mark Tuszynski and carried out
by neurosurgeon Hoi Sang U, leaders of a team which has been working toward
trying the technique in humans for 12 years. There is likely to be scepticism in
the wider Alzheimer's research commu nity at the value of such a radical
approach.

    "This approach is not targeting the disease itself," warned Declan
McLoughlin, a lecturer in old age psychiatry at King's College London.

    "Although there is some scientific rationale for doing it, you could say a
lot of current work has superseded it," he said.

    The procedure targets a thumbnail-sized region of the brain called the
nucleus basalis of Meynert, which produces a substance called acetylcholine,
critical in modulating thought and memory.

    The San Diego team's ap proach is to take a sample of skin cells from the
patient months before surgery and insert a gene in them which expresses a
chemical called nerve growth factor (NGF).

    These cells are multiplied in culture, tested to see that they are producing
the right amount of NGF, and then in jected into the nucleus basalis with a fine
needle put through a hole in the patient's skull.

    Critics say drugs already exist which target the lack of acetylcholine in
the brain of Alzheimer's patients.

    * Birth defects in babies of women who take medicine for epilepsy while they
are preg nant are caused by drugs and not by epilepsy, according to new research
reported in the US, writes Sarah Boseley. The study, in the New England Journal
of Medicine today, claims the idea that the genetic abnormalities which cause
the epilepsy are then passed on to the foetus, is wrong.


LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2001


                             827 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 9, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: Comment & Analysis: How to live longer: To defeat the ageing process,
we must overcome our fears of genetic engineering and set to work

BYLINE: Johnjoe McFadden

BODY:


    This year's Reith lecturer, Professor Tom Kirkwood, claims ageing is
"neither inevitable nor necessary" and invites us to "prepare for the longevity
revolution". While, as he states, we are not programmed to die, it is also true
that our genes have not been designed for long life.

    Most of our ancestors were hunter-gathers who led short and brutal lives
before falling prey to disease, starvation, predators or competitors. Their
genes evolved to inhabit bodies for just a couple of decades before being passed
on to their offspring.

    The fate of the bodies left behind was of little concern to genes that had
already fled into the next generation. Defects that showed up only in later
years, leading to cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's or stroke, would have
escaped the attentions of natural selection. Long-term maintenance and repair
was never a priority.

    Our genes haven't changed. They are still designed for the short term, no
matter how carefully we maintain and service our bodies. Ageing is a genetic
disease. To cure it, we will need to turn short-term genes into long-term genes
and this will be accomplished only by genetic engineering and gene therapy.

    Ever since the first microbe crawled out of the primordial soup, Mother
Nature has operated a strict policy of breeding from only the fit and healthy.
The vast majority of creatures born into this world have departed from it
without leaving any descendants. For many it might have been just bad luck, but
others inherited bad genes that led to illness, frailty or plain lack of sex
appeal.

    Darwin described this motor of evolution but lamented its "clumsy, wasteful,
blundering, low and horribly cruel" action. His cousin, Francis Galton, and
others proposed to replace human natural selection with breeding programmes to
"improve the racial qualities of future generations".

    This "eugenics" movement was openly racist with the aim of ensuring that the
"feeble nations" give way before the "nobler varieties of mankind".

    In Germany, the 1934 racial hygiene law led to the enforced sterilisation of
more than 80,000 people considered "unworthy". US eugenics policies between 1907
and 1960 resulted in the enforced sterilisation of at least 60,000 individuals.
Even in liberal Sweden, more than 62,000 people (mostly women) with handicaps,
or considered "undesirable", were sterilised against their will.

    With such a terrible history, it is perhaps not surprising that many fear
the human genome will become a eugenicist's toolkit. But there is a huge
difference. Whereas eugenics seeks to restrict fertility by enforced or coerced
sterilisation, gene therapy seeks simply to correct gene defects that make us
sick.

    The aim is not to produce Galton's "highly bred human race" but to eliminate
genes that cause disease, including the infirmities of old age. Just as vaccines
have conquered smallpox, gene therapy may eliminate genetic diseases like cystic
fibrosis and muscular dystrophy and, eventually, the most common of them all,
the ageing process.

    Hardly a day goes by without Prince Charles warning us of the dangers of
genetic engineering. Yet the human genome has revealed that nature is the
busiest genetic engineer. More that 200 of our genes appear to have been
captured from bacteria and much of the rest of the genome is a junkyard filled
with the corpses of retrovirus and other parasites that have been hopping in and
out of our chromosomes for millennia.

    Comparing our chromosomes to those of other species, we can see that in
addition to inserting new genes, nature has reshuffled, duplicated and deleted
large segments of our chromosomes making about one major rearrangement every
million years.

    So if nature is not averse to a bit of genetic tinkering, why should we be
so wary? With the decline of religion, the genome seems to have emerged as the
secular equivalent of the soul: genes are sacred. Yet DNA is not spiritual. DNA
comes out of your cells looking like strands of slimy cotton. You can store it
in the freezer, post it to your friends; you can even eat it without suffering
any ethical crisis. Genes are just bits of us and gene therapy is just another
form of medicine. Fixing a broken arm is not considered to interfere with God's
plan so why should fixing a broken gene be any different?

    Of course any technology can be abused. But anyone wishing to use the human
genome to make a super-race would not know where to start. Identifying those
genes whose defects cause disease is a difficult enough task; unravelling the
genetic and environmental interactions that lead to complex characters like good
looks, physical strength or intelligence is far harder.

    It would be foolish to by-pass the potential benefits of gene therapy
because of unreasonable fears of its misuse. A surgeon could stab us in the
heart but we trust him not to: we don't ban scalpels from operating theatres.

    If we really wish to banish genetic diseases, including the ageing process,
then we must overcome our fears of dabbling in our own genome.

    Johnjoe McFadden is professor of molecular genetics at the University of
Surrey


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2001


                             830 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 20, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 26

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for Syngenta

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    Syngenta, the world's leading agribusiness company, says it has been
besieged by hundreds of requests for access to its map of the genetic structure
of rice since completing the project in January.

    The group, which yesterday announced a 19% increase in annual profits to
Dollars 450m (pounds 315m), unravelled the 430m-letter DNA code to design more
nourishing, pest resistant strains of rice.

    It has pledged to make the information available free to scientists helping
subsistence farmers. Syngenta is reviewing applications for access from hundreds
of academics who believe the information should be available to all.

    Syngenta's head of research and technology, David Evans, said: "The progress
we've made with the rice genome really knocks your socks off - we completed the
project in just 18 months."

    The first product arising from the map, a grain of rice with "markers"
displaying different traits, is likely to be on the market within three years.

    Syngenta's rice project has alarmed environmental groups such as Action Aid,
which point out that rice is a staple for half the planet's population.
Charities are concerned about the power multinationals such as Syngenta could
exercise over the world's food supply.

    Despite its increase in profits, Syngenta revealed a 4% fall in second-half
sales due to wet weather in Europe and surplus crops elsewhere. Revenue from its
crop protection business, which makes pesticides, was down 11% to Dollars
2.16bn. Chief executive Michael Pragnell said: "Very wet autumn weather affected
winter cropping - that hit growers right across Europe."

    Elsewhere after three years of good harvests, prices had softened and
farmers had lacked the confidence to invest in chemicals to boost yields.

    Mr Pragnell said he expected little relief this year: "We're not planning on
any overall market improvement."

    The firm was established last year through a combination of the
agribusinesses of AstraZeneca and Novartis.

    The merger is likely to create cost savings of Dollars 525m by 2004 - partly
through the loss of 3,000 jobs.

    Special report on the GM debate at guardian.co.uk/gmdebate


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2001


                             831 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 17, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 30

LENGTH: 488 words

HEADLINE: Dolly the sheep firm seeks pounds 45m

BYLINE: John Cassy

BODY:


    PPL Therapeutics, the company that cloned Dolly the sheep, yesterday said it
would brave the turbulence of the stock markets by initiating a pounds 45m
fundraising.

    The Edinburgh-based firm said the cash would be used to develop new
products, fund further clinical trials and provide further working capital until
its main drug hits the market in 2004. It will also enable PPL to buy a second
farm in New Zealand and expand its production of sheep flocks.

    PPL is trying to raise money at a tricky time for biotech firms. Scottish
heart valve firm AorTech was last week forced to pull a pounds 64m share issue
but gene therapy firm Oxford Biomedia has said it will press ahead with plans to
raise up to pounds 37m. "The markets are difficult but we wouldn't have launched
this if we weren't confident of getting there," managing director Dr Ron James
said.

    "The fundraising has been flagged to the market for some time and investors
know we need more money. They're saying that they'd rather we just got on and
raised the cash, rather than hang around."

    Shares in PPL slipped 8.5p to 148p. PPL has just pounds 2.45m in the bank
and analysts have long expected PPL to launch the fundraising. Full details of
the price and number of shares to be placed are expected to be announced by
stockbroker Deutsche Bank on April 10. The shares are likely to be placed at a
substantial discount to the current price.

    News of the fundraising accompanied PPL's results for the year-ending
December 2000, showing losses had narrowed from pounds 14.4m to pounds 11.2m.
Research and development costs were pounds 10m.

    Turnover was just pounds 290,000 because PPL is in a developmental stage,
although it has won a Dollars 3.1m contract with the US Government's Defence
Advanced Research Projects Agency to engineer cattle able to produce polyclonal
antibodies.

    PPL is pinning its hopes on an emphysema product called alpha-1-antitrypsin
(rATT), which is being developed in conjunction with Bayer. The product is
expected to reach the market in 2004, enabling PPL to break even by 2005.

    Further money will be spent on trials of two products, one of which has the
potential to treat people with pancreatitis and the other which may be able to
be used in surgery to stop bleeding or seal wounds.

    Dr James said that by purchasing a second farm in New Zealand PPL would be
able to split its sheep, reducing the risk of them all being wiped out by any
infection.

    All PPL's sheep are kept in quarantine on arable land outside Edinburgh and
are not at risk from the outbreak of foot and mouth disease, Dr James added.

    "For the last nine years we have run a quarantine farm and all staff who
visit the site shower and change clothes. Theoretically it should be the safest
farm in Britain."

    Dolly is quarantine at the Roslin Research institute where she was born the
world's first cloned mammal in 1996.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2001


                             832 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 15, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1412 words

HEADLINE: Health: Trial and error: Medical research needs human guinea pigs. But
the news this week of patients irreversibly damaged by a new treatment for
Parkinson's disease has highlighted the risks. When is it worth it?

BYLINE: Sophie Petit-Zeman

BODY:


    Just how ill would you need to be before agreeing to take an experimental
treatment, the risks of which were unknown? You might consider, if you were
suffering from a terminal illness, that the possibility of a miracle cure -
however slim - would make the chance one worth taking. But what if you had a
disease that was painful or debilitating, but unlikely to kill you? How do you
assess potential risks when the whole point of the treatment is that you are the
guinea pig?

    Earlier this week it was announced that a trial of a new treatment for
Parkinson's disease had, for some patients, gone horribly wrong. A group of
volunteers in the US had foetal cells transplanted directly into their brains,
in the hope that they would survive and produce dopamine, the "chemical
messenger" missing in patients suffering from Parkinson's.

    But the researchers were horrified to discover that instead of being helped
by the experiment, a small number of the patients got much worse. The cells
appear to have gone into overdrive, producing too much dopamine and causing the
patients to writhe and jerk their heads uncontrollably. Unlike many experimental
procedures, scientists have no way of reversing this particular treatment. The
experiment has been stopped completely, prompting despair in many sufferers who
hoped it offered a possibility for a cure.

    It is a sobering moment for those involved in trials at the cutting edge of
medical research. But the results should not affect the will of the medical
profession to continue experimenting on new procedures, says Sir Iain Chalmers,
director of the UK Cochrane Centre, an international organisation that collects
evidence on experimental treatments, and a leading expert on clinical trials.

    Chalmers agrees that all trials are risky but stresses that the public need
to know they are important. He sees the climate of fear which surrounds them as
extremely unhelpful. "Trials have to go through enormous scrutiny procedures
before they're launched. But the whole enterprise is tarnished because people so
often don't understand how they work," he said. "There's a perceived need to
protect people who are inside trials, yet it's the 99 out of a 100 who aren't in
them who are at risk."

    So convinced is Chalmers of the potential benefits of experimental
treatments, he carries a card asking to be entered into any clinical trial for
which he may be suitable. "I'm afraid it's all a case of hedging my bets.
There's overwhelming evidence that people in trials do better than those outside
them, whether they're receiving the test treatment or the placebo, probably
simply because they get better care."

    His faith is borne out by Mary Combe, 80, who has been involved in Progres,
a trial for a new treatment for stroke victims, for the last 5 years. After
suffering a mini-stroke in 1996, her GP encouraged her to join the trial to find
out whether conventional blood pressure-reducing drugs decreased the danger of
further problems in high-risk patients, even if their blood pressure was not
problematically high. While not testing a new drug, the application of this
treatment in this area was untested. Its results will be released in June.

    Combe's experience has been a positive one. "I had no doubts about doing the
trial," she says, "and went to the hospital every few months. I enjoyed my
outings and had superb care. I was called back just yesterday to see how I was
getting on."

    And it was that routine visit that may prove so important for Combe. "I'd
had a lump in my breast for ages, which I'd ignored. But as I was going, I
thought I'd mention it, and the doctor gave me a good going over. He'll help get
me seen quickly now."

    Her doctor and trial co-ordinator, Richard Lindley of Edinburgh's Western
General Hospital, says it is just this kind of discovery that can make being
involved in trials so beneficial. "You're seen regularly by people with more
time than usual, you chat, and get the chance to pick things up and deal with
them early."

    But clinical trials remain highly risky, and public concern is
understandable. In May, the US government produced a report which revealed that
a number of research institutes were not taking risk and ethical considerations
fully into account, and research was suspended in some of the country's top
centres including Duke University and the University of California, Los Angeles.

    An example of the kind of thing that can go wrong is illustrated by the
recent suspension of gene therapy trials run by Dr Jeffrey Isner, a top
researcher at Tufts University in Massachusetts. He received a warning letter
from the US food and drug administration last year because he had enrolled a
patient into a study to see whether a gene for vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) could help grow new blood vessels in patients with heart disease
or other circulatory problems.

    The administration found that Dr Isner had included in his trial one patient
with lung cancer and that the VEGF gene may have fed this man's tumour. With
gene therapy trials likely to become big business, clearer standards to con trol
them are urgently needed.

    Facts on the number of people involved in trials have been incredibly
difficult to come by, says Chalmers, because there is no mandatory requirement
to register experiments. All trials carried out within the NHS must now be
registered, but many still escape the lists, such as some of the experiments
that advertise for volunteers in newspapers, and those arranged between drug
companies and doctors outside the NHS.

    In some cases, in fact, trials have been double-counted, leading to absurd
situations where there have been more apparent trials than there were patients,
because the same trial was being differently reported.

    New regulations should enable experimental treatments to be better
monitored, provide accurate figures of the number of volunteers taking part, and
reduce publication bias in favour of positive trial results, which are currently
more likely to be published than those which are negative or equivocal.

    Alongside clinical trials which participants join knowingly, there are also
those to which patients may be unwittingly entered at critical times. These
include the current third interna tional stroke trial, also being co-ordinated
in Edinburgh by Lindley. Aimed at ascertaining whether a "clot busting" drug,
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA), increases the number of people
who survive without disability after a stroke, the risk is that such drugs can
increase bleeding within the brain, and could cause death if used in people
where this was a problem.

    As Lindley explains, people are carefully screened before they are admitted
to the trial to ensure, as far as possible, that this risk is not relevant to
them. Strict criteria of this sort have enabled the trial to go ahead with an
unusual "waiver of consent" rule. This means that doctors can enter patients for
the trial without their consent or that of relatives, if it cannot be obtained
quickly enough to allow them to receive the drug during the relatively short
"window" after the stroke when it is thought to work.

    While this trial sounds scary - patients being given drugs which might
hasten their death, and without being asked first - the need for it is clear.
Every year thousands of people in the UK survive, severely disabled, after a
stroke. The value of rt-PA is unproven, but some doctors are so convinced of its
benefits that they use it despite a lack of trial-based evidence. Lindley says
that trials are vital to stop the "postcode lottery" of stroke care. As he
explains: "We must do the proper trial, find out if the treatment really works,
and then make the drug available, or not, on this basis. If you have a stroke
in, say, Glasgow or Newcastle, you may be given these drugs because some doctors
there are confident that they work."

    While the failure of the Parkinson's trial is devastating for those affected
and their families, Chalmers says that he would have participated in the trial
himself. In the sense that any results, even negative ones, are invaluable, he
persists in viewing this experiment as "a tremendous success". "This trial is
important because it urges humility on those who make claims without careful
studies," he says. "The public need to understand that we can't simply rely on
what works in the lab working in the clinic."


LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2001


                             833 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 13, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 177 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapist raises pounds 37m for new products

BODY:


    Gene therapy firm Oxford BioMedica has braved choppy waters to tap
shareholders for up to pounds 37m, which will fund trials for cancer and
Parkinson's treatments and the opening of an offshoot in California, writes
Andrew Clark

    Chief executive Alan Kingsman has been on a whirlwind tour of 70
institutions in three weeks to drum up support. Sentiment is poor in the sector,
as shown by the failure of a pounds 64m cash call by heart valves specialist
Aortech last week.

    The money includes pounds 27m which is already in the bag, through a placing
of shares underwritten by broker Beeson Gregory and NM Rothschild. The firm
hopes to raise pounds 10m through an open offer at 55p a share.

    Professor Kingsman said: "We're delighted to have got our money but we've
had to see a lot of people to do it."

    Some of the money will be used to explore new uses for the company's two
lead products - breast cancer drug MetXia and colorectal cancer treatment
TroVax. The funds will also pay for clinical trials of a Parkinson's drug,
ProSavin.


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2001


                             837 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 6, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 23

LENGTH: 52 words

HEADLINE: City briefing: Biotech firm plans listing

BODY:


    British biotech firm Oxford Biomedica aims to raise pounds 20m-pounds 30m
this month ahead of its move to a full London Stock Exchange listing, a company
spokesman said yesterday. Oxford Biomedica, which is working on gene therapy
treatment, has already secured interest from institutional shareholders.


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2001


                             840 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 27, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 9

LENGTH: 265 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy 'may halt cancer'

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:


    Some of the most common forms of cancer could be nipped in the bud by a gene
therapy being developed in the United States, scientists said yesterday.

    Following dramatic success preventing tumours in mice, researchers plan to
begin clinical trials in the next 12 months in humans.

    Scientists at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia have focused on a
gene called FHIT, which appears to play a central role in preventing cancer
developing in healthy cells.

    The FHIT gene lies on one of the most fragile regions of the human third
chromosome.

    It is easily deleted by carcinogens like tobacco smoke and its disappearance
is often the earliest genetic signal that a cell is about to turn cancerous.

    The mouse FHIT gene is very similar to that of humans. Researchers in
Philadelphia created a mutant mouse, born with one FHIT gene missing, which
invariably shed the other gene and developed cancer when given a certain
carcinogen.

    But when mice fed the carcinogen were given viruses modified to carry spare
copies of the FHIT gene, the number who developed cancer fell sharply.

    In one group of mice, after gene therapy, only three out of eight had
tumours. The research is reported in today's online edition of the proceedings
of the US National Academy of Science.

    The mice were expected to develop stomach cancer. One of the things which
astonished scientists was that the virus carrying the "good" gene was able to
survive and deliver its cargo through the stomach. Getting replacement genes
into the right cells is the hardest aspect of gene therapy.


LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2001


                             850 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 5, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 19

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: Biomedica in gene pact with academics

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    Drug development company Oxford Biomedica is to get exclusive access to a
gene associated with nerve repair under an agreement with a team of scientists
at King's College London.

    The company believes the gene could be crucial in developing treatment for
spinal injuries and for nerve damage in diseases such as diabetes.

    The gene, known as RAR2, was identified by a team at King's College headed
by Professor Malcolm Maden. The college has patent protection for the gene,
which means it can decide who carries out research on it.

    In a deal to be announced today, Oxford Biomedica is paying pounds 180,000
to King's College for access to the gene. To help cement a long-term
relationship, King's is investing pounds 150,000 in Oxford Biomedica shares at
73p each.

    Alan Kingsman, chief executive of Oxford Biomedica, said: "The combination
of our technologies opens up some very exciting commercial opportunities and
sits well with Biomedica's increasing activity in the field of neurological
diseases."

    Biomedica specialises in gene therapy - adding genes to the body to attack
diseases. Its technology allows genes to be delivered to specific areas.

    King's is one of a number of institutions that have obtained patents over
genes - a controversial practice which critics say amounts to a claim of
ownership over parts of the human body.

    King's College will get royalties on any medicines launched by Biomedica
using RAR2. The company has two products in clinical trials: MetXia, for breast
and ovarian cancer, and TroVax, for colorectal cancer.

    *NMT, the Scottish medical devices company, is to announce that its
catheters will be manufactured by an Indian company, Eastern Medikit, for a
three-year period.


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2001


                             852 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 1, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Science Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1103 words

HEADLINE: Science : A gleam in the eye: The tetrachromat sees a vivid world
unavailable to most of us, writes David Hambling

BYLINE: David Hambling

BODY:


    There is more to colour than meets the eye. We learn at school that there
are three primary colours, and the rest of the rainbow can be made by mixing
these. Red light plus green light gives yellow, blue plus green gives cyan and
so on. This may be true for most of us, but it now seems that there is a small
group of people for whom yellow is one colour and "red plus green" is quite
different. These people are called tetrachromats, whose unusual combination of
genes may give them an extra dimension of colour.

    Colour vision is provided by cone cells in the retina. Normally, there are
three different types of cone, each sensitive to a different range of colour:
red, green and blue. The way we perceive colour depends on the combination of
the responses of the three different types, giving us three dimensions of
colour. Colour television uses three colour guns, and colour printers need three
inks to cater for the full range of our trichromatic colour perception.

    The genes for green and red pigment are both located on the X-chromosome. It
sometimes happens that instead of having one of each, the X-chromosome has a
green only, or two different greens. The red is lacking and the result is
colour-deficiency. The individuals with these genes have only two dimensions of
colour vision, blue and green. Others end up with red chromosomes and no green.
These people are dichromatic, and the most obvious effect is that they
distinguish fewer colours at one end of the spectrum. Blue and turquoise, lime
and emerald green are all the same as far as they are concerned.

    There are also a few individuals who have no cone cells and are completely
colour-blind. We all have rod cells, which provide vision in low lighting and
are not sensitive to colour. This is why we see the twilight world in shades of
grey. People with no cone cells see the world this way permanently.

    Women have two X-chromosomes, so if a colour is missing on one they have a
spare. Men have only one X-chromosome and so are much more likely to be colour
blind. Something like 8% of men have some abnormality in colour vision.

    Another possible effect of having two X-chromosomes is that a woman who is a
carrier for colour-blindness might have one X-chromosome with red and green and
one with green and a different green. Her son, who has only the two green
pigments, is colour blind. But the woman herself may have cone cells for blue,
red, green and the extra green. Instead of having the usual three dimensions of
colour she might have four. She would be a tetrachromat.

    Drs Gabriele Jordan and John Mollon of the University of Cambridge have been
trying for some years to confirm the existence of tetrachromats, with good
theoretical reasons. Squirrel monkeys are generally dichromatic, but research
carried out in 1986 showed that many females possess genes that make them
trichromatic, giving them a wider range of colours than their companions.

    Dr Jordan has tested a range of volunteers including a group of women with
colour-blind children. In one exercise the volunteers were asked to find a
mixture of green and orange light that matched a particular shade of
yellow-orange. For normal trichromats there should be a whole range of matches,
but for a tetrachromat the added dimension means there would only be one
combination that matched exactly.

    The experiment showed that the potential tetrachromats were much more
finicky about declaring a match to be exact, and made different matches to
others. "I want to be able to add more orange to the mixture, not red," said one
subject. "It's the wrong kind of orange," said another, "it looks rather pink
when I add more red." This suggests they can make real colour distinctions
between shades that look identical to the rest of us. Dr Jordan, now at the
University of Newcastle, is starting further tests to show conclusively whether
she has discovered true tetrachromats. Getting the right equipment can be a
challenge: how do you know the apparatus is producing the right signal if it all
looks the same to you?

    If tetrachromats exist, it would prove that the brain, which normally only
handles three colour channels, is capable of handling input from a fourth
channel. By extension, it might be possible one day using gene therapy to give
colour-blind people their missing colour. The technology is decades away, but
should eventually be possible. There is also an intriguing possibility - a more
advanced form of gene therapy that would give women tetrachromatic colour
vision.

    In the animal world, tetrachromats are not so extraordinary. Bees need to
tell flowers apart and so have evolved as tetrachromats. They also see further
into the ultraviolet than humans. Some butterflies go one better and are
actually pentachromats with five different types of colour sensor. What a
colourful world they must live in.

    An enhanced sense of colour is of limited use in the modern world because
all colour reproduction is based on a three-colour system. To a tetrachromat,
television and photographs never quite reproduce colours accurately. They would
need a special television or computer monitor with four colour guns or a special
colour printer.

    We should be careful about assuming that colour-blindness is a disability.
It was not even recognised until the 18th century, probably because so little
artificial colour existed. Colour-blind hunters are not at a disadvantage, in
fact rather the opposite. They seem to be better at picking out prey against a
confusing background than those with normal colour vision. The military have
found that colour-blind soldiers can sometimes see through camouflage that fools
everyone else, and new camouflage patterns have to be checked by people with
both sorts of vision.

    Joseph O'Neil is an amateur astronomer whose colour blindness went
undetected through his childhood. "I always used to walk with my head pointed
down to the ground . . . teachers and other concerned adults always assumed I
suffered from low self-esteem or some other psychobabble condition, when it was
the inability to walk in bright sunlight without experiencing pain in my eyes."
O'Neil finds he has better night vision than his colleagues, clearly an asset
when searching for faint astronomical objects.

    Some 16% of women are carriers for colour-blindness. It has been suggested
that this kind of vision helps in search tasks (like finding berries), whereas
colour-blind men may have evolved as superior hunters. Even if you can't see the
same colours as other people, maybe you can still see things they can't.


LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2001


                             853 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 29, 2001

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 818 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Charles Merieux: Virologist and pioneer of vaccine
production

BYLINE: Pearce Wright

BODY:


    Charles Merieux, the French virologist who pioneered the large- scale
industrial production of vaccines that have saved millions of lives, has died
aged 94. He also played a major role in many of the public health initiatives
launched by the World Health Organisation in developing countries.

    His achievements covered diseases in people and animals. In the late 50s he
developed processes for the production of large quantities of the two polio
vaccines and made a start on the worldwide eradication of the disease. His
organisation, the Institut Merieux, refined and cultivated vaccines against
rabies, rubella, diphtheria, tetanus and other diseases.

    Born in Lyon, Charles was the younger of two sons. His father, Marcel
Merieux, was a microbiologist and former assistant to Louis Pasteur, the
scientist who made the connection between micro-organisms and disease. This was
the foundation of modern bacteriology.

    In 1897 Marcel had set up a laboratory to apply Pasteur's ideas to the
diagnosis of diphtheria and to prepare serums. He bought 100 acres of land at
Marcy l'Etoile, outside Lyon, for pasture for horses used to produce
anti-diphtheria serum and for cows that would provide serum against
foot-and-mouth disease.

    The land is now the site of the world headquarters of the Merieux
organisation, which, after Marcel's death, became a global powerhouse for
preventive medicine under Charles's guidance.

    Yet Charles had intended to pursue a career in medicine rather than in the
family laboratory. While his elder brother, Jean, joined their father with a
view to succeeding him in the business, Charles studied medicine. But Jean died
from meningitis contracted in the laboratory. Charles agreed to join his father
after training in microbiological research at the Institut Pasteur, and
inherited the laboratory when his father died in 1937.

    During the second world war Merieux created a blood transfusion centre for
the French resistance - his wife delivered the plasma to the fighters on her
bicycle - and he produced and distributed protein-rich extracts to feed
undernourished children.

    After the war he went to the United States to study advances in purifying
blood products from transfusions, and other experiments that were the
forerunners of biotechnology. He used this knowledge in planning the institute's
future, because the French government had banned commercial laboratories from
handling human blood products.

    On returning to France, Merieux concentrated on veterinary medicine and
created the Institut Francais de la Fievre Aphteuse (the Foot-and-Mouth
Institute), where, for the first time, the virus was cultured on an industrial
scale. The early method of cultivating foot-and-mouth was to apply it to the
tongue of a live cow and harvest the multiplied cells from the resulting
pustules. The work was laborious and produced only small amounts of usable
virus.

    Charles found a more efficient way, by harvesting the cow tongues and using
the tissue to form a growth medium that could be used to produce viruses on an
industrial scale. When, in the 60s, a foot-and-mouth epidemic threatened
livestock in Europe, he organised a "vaccine barrage" to stop its spread. The
next step was to apply similar techniques to human health. This began with the
large-scale production of the Salk polio vaccine, cultivated on tissue from
monkeys' kidneys.

    Merieux went on to collaborate on vaccine projects with other scientists
like Hilary Koprowski, a virologist with whom he introduced a new rabies vaccine
for humans.

    His vigorous approach to public health campaigns was apparent in 1973 when,
in response to a meningitis epidemic in Brazil, he built a plant to produce
enough vaccine for 90m Brazilians. Later he designed a portable plant that could
fit into a Hercules airplane to treat outbreaks on the spot.

    Merieux's interest went beyond research and development and focused on the
social and political mechanisms for delivering vaccines to large numbers of
people. He believed that it was not enough to manufacture the vaccines without
addressing the logistical problems.

    In the early 80s he formed a training organisation, Bioforce Developpement,
to prepare professionals for public health emergencies. He converted a family
property into an epidemiological teaching centre, the first course at which was
carried out in collaboration with the US Centres for Disease Control and
Prevention.

    In 1968 controlling interest in Institut Merieux was sold to Rhone-Poulenc,
the French pharmaceutical company; the acquisition was completed in 1994. The
Merieux name has moved into gene therapy through Charles' son Alain, the
chairman of Transgene. He is also survived by a daughter, Nicole.

    Charles Merieux, virologist and vaccine producer, born January 9 1907; died
January 18 2001.

    Merieux's work saved countless millions of lives


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2001


                             859 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2001 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 19, 2001

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 29

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: Bankers go in at Land's End owner's biotech firm

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    Fresh questions were raised yesterday about the financial position of Kevin
Leech, the millionaire owner of Land's End and John O'Groats, following an
announcement that his biotech company, ML Laboratories, had called in bankers to
conduct a "strategic review".

    The review will consider all options, including putting the company up for
sale. A planned US flotation of ML's respiratory division has been delayed
pending the outcome.

    Mr Leech owns 48% of ML, which is capitalised at pounds 163m. Recent reports
have suggested that he has suffered heavy losses on dot.com investments -
particularly in his incubator Ci4net.com - and he is fighting potentially
expensive litigation related to it.

    He has pledged that he is "not a seller" unless the company is taken over.

    ML's chief executive, Stuart Sim, yesterday insisted the review, which will
be carried out by NM Rothschild, was unconnected with Mr Leech's position. He
said it was a reaction to the disappointing recent performance of the company's
shares, which fell 10.5p to 103.5p having failed to flourish in last year's
biotech boom. Mr Sim said: "We don't feel the real value of the business is
being reflected in the share price."

    He blamed "a bit of confusion in the market about what we're about". Some
analysts feel that ML's activities are too diverse - its products include kidney
dialysis solutions, inhalers and gels to prevent post-operative adhesions.

    Mr Sim said: "Rothschild are coming in to review from the bottom up what
we're doing in terms of the product portfolio and where we're at."

    The exercise will include examining corporate activity, including a division
of the business, disposals or an outright sale. He said: "Everything is an
option, although we certainly haven't appointed them specifically to put us up
for sale."

    ML Laboratories' full year losses widened from pounds 6.9m to pounds 11.8m,
hit by increased research spending and marketing costs associated with several
product launches. The bottom line was also hit by the firm's acquisition of
Cobra Therapeutics, a loss making gene therapy business exploring potential
cancer treatments.

    The firm is awaiting clinical trial results of promising products for
prostate cancer and pain relief. Sales of its founding product, a kidney
dialysis solution named Extraneal, were sharply up.

    ML was co-founded by Mr Leech, a former funeral director, in 1987. His other
interests include assets such as the Snowdon Mountain Railway and the Needles
Pleasure Park.

    Mr Leech has been hit by a collapse in the shares of Ci4net.com, his
internet investment firm listed on Nasdaq, and he is involved in a complicated
financial dispute with Ellen Milner, the widow of ML's co-founder.


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2001


                             873 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               November 23, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 11

LENGTH: 142 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy experiment offers hope to diabetics

BYLINE: Tim Radford

BODY:


    Scientists have used gene therapy to treat diabetic mice and rats, they
report today. It could be many years before humans benefit, but the research
raises hopes for people with type 1 or insulin-dependent diabetes.

    This auto-immune disease begins in early life and ends in the destruction of
the insulin-producing cells in the pancreas. The only treatment is to inject
insulin to adjust blood sugar levels.

    Ji-Won Yoon and others from the University of Seoul report in Nature today
that they made an artificial gene which coded for an insulin substitute, and
transferred it to a harmless virus. They injected the virus into diabetic rats
and mice.

    Both species were able to secrete the synthetic insulin into their
bloodstreams for up to eight months. During that time, they had normal blood
glucose levels without side effects.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                             881 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                November 2, 2000

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 27

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: Cantab says it has five potential suitors

BYLINE: Neil Hume

BODY:


    Hope is in sight for the beleaguered shareholders of Cantab Pharmaceuticals
after the firm said yesterday it had received a number of approaches which could
lead to a takeover bid.

    Shares in Cantab rose 23p, or 25%, to 115p, valuing the Cambridge-based
vaccine specialist at pounds 51m after its board said it was exploring
approaches which might result in a takeover or merger. Sources close to the
company indicated last night that at least five groups of "different shapes and
sizes" had expressed an interest.

    News of the approaches comes a week after the company parted company with
its chief executive, Jurek Sikorski, and called in investment bank CSFB to
advise on options for enhancing strategic value.

    Mr Sikorski resigned after the failure in clinical trials of the company's
leading product - a vaccine for genital warts - led to a two-thirds reduction in
Cantab's share price.

    Analysts were not surprised by the news and said the company would be
attractive to either a gene therapy company or a life sciences outfit such as
Baxter. The big US life sciences company recently bought a stake in Peptide
Therapeutics, an erstwhile merger partner of Cantab.

    They also suggested the possibility of a reverse takeover by the privately
held British firm Microscience, whose backers include Apax Partners. Apax
recently picked up a 9.1% stake in Cantab.

    Despite the failure of Cantab's leading product, it has six drugs in
preparation including a vaccine for nicotine addiction. It also has a cash pile
of about pounds 20m.

    Its most promising product is a vaccine for herpes in phase II trials. Glaxo
Wellcome was collaborating on the vaccine before regulators forced it to return
the product in exchange for approving its merger with SmithKline Beecham.

    Ian Smith, analyst at broker Lehman Brothers, put a value of 115p a share on
the vaccine, saying: "It's not surprising people have expressed an interest, no
one is denying they have interesting technology."


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000


                             882 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 28, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 13

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: News Focus: Science on the rack: Science and safety - the future
issues

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:


    Xenotransplantation

    Using organs from specially bred animals - probably pigs - for transplant
into humans, to overcome the shortage of donors. At the moment, it is
scientifically impractical. The fear is that diseases currently confined to pigs
could find a new host in human beings

    GM animals

    GM plants are already here. The next wave is GM animals. First up for the
supermarket shelf - GM salmon, genetically modified to grow four times as fast
as their traditionally bred cousins. Fear one: that they could escape and breed
with wild fish, corrupting the wild gene pool and even wiping out the original
species. Fear two: that genetic modification could accidentally make them toxic

    Germ line engineering

    Currently outlawed, this involves genetically altering human beings. In the
related technique of gene therapy, "good" genes are introduced into the bodies
of sufferers from genetic diseases. But this only affects the person treated.
Germ-line engineering means treating a patient's reproductive cells so that they
pass on genetic modifications to their children. Proponents say this could wipe
out inherited diseases. Opposition is mainly on ethical grounds

    Legalising cannabis

    Part of any legalising argument will be over how safe it is - how its smoke
and addictive qualities compare to cigarettes, how its effects on the brain
compare to alcohol, and whether it could lead a user to other more harmful drugs

    Nanotechnology

    The engineering of the very small. Within our lifetimes we may see the
creation of tiny, molecule-sized machines capable of reproducing themselves from
readily available raw materials - that is, atoms. Some foresee a danger of this
process getting out of control, with the world being smothered in "grey goo"


LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2000


                             886 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                October 10, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages, Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: Obituary: Michael Smith: Nobel prizewinner for chemistry whose
discoveries contributed to gene therapy

BYLINE: Pearce Wright

BODY:


    Michael Smith, who shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in chemistry, has died aged
68. He developed one of the fundamental techniques used in genetic engineering
that allows scientists to reprogramme the genetic code. By rearranging the small
molecules - nucleotides - from which they are formed, he found out how to alter
genes. The invention was the biochemical equivalent of using a pair of tweezers
to rearrange the chemical building blocks that make up the genes contained in
DNA.

    The name of the discovery was oligonucleotide-based, site-directed
mutagenesis. His co-prizewinner was Kary Mullis, an American chemist who
developed another advance in genetic engineering, the polymerase chain reaction.
Smith's technique opened a route to combating certain inborn diseases through
gene therapy, correcting the mutations that caused disease by rearranging an
abnormal sequence of molecules in DNA sequences to the normal one.

    Michael Smith was born in Blackpool, where his father worked on the family
market garden. At 11, he won a scholarship to the independent Arnold School,
where he was inspired by a chemistry teacher called Sidney Law. Law also
encouraged his pupils to broaden their horizons. Smith recalled that he was
persuaded to read a better newspaper than the one to which his parents
subscribed: he became a life-long reader of what was then the Manchester
Guardian. His faith in Law grew when he became a reader of the New Yorker,
another life-long addiction, almost from the moment he arrived in North America
as part of the brain drain.

    Smith went to Manchester University in 1950 to study chemistry. In 1956, he
got a PhD. In his final year, he and his classmates were applying for research
jobs in America, and in the summer of 1956 he heard of a brilliant young
scientist at the British Columbia Research Council, in Vancouver, Gobind
Khorana, who had a place for a research assistant. The job was to develop ways
of synthesising molecules that belonged to the biologically important
organo-phosphate groups.

    He got the job. The chemistry was far more difficult than the research into
the classes of compounds on which he had been trained for his PhD; but it led
him to carry out research on substances whose existence and biological
significance had only recently been discovered. He stayed with Khorana's group
when it moved in 1960 to the Institute for Enzyme Research at the University of
Wisconsin, where he worked on what he described as the most challenging of
problems for a nucleic acid chemist - the synthesis of ribo-oligonucleotides.

    In 1961, he returned to Vancouver to a job with the Fisheries Research Board
of the Canada Laboratory. It gave him a chance to learn about marine biology and
continue work in nucleic acid chemistry, and to develop a new method for
synthesising complex phosphates.

    Smith became a medical research associate of the Medical Research Council of
Canada in 1966 with a salary that let him join the faculty at the University of
British Columbia, where his Nobel prizewinning work was done. In 1986 he created
a new interdisciplinary institute, the Biotechnology Laboratory, which remained
his academic home, punctuated by sabbaticals at Rockefeller University, New
York; the Laboratory of Molecular Biology of the Medical Research Council, in
Cambridge; and Yale University.

    Smith had not set out to solve the particular question that his discovery so
importantly answered. It was one scientists had been toying with since the
discovery that the flow of genetic information went from genes contained in DNA
via the translator molecule RNA as coded instructions to the
protein-manufacturing part of cells in the body. Many wondered if re-programming
the code of a DNA molecule was possible - to manipulate the production of
protein molecules.

    Smith's oligonucleotide-based site-directed mutagenesis turned it into a
reality. It emerged from work in the 1970s in which he learned how to synthesise
oligonucleotides - short, single-strand DNA fragments. He also studied how these
synthetic fragments could bind a virus to DNA. To his surprise, he discovered
that even if one of the small molecules of the synthetic DNA fragment was
incorrect, it could still bind at the correct position in the virus DNA and be
used when new DNA was being synthesised.

    The story goes that while at Cambridge, during a coffee-break discussion,
the idea arose of getting a reprogrammed synthetic oligonucleotide to bind to a
DNA molecule and then having it replicate in a suitable host organism. This
would give a mutation, which, in turn, would be able to produce a modified
protein.

    In 1978 Smith and his co-workers made this idea work. They succeeded both in
inducing a mutation in a virus, and in "curing" a natural mutant of this virus
so that it regained its natural properties. Four years later they were able for
the first time to produce and isolate large quantities of a mutated enzyme in
which a pre-determined amino acid had been exchanged for another.

    In 1997, Smith retired from the university to become director of a new
Genome Sequencing Centre at the Cancer Agency, Vancouver, a post he held until
his death. In 1981, he was also a cofounder, with Ben Hall and Earl Davie from
the University of Washington, of a biotechnology company, Zymos, funded by a
Seattle venture capital group. One of its first contracts was with the Danish
pharmaceutical company, Novo, to help develop a process for producing human
insulin in yeast. In 1988, the pharmaceutical company, now Novo-Nordisk, bought
outright the biotech nology company, now named ZymoGenetics.

    Smith was an outdoors man who loved the Pennines and moorland countryside.
He said that explained his great pleasure in living amid the rugged outdoors and
beauty of British Columbia.

    He was separated from his wife, Helen, in 1983. His partner, Elizabeth
Raines, two sons and a daughter survive him.

    Pearce Wright

    Michael Smith, biochemist, born April 26 1932; died October 5 2000


LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2000


                             899 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                August 29, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy breakthrough for heart patients

BYLINE: Tim Radford Science editor

BODY:


    US scientists claim today to have used gene therapy to trigger new blood
flow to failing hearts in a small group of patients. If the same treatment works
in a wider group, it could make bypass surgery unnecessary in many cases.

    The scientists report in the US journal Circulation that they significantly
increased blood supply by injecting "dead" heart muscle with a substance known
as vasucular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF.

    The gene for VEGF naturally stimulates new blood vessel growth in the heart.

    "To my knowledge, this is the first study using objective findings that has
demonstrated improvement in blood flow to the heart using gene therapy," said
Jeffrey Isner, of the Tufts University school of medicine in Boston.

    The Tufts team treated 13 seriously ill patients. All the eight men and five
women had experienced severe angina or chest pain, had survived at least one
heart attack and had undergone bypass surgery. Twelve of them had also
experienced angioplasty - in which surgeons blow up a bal loon in the arteries
to force them open.

    Six months after the new treatment, all the patients were alive, and none
had had a serious heart attack or other complication. The researchers found that
in nine cases, the gene therapy had revived parts of the heart that had
previously appeared to be dead.

    "This is a potentially important finding that was quite unexpected,"
Professor Isner said.

    "We saw large areas where there was no blood flow to the heart when the
patient was at rest, but many of those resting defects were gone after gene
transfer. What we have shown is that VEGF gene transfer is sufficiently potent
to provide enough blood supply to rescue an area of hibernating heart muscle."


LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000


                             910 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 August 1, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 660 words

HEADLINE: Scientists hail cancer success as gene therapy helps shrink tumours

BYLINE: James Meek Science correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists have achieved a significant breakthrough in the struggle to make
gene therapy work against cancer by using a genetically engineered virus to
shrink and in some cases eliminate tumours.

    The success is one of a series of recent coups which have revived faith in
genetics-based medicine, which were tainted by the death last year of a US
teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, in a gene therapy experiment that went wrong.

    In the latest tests, reported in the journal Nature Medicine, British and US
patients dying of head and neck cancer were treated with a combination of
chemotherapy and the modified virus.

    In 25 out of 30 patients, the tumours shrank; in 19, they shrank by half or
more; in eight, the tumours - some as large as 10cm - disappeared, and did not
come back after five months.

    David Kirn, formerly head of clinical research at the US biotech firm which
developed the virus and now based at the Imperial Cancer Research Fund in
London, said the patients had been so close to death when they were treated
that, although their lives had in some cases been lengthened, none was likely to
have been cured.

    If the virus was approved for general use and the cancer was caught earlier,
he said, it would be different.

    "This combination therapy, when moved to treat patients where the cancer is
less advanced, could definitely lead to cures," he said.

    "I am looking in the long term at coming up with a therapy that, in
combination with others, cures patients. This is a very, very exciting step in
that direction. It's going to be built on by everybody else out there. It's a
landmark in that sense."

    In a separate piece in Nature Medicine, W French Anderson, the US scientist
who jointly led the first gene therapy experiment on a human in 1989, wrote:
"With all its twists and turns, gene therapy seems to be turning the corner
after a very bad year."

    Head and neck cancer affects about 500,000 people worldwide per year, mainly
heavy smokers and drinkers. Researchers picked it as the target for the
engineered virus because the tumours are close to the surface, making it
possible to inject the virus directly.

    Known as ONYX-15, the virus comes from the same adenovirus family which
killed Mr Gelsinger.

    Unlike that experiment, where researchers were using the virus to get a
"good" copy of a defective human gene into Mr Gelsinger's cells, ONYX-15 has one
of its own genes knocked out.

    This modification means that the virus zooms in on cancer cells, recognising
them because, unlike healthy cells, they lack a working copy of a gene called
P53. The virus sneaks into the cells, uses their own machinery to replicate, and
then destroys them. Healthy cells are untouched.

    Yet used by itself, without chemotherapy, the virus is effective in only 15%
of patients.

    All now depends on whether gene therapies such as ONYX-15 can make it
through tough, expensive Phase III trials which determine whether treatments
make it to the clinics. The trials will be carried out on 300 patients in
Britain and the US but, even if they are deemed a success, the therapy is
unlikely to be licensed before 2004.

    Other promising gene therapies making their way through the regulatory
process are treatments for haemophilia and a rare childhood immune system
disease, X-linked SCID.

    First trials of a drug against chronic myeloid leukemia, which, while not
strictly a gene therapy, relied on scientists' genetic knowledge for its
development, have had extraordinary results: 31 out of 31 patients went into
remission.

    However, Stanley Kaye, who supervised some of the ONYX-15 trials at the
Beatson Oncology Institute in Glasgow, warned against over-optimism.

    "It wouldn't be appropriate to suggest that the data as it is just now
demonstrates this is clearly going to be effective," he said. "But it is good
enough for us to take the next step."

    How close are we to a cancer vaccine? G2, page 8


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000


                             911 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 July 31, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1208 words

HEADLINE: Portrait: Flawed genius: At 15, Benjamin Lebert started to write
Crazy.Three years on, his semi-autobiographical novel about a partially
paralysed adolescent is a bestseller in Germany. Simon Hattenstone meets him

BYLINE: Simon Hattenstone

BODY:


    I'm looking for a beautiful boy with a distant look and a heavy limp. I
stare hopefully at someone who could be Benjamin Lebert - he looks like him and
doesn't look like him. Slightly too spotty, and imperfect. He limps up to me and
shakes my hand.

    Benjamin Lebert is a bestselling author. At 15, he started writing Crazy
during weekends at home from boarding school. By the time he was 16 it had been
published and today, at 18, he has sold more than 300,000 copies in Germany
alone. Crazy is autobiographical. The lead character is called Benjamin Lebert,
it is set in a boarding school outside Munich and tells the story of a
15-year-old boy paralysed down half his body. At the same time, it is a novel -
the Benjamin Lebert of the book, like the photograph on the front, is both
recognisable and different. His school friends are composites of different
people, many of the incidents are made up.

    Crazy is a beautiful book about someone grasping freedom for the first time.

    Benjamin, the character, revels in his adolescent discovery - girls, drink,
cigarettes. The book also captures a boy who is part of the world but always
separate, forever marked out by his disability.

    Like Holden Caulfield in Catcher in the Rye, the fictional Benjamin asks the
biggest existential questions in the tiniest words. He decides life is pointless
unless you're brave, unless you can face up to your daily demons.

    But he's still never sure what bravery actually is. At times, his school
friends mock his tedious philosophical questing. "Where did you come up with all
this shit?" they ask him.

    We're walking to a restaurant. Lebert is struggling a few paces behind me.
In Crazy, he is always struggling a few paces behind his friends. He is talking
about the ways in which the character is different from himself. "He's braver.
Some girls have an idea that I'm a powerful boy and I'm not powerful, I'm weak."

    After the book was published, many girls wrote to Lebert and poured their
heart out. Some said they loved him, some said they wanted to sleep with him,
show him a good time like Marie had done in the book. In Crazy, Benjamin's
disability is almost envied by friends, it makes him different, and so cool. He
says this was true of his year at boarding school, but at no other point in his
life.

    Lebert was born with his umbilical cord around his neck. It starved him of
oxygen, hence the paralysis. He ended up in boarding school because he'd flunked
all the exams at all the other schools. "I was a loser," he says. It was also
part of his rehabilitation into the real world.

    "Because I was disabled my mother always tried to protect me and hide me
from the world." He knew it wasn't good for him, but he enjoyed hiding behind
his doctor mother. Much of his childhood was painful - at earlier schools he had
been teased, ridiculed. "Cripple!" his fellow pupils shrieked at him. Or, even
worse, he was ignored.

    The last few years have been so much better, he says, but even now he has
periods where he feels he's the unluckiest person in the world.

    "Sometimes I feel very good and I say I'm different. Sometimes I like it,
it's a part of me. But sometimes I say, 'Oh I'm so poor and I'm so different.' I
feel sorry for myself."

    I order drinks and am surprised when he opts for a Coke. I offer him a
cigarette and he refuses. "I don't smoke." I was sure you smoked, I say.

    No, that is the Benjamin of the book. If Lebert doesn't eat and drink wisely
his health will rapidly deteriorate. His phone rings. He flips it open with a
deft flick of his teeth. He says you adapt, gain new strengths.

    Lebert started writing when he was nine or 10 - monster stories. The longer
he wrote the simpler the words and sentences and stories became. Before long he
found he was writing about himself and his experiences and losing himself in his
fictive universe. "You can invent your own world. There's a kind of purity . . .
you have to be very honest and very close to yourself."

    I ask him what his favourite bit of the book is, and without hesitation he
mentions the scene in the toilet when he loses his virginity. "It was terrific
fun to write," he says with a squeaky giggle. A drunk girl, Marie, takes him off
to the toilet. She silently lifts off her dress, places herself on top and rides
him to a convulsive ecstacy. She dresses and walks off without a word.

    I was amazed that a 16-year- old could write so tenderly and so erotically,
and tell him I phoned the publisher Hamish Hamilton to ask if Crazy was a hoax.

    Lebert says many people in Germany have suggested that the book was actually
written by his journalist father. "That made me angry," he says. "I mean really
angry. People are always so sceptical, I don't like it." He's a wonderful mix of
excessive politeness ("How is your pizza?" "To your health") and seething
impatience, doe-eyed idealism and street-wise cynicism.

    Lebert says he adapted the sex scene from life. Did she really walk off like
that? Pretty much, so he says. I say that's sad. "Yes, but also kind of
beautiful," he says. More perfect? He shudders and says he hates the word
perfect, hates the very concept of perfection. Suddenly, he's talking about the
politics of cloning and there's no stopping him. "They try to make everything
perfect, especially with the cloning and stuff. There will be a brave new world,
and I'm really frightened of it." He says what scares him most is the idea that
you could choose your body like you choose a computer program.

    And that's not the way the world or nature was meant to work. "Human beings
are different. Some have big noses, some have big ears, and some have big
breasts, and that's life. I hate MTV. When I look at MTV I get really upset
because everybody seems so happy, and everyone seems so beautiful, dancing, but
it's just sick, and no one seems to recognise it. It's going in the same
direction as the Nazi thing that there must be a beautiful race . . ."

    If gene therapy could have stopped him being paralysed . . . He inter rupts
my question. "I wouldn't have done it, you know, because it's me."

    He asks me how my pizza is, and thanks me for taking him out to lunch. He
says there are so many beautiful things in the world, why would people ever be
mad enough to strive for perfection.

    Have his boarding school friends enjoyed his success? "No, they are very
angry." Why? "Some are angry because of what is not true, some are angry because
of what is true." He says they cannot accept that Crazy is a novel based on
experience. "I'm not friends with them any more, but they are not exactly like
they are in the book." Characters such as Florian aka Girl and his hero,
Janosch, are hand-crafted, the type of friends all of us would like.

    A while ago documentary-makers returned to Lebert's old school and asked the
teachers about him. Did they say that they always knew he had it in him to be a
successful writer? "No. They said I was a loser. I was a loser." He smiles, and
thinks about it. "But I feel in some way everyone is not a loser. Everyone is
brave in some way."

    And he limps back to his chauffeur-driven Mercedes.

    Crazy, published by Hamish Hamilton, priced pounds 9.99.


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000


                             912 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 29, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 828 words

HEADLINE: New age of cloning for health care

BYLINE: James Meek Science correspondent

BODY:


    Scientists in Edinburgh yesterday announced a dramatic new technique for the
precise genetic engineering of large mammals, clearing the way for a wave of
patented designer animals to be created to solve human health problems.

    The technique, which brings together the cloning and genetics expertise in
which Scotland has a world lead, has produced two cloned lambs, Daisy and Cupid,
with a human gene locked in their cells - and the cells of any offspring they
have.

    Human genes have been planted in animals before, creating what are known as
"transgenic animals". But the Edinburgh scientists have for the first time
delivered the human gene to a specific point on the sheep chromosome, meaning
that they are on the verge of being able to add, subtract and replace genes at
will.

    Up till now this has been possible only in mice. Now the age is upon us of
the bespoke sheep, cow, pig, chimpanzee - even, perhaps, human, although there
are practical, as well as ethical and legal, reasons why genetically modified
people are still some way off.

    A commentary in today's edition of the journal Nature, in which the company
responsible for Daisy and Cupid, PPL Therapeutics, publishes its work, says: "We
are clearly at the dawn of a new era in mammalian genetic technology."

    PPL works closely with the Roslin Institute, where Dolly the sheep was
cloned in 1997.

    Daisy and Cupid were born last year, but PPL delayed full disclosure of its
technique, known as gene targeting, in order to secure patent rights.

    The firm's priority is to use gene targeting to create "knockout" pigs to
produce organs for human transplant.

    Earlier this year, PPL was the first to produce a litter of cloned pigs. But
before the organs of cloned pigs can be used for human transplants, they need to
have several genes added and at least one "knocked out" to prevent the human
metabolism rejecting them as alien.

    PPL also plans to use gene targeting to create "immunocows", cows with their
own immune systems knocked out and replaced with human immune systems. This
would allow the firm to extract gamma globulin, a group of plasma proteins used
in the treatment of and immunisation against certain diseases, and which is now
obtained from human blood, from cows instead.

    All over the world, campus entrepreneurs are racing to create commercially
viable transgenic animals: chickens with human proteins in their egg whites,
goats with spider's webs in their milk, sheep which shed their fleeces at
shearing time.

    But they are all using the traditional, haphazard method of getting alien
genes into animals, which is a costly, hit and miss affair.

    "In a sense this (new technique) has revolutionised the whole field of
biology," said Milind Suraokar, a geneticist at the Baylor College of Medicine
in Texas, who contributed to today's Nature commentary. "Now you can actually go
and change a certain gene, not just insert it willy-nilly, anywhere in the
genome. It's a very sophisticated change."

    Mice genes are relatively easy to tinker with because scientists know how to
isolate and grow mouse stem cells, the embryonic cells from which all other
cells in the body grow.

    The stem cells of larger mammals, such as sheep, cows and humans, cannot yet
be manipulated in this way. But in its gene targeting experiment PPL scientists
were able to use their cloning expertise to modify the DNA of a cell from an
adult animal.

    Ron James, chief executive of PPL, said another potential use for gene
targeting was in human gene therapy. Human cells could be removed from the body,
a faulty gene could be corrected or replaced, and the cells returned.

    He said the technique could, in theory, be used to clone healthy human
offspring from parents with genetic flaws, but pointed out that too many human
eggs would need to be sacrificed to produce a single clone to make it
acceptable.

    "Gene targeting would provide the technology to do the genetic engineering
required," he said.

    "The reason it would be illegal and at the moment unethical is because the
next step - turning the modified cell into a human - is far, far from efficient,
whereas for the sort of work we are doing, you can ethically justify using 10 or
12 animals to produce one.

    "I'd rather people didn't keep banging on about cloning humans. There could
be perfectly ethical uses of this technology in humans but only at some time in
the future when the rest of this technology is effective. The real difficulty is
you'd have to do lots of experiments in humans to make the technology work in
humans."

    Like many small biotech companies, PPL is listed on the stock market even
though it has consistently lost money. It hopes to find partners ready to take
its existing products - sheep-produced human proteins to treat illnesses such as
cystic fibrosis - through the final stage of trials.

    Special report on the GM debate at www.guardianunlimited.co.uk/ gmdebate


LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000


                             915 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 27, 2000

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: Gene map benefits Oxford Biomedica;
 Market Forces

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    The completion of the human genome project has triggered a blitz of
scientific propaganda, as biotechnology companies try to join the vanguard of
gene research.

    Every drugs company has perfected a polished patter on the relevance of the
new DNA blueprint to its business. All are hoping to benefit from a surge in
interest from investors.

    Oxford Biomedica can claim more relevance than most - it specialises in gene
therapy. At a neurosciences conference in Brighton yesterday the company
announced it had developed an efficient way of delivering genes to the brain,
using a virus found in horses as a transporter'.

    Gene therapy involves the use of genes to repro gramme' cells that are
malfunctioning. The use of a virus helps them spread through the body quickly.

    Yesterday's breakthrough will be used to develop Oxford Biomedica's products
for Parkinson's Disease, and could also lead to progress in treating
Alzheimer's. The company's shares rose 3.5p to 59p.

    Oxford Biomedica's chairman, Alan Kingsman, believes the completion of the
genome project will help the company in the long term, because it will make
genes eas ier to come by as targets for its new drug research. Furthermore, the
company can tweak its existing gene research through reference to the completed
genome map.

    But the benefits to any company are long term. Chris Redhead, a biotech
analyst at WestLB Panmure, says: The human genome project will provide value
eventually, but it's not going to be simple and it's not going to be fast.'

    The hype surrounding the genome project should help companies specialising
in providing drug targets. There is also likely to be a shift in emphasis from
genes to proteins - the body's by-products, which actually cause disease.
Finally, patent experts - such as BTG - are likely to benefit from the
inevitable ownership wrangles surrounding gene research.

    The biotech sector ballooned when Celera announced it was 90% of the way
towards mapping the human genome and share prices exploded. There is unlikely to
be a repeat of this phenomenon, particularly as biotech shares are already, on
average, up 100% over the past year.


LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             916 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 27, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: Decoding DNA Your questions answered

BODY:


    What is the human genome?

    The collective name for the whole set of genes at the centre of most of the
trillions of cells in every human on the planet. Genes, made from a chemical
called DNA, are the recipes for the substances that create our bodies, so the
human genome is like the recipe book for a human being.

    Why is there a human genome project?

    Governments and a British charity, the Wellcome Trust, were persuaded by
scientists that it was desirable to decode the genome - to decipher the 3bn bits
of DNA containing our genes. This will greatly speed up the identification of
individual genes, which should lead to medical breakthroughs.

    How?

    Most diseases - perhaps all diseases - are caused by tiny mutations in our
genes, like misprints, which means they give out the wrong instructions in
cells. These misprints can be inherited, or caused by environmental factors like
pollution or radiation.

    A single faulty gene can be enough to cause disease, but some of the biggest
killers, such as heart disease and cancer, are thought to be the product of
environment, lifestyle and a whole series of genes. If the genes involved can be
identified, therapies can be developed.

    When are we going to feel the benefits?

    The first successful gene therapies are already in trials. Treatments for
Alzheimer's and possibly some forms of cancer are imminent but it could be
decades before illnesses like heart disease can be successfully tackled.

    What is the downside?

    If a new disease gene is discovered, a test can be developed for it.
Difficult issues include potential insurance and employment restrictions on
healthy people known to be genetically susceptible to disease; pre-natal
screening of embryos, which could leave parents facing abortion decisions over
events far in their child's future; an increasing healthcare gap between rich
and poor countries; and excess control over lifesaving diagnosis and treatment
options by private firms that have patented genes.

    Whose genes are scientists reading?

    The DNA was donated as male sperm and female blood by many donors from all
ethnic groups. Six to 12 samples were picked at random and deliberately mixed
up.

    A follow-up project, studying variations in DNA from person to person,
involves 24 anonymous individuals from a range of ethnic groups. It has been
rumoured, though never confirmed, that among the samples used by Celera was DNA
from the head of the company, Craig Venter.

    People are different. How can there be one human genome for all of them?

    There are thousands of tiny variations between individuals, but the overall
variation is no more than 0.2%. In the same way individual human eyes are
different, but we can still talk about the working of the human eye in general.

    Why announce a draft' before the whole thing is finished?

    One answer is technical - the unfinished parts of the genome are
particularly hard to read. Lots of crosschecking will have to be done to
complete it, but the draft is ready for use now.

    The other reason has more to do with politics, finance and media pressure:
the publicly funded human genome project feared that its thunder was going to be
stolen by Celera finishing the genome first. The two sides decided to declare
victory together at a fairly arbitrary point.

    Is there any link between genetically modified foods and the consequences of
the human genome project?

    GM plants and animals have artificially altered genes, and some researchers
seeking to apply human genome knowledge to medicine seek to alter human genes.
But there are two crucial differences.

    GM plants and animals are designed to pass their altered characteristics on
from generation to generation, whereas gene therapy only affects the patient
treated, not their subsequent offspring.

    Gene therapy seeks to restore natural', working human genes to people who
lack them, rather than to give them special powers borrowed from another
species.

    How much did the project cost?

    Less than expected - about pounds 200m, less than the cost of a new
hospital.

    Is there a Nobel prize in this for anyone?

    Possibly, but the huge number of scientists and engineers working on this
make it difficult to pick out individuals who deserve the credit.

    Where can I read the genome?

    On the internet - but it would be heavy going. It consists of a 3bn letter
string of four letters, representing the four amino acids of DNA - A, C, G and
T: enough letters to fill 200 telephone directories.

    James Meek


LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             917 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 27, 2000

SECTION: Guardian City Pages, Pg. 25

LENGTH: 363 words

HEADLINE: Market forces: Gene map benefits Oxford Biomedica

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    The completion of the human genome project has triggered a blitz of
scientific propaganda, as biotechnology companies try to join the vanguard of
gene research.

    Every drugs company has perfected a polished patter on the relevance of the
new DNA blueprint to its business. All are hoping to benefit from a surge in
interest from investors.

    Oxford Biomedica can claim more relevance than most - it specialises in gene
therapy. At a neurosciences conference in Brighton yesterday the company
announced it had developed an efficient way of delivering genes to the brain,
using a virus found in horses as a "transporter".

    Gene therapy involves the use of genes to "repro gramme" cells that are
malfunctioning. The use of a virus helps them spread through the body quickly.

    Yesterday's breakthrough will be used to develop Oxford Biomedica's products
for Parkinson's Disease, and could also lead to progress in treating
Alzheimer's. The company's shares rose 3.5p to 59p.

    Oxford Biomedica's chairman, Alan Kingsman, believes the completion of the
genome project will help the company in the long term, because it will make
genes eas ier to come by as targets for its new drug research. Furthermore, the
company can tweak its existing gene research through reference to the completed
genome map.

    But the benefits to any company are long term. Chris Redhead, a biotech
analyst at WestLB Panmure, says: "The human genome project will provide value
eventually, but it's not going to be simple and it's not going to be fast."

    The hype surrounding the genome project should help companies specialising
in providing drug targets. There is also likely to be a shift in emphasis from
genes to proteins - the body's by-products, which actually cause disease.
Finally, patent experts - such as BTG - are likely to benefit from the
inevitable ownership wrangles surrounding gene research.

    The biotech sector ballooned when Celera announced it was 90% of the way
towards mapping the human genome and share prices exploded. There is unlikely to
be a repeat of this phenomenon, particularly as biotech shares are already, on
average, up 100% over the past year.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             918 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 27, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Decoding DNA: Your questions answered

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:


    What is the human genome?

    The collective name for the whole set of genes at the centre of most of the
trillions of cells in every human on the planet. Genes, made from a chemical
called DNA, are the recipes for the substances that create our bodies, so the
human genome is like the recipe book for a human being.

    Why is there a human genome project?

    Governments and a British charity, the Wellcome Trust, were persuaded by
scientists that it was desirable to decode the genome - to decipher the 3bn bits
of DNA containing our genes. This will greatly speed up the identification of
individual genes, which should lead to medical breakthroughs.

    How?

    Most diseases - perhaps all diseases - are caused by tiny mutations in our
genes, like misprints, which means they give out the wrong instructions in
cells. These misprints can be inherited, or caused by environmental factors such
as pollution and radiation.

    A single faulty gene can be enough to cause disease, but some of the biggest
killers, such as heart disease and cancer, are thought to be the product of
environment, lifestyle and a whole series of genes. If the genes involved can be
identified, therapies can be developed.

    When are we going to feel the benefits?

    The first successful gene therapies are in trials. Treatments for
Alzheimer's and possibly some forms of cancer are imminent but it could be
decades before illnesses such as heart disease can be tackled.

    What is the downside?

    If a new disease gene is discovered, a test can be developed for it.
Difficult issues include potential insurance and employment restrictions on
healthy people known to be genetically susceptible to disease; pre-natal
screening of embryos, which could leave parents facing the decision of whether
or not to terminate pregnancies based on events far in their children's future;
an increasing healthcare gap between rich and poor countries; and excess control
over lifesaving diagnosis and treatment options by private firms which have
patented genes.

    Whose genes are scientists reading?

    The DNA was donated as male sperm and female blood by many donors from all
ethnic groups. Six to 12 samples were picked at random and deliberately mixed
up.

    A follow-up project, studying variations in DNA from person to person,
involves 24 anonymous individuals from a range of ethnic groups. It has been
rumoured, though never confirmed, that among the samples used by Celera was DNA
from the head of the company, Craig Venter.

    People are different. How can there be one human genome for all of them?

    There are thousands of tiny variations between individuals, but the overall
variation is no more than 0.2%. In the same way individual human eyes are
different, but we can still talk about the working of the human eye in general.

    Why announce a "draft" before the whole thing is finished?

    One answer is technical - the unfinished parts of the genome are
particularly hard to read. Lots of crosschecking will have to be done to
complete it, but the draft is ready for use now.

    The other reason has more to do with politics, finance and media pressure:
the publicly funded human genome project feared that its thunder was going to be
stolen by Celera finishing the sequence first. The two sides decided to declare
victory together at a fairly arbitrary point.

    Is there any link between genetically modified foods and the consequences of
the human genome project?

    GM plants and animals have artificially altered genes, and some researchers
seeking to apply human genome knowledge to medicine seek to alter human genes.
But there are two crucial differences.

    GM plants and animals are designed to pass their altered characteristics on
from generation to generation, whereas gene therapy only affects the patient
treated, not their subsequent offspring.

    Gene therapy seeks to restore "natural", working human genes to people who
lack them, rather than to give them special powers borrowed from other species.

    How much did the project cost?

    Less than expected - about pounds 200m, less than the cost of a new
hospital.

    Is there a Nobel prize in this for anyone?

    Possibly, but the huge number of scientists and engineers working on this
make it difficult to pick out individuals who deserve the credit.

    Where can I read the genome?

    On the internet - but it would be heavy going. It consists of a 3bn-letter
string of four letters, representing the four amino acids of DNA - A, C, G and
T: enough letters to fill 200 telephone directories.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             926 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 26, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1193 words

HEADLINE: The story of life: Ethics: Alarm bells The applications of
biotechnology have provoked debate about its ethics. Richard Holloway looks at
some of the issues

BYLINE: Richard Holloway

BODY:


    One way to classify people is by the tumbler test: pessimists say it is half
empty, optimists half full. In most of the great debates about human nature
people place themselves somewhere on the continuum between these two poles.

    There is an obvious application of the tumbler test to political theory,
with people like Hobbes in the pessimist camp. Because of his low estimate of
human nature, he called for strong princes to control the brutal excesses of
society. John Stuart Mill, on the other hand, believed that human nature was
rational and capable of altruism, so he argued for liberty and democracy.

    Science is the dominant narrative of our day, so it is fascinating to watch
this ancient debate conduct itself in a new language. Pessimists mistrust
science, optimists celebrate the enormous contribution it has made to human
progress, but many people are just not sure what to make of it.

    Reaching a considered judgment on the complex issues that science presents
is particularly difficult in Britain at the moment, because of the approach of
certain newspapers. The science correspondents in the better papers play an
important part in educating the public about science and its implications, but
some of the other sheets present the subject as a shoot-out between ordinary
decency and overweening arrogance. This may sell papers, but it hardly does
justice to the importance of the subject.

    There are real anxieties, of course. The biotech revolution we are now
entering will make the industrial revolution look like a minor blip on the chart
of human history. Change always induces anxiety, particularly among natural
pessimists, of whom Britain always seems to have more than its fair share, so
it's not surprising that recent advances in genetics have provoked alarm in
certain quarters.

    The paradox is that this country has so far managed to pilot a steady course
through the scientific revolutions of our era. The paradigm is the Human
Fertilisation and Embryology Act of 1990. Like any human construct, it is far
from perfect, but it does provide us with a model approach to the negotiation of
current perplexities. Depending on which side of the pitch you stood, the 1990
Act was a masterly example of either moderate pessimism or moderate optimism,
which steered a middle way through the field of reproductive science, between
unfettered experimentation and the outlawing of procedures that were novel and
controversial at the time. After a certain amount of ritual grandstanding on
both sides of the debate, this is the approach we will almost certainly adopt to
the new advances in human genetics. But we ought to keep our minds open to some
of the sensitive issues that will confront us.

    One of the difficulties is that the subject is inescapably linked to
memories of the pseudo-science of eugenics, with its fascist echoes. The word
eugenics is probably beyond rehabilitation, but behind it lies a morally complex
issue. Theoretically, it will soon be possible to perform gene therapy to cure
or prevent inheritable genetic disease. These therapies in themselves raise
interesting ethical problems to which I'll return, but the issue I want to look
at briefly now is their likely impact upon existing people with disabilities.

    It is not too difficult to see why the disabled community might come to
interpret these procedures as an attack upon their own value as human beings. We
might argue that to try to mend a particular defect is far from saying that
those who possess it are less human than the rest of us.

    Even more complex will be the ethics of the reverse possibility, whereby a
disabled couple, such as a profoundly deaf one, might invoke the process in
order to design the birth of a disabled child who can be fully at home in its
parent's culture. Is there any way in which a truly multicultural society could
learn to live with intentionally produced disability? If, as the disabled
community claims, disability is socially constructed, might it not be possible
to deconstruct it in this way and thereby create genuinely plural communities?
We are going to have to breathe deeply and keep our wits about us as we
negotiate some of these possibilities.

    When gene therapy is perfected, it will come in two possible forms, each
with its own ethical difficulties. It could be performed using somatic cells,
which make up most of the cells in the body, or germ cells from sperm or eggs.
Somatic cell gene therapy would only affect the individual who was treated,
whereas germ cell therapy would pass the altered genes on to the next
generation. In 1989 the government set up a committee to consider the ethics of
gene therapy. Its report in 1992 concluded that "somatic cell gene therapy will
be a new kind of treatment, but it does not represent a major departure from
established medical practice; nor does it pose new ethical challenges."

    Where it is likely to become controversial, however, is when it is applied
to procedures for the enhancement of physical characteristics, such as height or
appearance. Though it will doubtless provoke debate, it would be hard to argue
that using somatic cell gene therapy for these purposes would be more ethically
problematic than getting a nose job or a breast enhancement using existing
procedures. Nevertheless, we can expect the tabloids to have a field day with
this therapy when it comes on-stream.

    Germ cell gene therapy, if it is ever made safe, will raise a much more
difficult issue. Would it be unethical to apply a technique that would affect an
individual prior to conception? The philosopher John Harris argues that, if the
technique is proved to be safe and efficacious, it would be unethical not to
apply it, because parents have an obligation to avoid harm to their unborn
children.

    However, the real issue here is the moral status of the human embryo. Germ
cell gene therapy will only be perfected and made safe after years of
experimentation on embryos. The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act permits
experiments on embryos up to 14 days, or on the appearance of the neural or
primitive streak. But this is one of the most controversial aspects of the act
and one which significant elements in British society still reject.

    Most of us would probably apply a doctrine of incremental potentiality to
human gametes, so that the moral status of the entity increases the closer it
gets to term. The Roman Catholic Church, however, accords full human status to
the embryo from the beginning, so it condemns experiments on embryos as the
moral equivalent of the torture of human beings.

    This is an example of the kind of disagreement that is inevitable in a
plural society. But those of us who find these developments unproblematic ought
to remember that they will be painful for intact moral communities that have a
fixed perspective on the status of human gametes. If we are to avoid the culture
wars that so disfigure the USA we'll have to negotiate these complexities with
great care.

    Richard Holloway is bishop of Edinburgh and from 1991-97 was a member of the
Human Fertilisation and Embryo Authority


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             927 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 26, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 13

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: The story of life: New frontiers: Gene therapy and drug wars

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:


    The completion of the Human Genome Project will be greeted by the humming of
thousands of powerful computers, as drugs companies around the world race to
analyse the final pieces of the genetic jigsaw. The next decade will see an
explosion in the rate of drug development activity and any pharmaceuticals group
which lags will be left far, far behind.

    Allen Roses, worldwide director of genetics at Glaxo Wellcome, says: "This
is not just a once in a lifetime event for the industry. There is only one human
genome and what happens in the next five to 10 years will not be repeatable."

    Today's work shows the position of every gene in the body. The challenge for
drug researchers is to determine their functions, and identify tiny differences
which cause disease. Medicines can then be accurately tailored to correct these
tiny chemical deviances.

    John Keller, director of SmithKline Beecham's genomics technology group,
says: "There certainly is going to be a competition but I don't think people
should underestimate the magnitude of the task. This completes one area of
biology. Everyone within biology will be pursuing their own interests in it."

    The amount of money involved is immense. Britain's second biggest drugs
group, AstraZeneca, spends Dollars 8m a day on research and development.
SmithKline spends over pounds 1bn annually, employing nearly 8,000 people
worldwide.

    It will take, on average, 10 years from the point of identifying a gene
"target" to launching a drug. Many such projects are already well under way.
Ultimately, genomics will lead to differences in the way drugs are marketed.
Doctors will be able to judge more accurately which patients are likely to
respond to which medicines.

    Dr Roses says: "We'll be able to take people who've had adverse events in
trials and look at their DNA to see what makes them different."

    He reckons this will ultimately mean higher sales, because people will no
longer have to be persuaded to "risk" suffering side effects.

    A clutch of smaller British players are well placed to take advantage of the
"gene economy". Oxford Glycosciences, a spin-out from Oxford University, has one
of the world's biggest libraries linking proteins to disease. By connecting
these proteins with genes, the company can trace the roots of illness further
back, making it much easier to design effective drugs. Its shares have surged
eight-fold in a year, to value the business at more than pounds 600m.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             928 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 26, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 2518 words

HEADLINE: The story of life: Medicine: The x-factor: Gene therapy has been used
successfully for the first time. James Meek looks at how this was achieved

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:


    Last February, an air of euphoria seeped into the corridors of the Necker
Hospital for Sick Children in the Montparnasse district of Paris. Wondrous
cures, great courage and the heart-hollowing grief of parents left behind by
children who could not be saved, make the Necker and its ilk emotionally charged
places at any time, but this was different.

    What was happening to the 11-month-old baby boy in the airtight bubble in a
room in the hospital's immunology and haematology unit was an incredible
transformation, and more: it was history. For the first time, doctors had used
mankind's knowledge of the genes involved in a fatal disease to cure it. After
over eight years of inconclusive experiments, gene therapy's promise to correct
nature's flaws was being realised. Now that humans' genetic code has been
cracked, more and more of those flaws will come within reach of repair.

    When the little boy was admitted to hospital, he was facing death within a
year from a rare inherited disorder called X-linked SCID, one of a family of
diseases that cause children to be born without a work ing immune system. The
slightest infection can be deadly.

    The boy lay in his bubble, his only direct contact with mother, father and
nurse through plastic gloves, for several days while doctors Alain Fischer,
Marina Cavazzana-Calvo and Salima Hacein-Bey, took out a few million of his bone
marrow cells and coaxed the healthy gene to enter them. Then they put them back
- a single, simple infusion of 20 to 30 millilitres of fluid. It took half an
hour to buy the boy what they hope will be a lifetime of normal immunity.

    Doctors knew in 15 days from tests that the new gene was working. But the
marvel for the parents was watching the change in their sickly, underweight boy.
Before their eyes, he began to thrive. The ugly red blotches on his skin faded
away, his diarrhoea disappeared, he put on weight, his breathing became easier.

    Three months after the infusion, his astonished parents were told they could
take him home. There he remains, a normal, healthy two-year-old boy.

    "We lived three months of euphoria in the lab," said Cavazzana-Calvo.
"Everyone was so happy. For three to six months we talked about nothing else
except the results. Nothing else was important."

    Adrian Thrasher, a consultant in child immunology at Great Ormond Street
hospital, said: "This is the first time we can say unequivocally that gene
therapy is effective on its own. Patients have not received any other treatment,
yet have got better."

    Three other children, one French, one Dutch and one American, have since
been treated at the Necker Hospital with similar success. A fifth boy, Shah
Rayhman from London, has done less well, because the disease had already caused
serious complications, but the Necker is pressing ahead with further trials
later this year, and similar gene therapy is to be carried out in London and
Maryland.

    This first gene therapy success, formally announced in April's issue of the
journal Science, will have to be further proven over time, and does not
translate into working gene therapies for other, more common genetic diseases
like cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy or Down's syndrome. But it is a stride
forward after last year's pessimism about gene therapy in the wake of the death
of Jesse Gelsinger, the 18-year-old gene therapy guinea pig who died in a poorly
designed trial in Pennsylvania.

    "I think this is the first case where we can say: here are human beings who
have received no other treatment than gene therapy," said Dr Jennifer Puck, a
leading genetics researcher specialising in the immune system at the US National
Institute of Health in Maryland. "When they started, they had no immunity, and
now they're exactly as good as any babies their age.

    "The immune system is not totally mature until they're two or three or four
years of age. Then the question is, is this going to last a lifetime?"

    Dr Cavazzana-Calvo said: "Curing is one thing. Correcting an illness for two
or three years is another. We have not had enough follow-up time to claim that
it's a definitive treatment: it's a success so far. But the importance of this
work is to have made the proof of principle that this strategy can work.

    "We stress that our success is a success for this particular disease. But
after the problem in the States, this has been a fresh breath of air for gene
therapy."

    Seen through the eyes of the genetics researcher, the human body is a
humblingly vast world, made up of 75 trillion cells. In this world, each cell is
like a city state in its own right. Each has walls bristling with communications
equipment. Inside, it has stockpiles of chemical raw materials; its own power
plant; factories making products according to the city state's own needs and the
needs of its import-export operations; and an army of couriers carrying
instructions to the factories.

    At the centre of each of these city states (with the exception of one
specialised kind, the red blood cells) is the library where these couriers find
their instructions. This is the genome. The tens of thousands of volumes in this
library contain orders for the couriers, such as "tell the factory to make this
much insulin, now". Sometimes the couriers will bring instructions into the
library from another city, telling them to seal or unseal this or that volume.

    Now imagine that in each of these billions of libraries there is an
identical mistake in one book - a missing page, an extra page, a figure out of
place. The obedient couriers will do their best to fulfil the bad instructions,
and something will go wrong. It may not do the cell much harm. It may make it
seriously defective. In the worst case, the whole world goes dark and dies.

    Looked at this way, it is possible to understand how hard the task facing
gene therapy scientists is. First, they see that there is trouble in some of the
cities: the walls are the wrong shape, say, making them vulnerable to attack
from outside. Then, scientists have to work out which of the volumes in the
libraries is causing this by giving out false instructions about wall-building.
To make it harder, several volumes, cross-referencing each other, could be
involved.

    Finally, they have to work out how to transport a correct replacement book
on an often treacherous journey to the gates of millions of cities, smuggle it
inside, and sneak it on to the library shelves in such a way that the couriers
will read it and obey.

    With X-linked SCID, researchers identified the flaw in 1993. It lay on the
x-chromosome, which in boys is one of 46 sets of genes in the genome. (Girls
have a spare set of x-chromosomes so are not affected by the disease.) The flaw,
a tiny genetic mutation, is a tragic broken link in a vital sequence.

    In every person's bone marrow is a group of cells known as stem cells,
which, when they receive the right chemical signals, evolve and multiply to
become red and white blood cells. The white blood cells are central to the
body's daily fight against infection, identifying and killing alien organisms.
In order to turn into white blood cells, the stem cells have to receive a signal
from other cells in the body telling them to do so. In babies with X-linked
SCID, the faulty gene fails to produce one of the proteins which enable the
cells to receive the signals - so the cell does not hear, there are no white
blood cells, and no immunity.

    So how did Cavazzana-Calvo, Hacein-Bey and their eleven collaborators crack
it? They took bone marrow from the little boy and isolated the cells most likely
to be stem cells. Then they sent in mercenaries, in the form of a virus. Viruses
do what the scientists cannot do themselves, break inside a cell with a set of
genes and squeeze the genes into the host genome. It is possible to slip a human
gene into a harmless virus and have it infect human cells, which can then be
returned to the patient. That was what the Necker team did. The cells given the
good gene entered the baby's body and produced the missing component.

    X-linked SCID is rare, afflicting 0.002% of the population. But when it
threatens the lives of 100% of your children, as it did with Ann Vincent from
Tewkesbury, the rarity is no comfort. For a mother to be told her baby has the
disease, the shock is threefold. First, your son could die before his second
birthday. Second, you are the carrier. Third, your mind flashes back over family
history; the mysterious infant deaths of brothers generations back become
mysteries no longer.

    "I come from a family which has a history of losing baby boys when they were
six months old. They all died of different things, so we never thought they were
connected. But when my son became really, really ill, he was diagnosed with
X-linked SCID. It was the same hospital where my brother Richard had been
treated 30 years ago, and they got out his notes.

    "Suddenly, I felt so terrible for my mother. She'd been going through the
same thing as me. She had three brothers who died and now we know why. I always
thought there was a family curse."

    Mercifully, since 1968, there has been another treatment for SCID patients:
a bone marrow transplant. A donor was found for Ann's first son, Owen, and he
was saved. Later, she accidentally became pregnant again, with another son,
Niall, who also had the defective gene. Doctors were able to save him using his
older brother's rejuvenated bone marrow.

    But marrow transplants have severe limitations. Even patients with
compatible donors have to endure months of chemotherapy, with all its ghastly
side effects. Patients with non-compatible donors have only a 60% chance of
survival, and many of those who do survive have only partially restored immune
systems.

    Craig Smith, from High Wycombe, who died last March aged four, was beaten by
the imperfection of bone marrow transplants and the sheer obscurity of the
disease. His parents Penny and Peter kept him alive for almost three years - an
astonishing figure for an X-linked SCID patient - while a succession of GPs and
consultants failed to see through his myriad infections to the root cause.

    Craig had a transplant at Great Ormond Street. At first, things looked good,
but then his body began to reject the donor marrow, his liver failed and he
started to slip away. Penny Smith remembers her doctors talking about gene
therapy, but had no idea it was so far advanced.

    Many false hopes have been raised before, and bone marrow transplants will
continue to save lives for the foreseeable future, but the signs look good that
X-linked SCID, at least, can within a few years be held at bay by better means.
Ultimately, children could be treated in the womb. As the human genome reveals
its secrets, other inherited diseases, in children and in adults, should follow.

    Penny Smith is 41. "If Craig was still here, or I did, by chance, have any
more children, I would go for gene therapy," she said. "I really do wish them
every success, the children and the doctors."

    Is gene therapy suitable for other diseases?

    Success with gene therapy for X-linked SCID may mark the conquest of one
rare inherited disease, but what of the others? Most are less accessible to gene
therapy. Others, like cancer and heart disease, are thought to be the result of
the complex interaction of many genes with environmental factors. The importance
of deciphering the human genome is that it will help researchers understand how
genes work with each other, rather than in isolation. The success of existing
gene therapy research varies from disease to disease, but scores of labs around
the world are involved, with some successes among the disappointments.

    Haemophilia

    One of the most promising areas is haemophilia, an inherited disease
afflicting males which forces about 10,000 people in Britain to take regular
injections of a protein called Factor IX. The protein is essential to make blood
clot; without it, sufferers can spontaneously bleed inside, which can lead to
permanent disability. The problem is caused by a fault in the gene which should
produce Factor IX.

    Recently a team of US researchers announced promising results in tests. Six
human patients were enrolled in a trial after haemophiliac dogs given the
engineered virus were cured of the condition. The first three humans were given
doses too low to affect the dogs - yet, unexpectedly, the implanted genes began
producing enough of the missing protein to allow them to cut back on their
injections.

    Cancer

    Clinical trials are under way or about to start - some in the UK - of three
promising gene therapies. Phase III trials, the last step before a treatment is
authorised for general clinical use, are imminent for an anti-cancer therapy
which focuses on a gene called p53. This is known as a "tumour suppressing
gene", one built into our bodies to halt the runaway growth of cells which marks
the beginning of cancer.

    In many tumour cells, the p53 gene is missing or damaged. Scientists have
devised a way to engineer a virus which will only thrive in p53-deficient cells.
It can be injected into a patient, and will only enter and damage the harmful
cancer cells, leaving healthy cells alone.

    Other trials focus on the set of so-called "oncogenes." In healthy people,
they promote normal cell growth and then get switched off. In some cancers, the
oncogenes get switched on when they should be dormant. Scientists hope to zoom
in on the gene which turns the "on" switch and fuse it to another gene called a
suicide gene, which activates an anti-tumour drug, killing the cancer cells.

    A third, more radical approach is to use an engineered gene as a vaccine. In
tumours, mutant genes emerge so unfamiliar to the body that its immune system
would attack them if only it knew they were there. Researchers hope to identify
the mutations, replicate them in the lab and inject them into patients to alert
the immune system, which would then attack the cancer as "foreign."

    Cystic fibrosis

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common life-shortening illness in Britain linked
to a single gene. There are 6,000 sufferers in the UK. Conventional treatment
advances have extended their average life expectancy from five to 31, but
all-out efforts here and in the US are under way to find an effective gene
therapy. The problem gene's worst effect is to reduce the amount of water in the
lining of the lungs, leading to a build up of infection-prone mucus. Researchers
are trying, with some success, to get "good" genes through the mucus barrier.

    In the US, they are using a virus to get the "good" gene to where it is
needed. In Britain, scientists are focusing on another delivery system, a fine
vapour of synthetic fat droplets.

    Early results from spraying the gene-enhanced fat into the nose, and now the
lungs, have been good, but the effects last only for a short time. The Cystic
Fibrosis Trust cautions that the technique is "gene transfer" rather than gene
therapy. The breakthrough has yet to be made.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             929 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 26, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages, Pg. 7

LENGTH: 160 words

HEADLINE: The story of life: The gene geniuses: William French Anderson

BODY:


    Dr William French Anderson Jr, of the University of Southern California in
Los Angeles, foresees a day when genetic therapy will be used to treat not only
the living but those who have not yet been born. He hopes to get approval within
the next few years to use gene therapy on a fetus that has been diagnosed with a
deadly inherited disease.

    "Gene therapy will revolutionise the practice of medicine. In 20 years,
every major disease will have gene therapy as a treatment option," Anderson
said.

    In 1979, Anderson led a team of scientists with the National Institutes of
Health in curing a genetic flaw in the cells of mice. By 1990, his laboratory
had performed the first gene therapy experiment on a 4-year-old child with a
rare genetic disease that prevents babies from developing their own immune
systems.

    Since Anderson's first experiment, more than 3,000 people have received gene
therapy as part of clinical trials worldwide.


LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             934 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 June 15, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages, Pg. 1

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: Ethical dilemmain race to map genes: (earlier edition (3 star)

BYLINE: James Meek Science correspondent

BODY:


    A wake-up call to the public and politicians was issued yesterday over the
dramatic implications of the genetics revolution, as campaigners warned of a new
era of inequality, discrimination and corporate control if our new knowledge of
how humans work was not used with more care.

    With scientists due to announce in less than a fortnight that they have
completed the rough draft of the "book of life", the sequence of genes which
builds, maintains and repairs human beings from scratch, there are fears that a
rush to exploit the information could provoke the same kind of public backlash
that has hit genetically modified foods.

    Launching a new watchdog group, the Campaign Against Human Genetic
Engineering (CAHGE), the independent geneticist David King said: "There is a
widespread concern that genetics is running far ahead of society's ability to
cope with these issues."

    Dr King said CAHGE was not against genetics research or its possible medical
benefits. But he said it was vital to rally public and political opposition to
human cloning and human germline engineering (altering humans' inheritable
characteristics) before they came within easy reach of science.

    Society had to be alert to dangers of employment or financial discrimination
against people genetically predisposed to disease, to pressure on women to have
abortions with greater antenatal genetic screening, and to genetic explanations
for social problems. "There's a large amount of work going on in behavioural
genetics and that is beginning to influence mainstream policy formation."

    Richard Nicholson, the editor of the Bulletin of Medical Ethics, said: "I
regard the mapping of the human genome as an incredible achievement. But much
like climbing Mount Everest or getting to the North Pole, it will be something
of benefit to a few people and unlikely to benefit the vast majority of mankind.

    "Medical research has become a very competitive field, where the priority of
many of those involved is no longer to make discoveries for the general good of
humanity or even for the sake of knowledge but career advancement and the needs
of the shareholders of biotech and pharma companies."

    Agnes Fletcher of the Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation
warned of a subtle revival of eugenics - effectively a selective human breeding
programme to weed out "undesirable" traits and promote "desirable" ones - such
as that pursued by the Nazis.

    "The promise is all about gene therapy and cures for difficult and often
painful conditions. In fact, what seems to be is that the money will come from
genetic testing and screening out, antenatally, a whole range of genetic
characteristics."

    G2 cover story Special report on the ethics of genetics at
www.guardianunlimited. co.uk/genes

    Link

    www.ornl.gov/hgmis Human genome project www.celera.com Celera


LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2000


                             942 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 28, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: French claim gene therapy breakthrough

BODY:

    French scientists claim today to have successfully delivered 'gene therapy'
to two infants condemned to a life sealed off from all others, writes Tim
Radford.

    The babies, aged 8 and 11 months, were born with a rare condition called
human severe combined immunodeficiency (Scid) XI. Such children are forced to
live in a sterile 'bubble' - because they have no immune systems and would be
unable to resist any infection - while waiting for a bone marrow transplant.

    Alain Fischer of the hospital Necker in Paris reports in the US journal
Science that he and a colleague delivered a normal copy of the defective gene
that caused Scid XI which proliferated in the patient's body. The new gene
'unblocked' the development of the other immune cells, restoring the immune
system to normal functioning.

    The two children have so far been normal for 11 months, with no side
effects. A third patient is doing well after similar treatment four months ago,
according to the report.

    There are around 4,000 diseases caused by defects in single genes.
Scientists began dreaming almost a decade ago of treating illnesses such as
cystic fibrosis by replacing genes. But the treatments proved difficult and
success has been elusive. Some diseases were far more difficult to treat than
researchers had imagined. The cystic fibrosis experiments were dis appointing.
There was alarm in the US this year at deaths in what may prove to be
improperly-conducted gene therapy trials. The Paris experiment is one of the
first of this kind of treatment to succeed.

    Dr Fischer and colleagues took bone marrow from the children, and filtered
out blood stem cells. They bathed them in a growth factor and then infected the
cells with a retrovirus which carried a good copy of the gene. They then put the
infected cells back into the babies without giving any drug treatment at all.

    The children now have immune cell counts similar to those of normal
children. Both now live at home, without treatment, and are developing normally.


LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000


                             945 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 April 17, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 875 words

HEADLINE: Tomorrow's world;
Futurecast, a new series of dramas on Channel 4, imagines what television will
be like in 2012. It's all great fun, says Mark Lawson. Just don't take the
predictions too seriously

BODY:

    Because memory is fallible and research tedious, it's easy for writers to
get the past wrong. Historical novelists dread the gleefully pedantic letter
pointing out that their beautifully described drowning was unlikely because the
year in question had been one of catastrophic drought.

    Getting the future wrong is probably worse, though, because more people will
notice. In 1989, Martin Amis published London Fields, set 10 years later. The
novel correctly predicted many of the social neuroses of the real 1999, and
there's one impressive accidental prophecy the big television show of the pre
-millennium year is a quiz game with a host who sounds oddly like Chris Tarrant
but, in this fictional Britain, mobile phones are exotic tools which only a
technological elite possess.

    In a week which sees the start of Futurecast (C4, Thursday, 9pm) three
dramas set in 2012 mobile phones offer a good example of the difficulty of
predictive fiction: we tend to extend what we can already see but many advances
creep out of the dark. Writing London Fields during the Cold War at a time when
portable telephones were in-car models the size of sewing machines, Amis
anticipated a nuclear stand-off and communication from call boxes. What we got
was Kosovo and signs in restaurants and theatres warning clients to silence
their mobiles. These developments were unguessable; the risk of crystal-ball
fiction.

    Projecting forwards now from 2000, we're likely to make the same mistake.
The smart bet seems to be a population carrying mobile video-phones and
shouting, presumably, 'Can you see me on the train?' Another default assumption
would be the domination of the internet. It would be a brave science-fiction
writer now who built a scene around a High Street shop rather than showing
consumers choosing goods from a screen. And yet both these predictions may seem
ridiculous by 2012. The futuristic writer looks up from the word processor to
see newspaper stories of new fears over mobile phone radiation and a sudden
sell-off of new technology stocks. Maybe 2012 will still have call-boxes and
family butchers after all.

    The three plays which make up the Futurecast series are specifically
intended to explore the future of television. The opening drama Kidnap by John
Milne shows a world in which television is transmitted purely through the world
wide web. Because internet broadcasts are harder to protect than those from
satellites or transmitters, the networks are at the mercy of cyber-pirates, who
can hack into channels during live transmissions and take them over.

    In a similar stretching of present trends, Milne assumes that Britain will
be part of a European superstate. Public healthcare is provided by the EHS
(European Health Service) but and again you feel contemporary headlines being
magnified there is two-tier provision. The best treatments are available to the
privately insured, while clients of the EHS die from similar illnesses.

    That standby of science fiction the cure for cancer has been discovered
through gene therapy but only private medicine provides it. Yet even some of the
well-heeled are unable to arrange private insurance because genetic screening
now mandatory in the European Super State has revealed that they will develop
expensive conditions.

    This proposition allows a thriller plot, in which an anarchist and the wife
of an EHS cancer patient kidnap the head of the pharmaceutical company which
pioneered gene treatment and stage live on internet television a debate about
whether he should live or die.

    The traditional problem of science fiction has been that it tends to over
-estimate the rate of change. According to the novelistic prophets of the past,
there ought to be hotels on Mars by now. A 70s BBC1 series called Plays For
Tomorrow in which Play For Today dramatists were encouraged to look ahead in
anger predicted, for the era which is now our present, electric cars, the
complete breakdown of social order and everyone walking around in acrylic polo
-necks.

    Writer Milne and director Bryn Higgins are cautious visually. The vehicles
and haircuts are more or less ours. But they present huge political, social and
technological changes. A European health service in 12 years. Obligatory gene
-profiling, we learn from a flashback, was introduced in 2004 which, in
Westminster terms, is the day after tomorrow.

    The date of these dramas 2012 has the same relationship to now as 1988 has.
Many of the cars, clothes, songs and celebrities from back then still exist
today. It would be interesting to know if Channel 4 which commissioned these
predictive plays is working at boardroom level as well on the assumption that
television will only exist on the internet in three Olympic years from now.

    But, from the evidence of the first drama, it seems that the main weakness
of Futurecast is that its predictions never do more than inflate the already
visible. Its world is a kind of 2000 to the power of three. A few bold counter
-intuitive guesses letter-writing making a comeback in a culture tired of email
and mobile phones, a sudden braining-up of culture bringing Chekhov and Ibsen
productions nightly on ITV would have been more fun.


LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000


                             953 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 15, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: Hear this

BODY:

    The extraordinary capacity some people have to dodge the reality of their
own behaviour has been brought home to Julia O'Connell Davidson, Laurie Taylor's
guest in Thinking Allowed (4.0pm, Radio 4). Having had long discussions with
those who travel abroad to satisfy their paedophile appetites she found that
many place their activities in the socially acceptable category of 'holiday
romances". They often view their exploitation of their young victims as just
another leisure activity.

    Jesse Gelsinger thought he would receive routine treatment for his liver
problem when he went into a Pennsylvania hospital last September. However, he
had a fatal reac tion to the genetically modified virus used experimentally by
his doctors. As Peter Evans (pictured) reports in Frontiers (9.0pm, Radio 4),
the incident has caused widespread alarm. A sense of crisis now pervades the
world of gene therapy.

    Harold Jackson


LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2000


                             954 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 13, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: Parents back gene therapy

BODY:

    Most parents would let their children undergo gene therapy, even though they
were unclear about the technique involved, according to a Mori poll commissioned
by medical charity Action Research.

    It showed 65% of adults were unclear about what gene cloning meant. But
after the process was explained, 74% agreed gene therapy was acceptable if it
was tightly controlled.

    Gene cloning is the process of producing copies of a single gene. Gene
therapy involves introducing the healthy gene into a patient to combat a genetic
disease, such as cystic fibrosis.

    In Scotland, 85% would let their child undergo gene therapy, compared with
74% in England, 73% in Wales and 62% in London. While 35% of adults understood
gene cloning, 32% thought it referred to producing cloned animals such as Dolly
the sheep.

    Action Research's director of communications and marketing, John Grounds,
said: 'The results of our Mori poll are very encouraging.

    'The lack of clear understanding was not really a surprise. There has been
so much about GM foods and Dolly the sheep that people have got at best an
incomplete understanding of what it is.'


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2000


                             962 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 7, 2000

SECTION: Guardian City Pages; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: Oxford hits the biotech jackpot;
News Analysis Behind the dreaming spires, university is rolling in money after
healthcare shares boom

BYLINE: Andrew Clark

BODY:

    Andrew Clark

    Threadbare gowns and rusty bicycles could become a thing of the past for
Oxford university - the place is suddenly rolling with money after the explosion
in the shares of biotechnology companies in the City of London.

    Five of the soaraway healthcare companies on the stock market began life at
Oxford. When they became independent, the university was shrewd enough to insist
on an equity stake in return for its intellectual property. Those stakes are now
worth more than pounds 55m.

    The dons are surprisingly coy about their sudden success. Decisions are
taken by an investment committee of five eminent fellows, chaired by William
Hayes, the president of St John's College. 'We own a substantial amount in share
value,' Dr Hayes admits guardedly. 'If the university ever needed a chunk of
money, it's there to be cashed in.'

    The university's biggest success so far is Powderject Pharmaceuticals, which
has developed a needle-free injection system under which drugs are blasted
through the skin at supersonic speeds by a pen-like device, powered with
compressed gas. The idea was hatched at Oxford's Medical Engineering Department,
by a group headed by Professor Brian Bellhouse, who is still on Powderject's
board.

    Analysts believe it could prove a moneyspinner, offering an alternative to
patients who have phobias for traditional needles, and getting round the problem
of jabs passing on HIV.

    Since flotation in 1997, the shares have tripled and the university's 3.7%
stake is now worth pounds 20m. So when might the university cash in its stake?

    'We wouldn't do anything in the early stages to disturb their share price,'
says Dr Hayes. 'We keep a friendly eye on them to begin with - we know all the
people involved, they're all Oxford people.' However, he adds: 'Once these
companies are firmly established on the stock market, we would look at them and
decide when to exit.'

    Among his colleagues on the committee is Earl Cairns, chairman of Allied
Zurich. He provides a City view, as a former chief executive of the investment
bank SG Warburg. Making up the numbers are two more senior dons and Sir Philip
Jones, who is 'curator of the university chest'.

    The university's other growth stocks include a chunk of Oxford BioMedica - a
business conceived by husband and wife team Alan and Susan Kingsman. They have
developed new gene therapy techniques while working as academics in Oxford's
biochemistry department. With treatments for breast and ovarian cancer in the
pipeline, it has surged in value to pounds 179m amid genetics enthusiasm.

    Oxford BioMedica's finance director, Andrew Wood, says: 'The university is a
fairly passive shareholder. They've given us freedom to operate - they've
allowed the management to manage the business.'

    Oxford Glycosciences, which develops protein-based medicine, has done
equally well, as has Oxford Asymmetry - a specialist in combinatorial chemistry.
The only disappointment is Oxford Molecular, a chemical services business which
is struggling so much that it has put itself up for sale.

    The proceeds from any share disposal would be split three ways. Some would
go to the department in which the company originated, some would fund more
technology transfer programmes and the rest would go into the university's
central funds. But, will the biotech boom benefit Oxford's financially
struggling students?

    John Clements, the university's director of finance, says: 'That's a very
difficult question to answer. There isn't a direct link between a particular
source of money at one end and specific spending at the other. The whole
university community will benefit, though.'

    The most likely course of action would be for some of the proceeds to be put
into an endowment fund, with the interest used to support students. The value of
the shares is significant for the university's finances - the institution's
income last year was pounds 319m. The government's efforts to end special
treatment for Oxbridge has meant a squeeze on funding. So much so that Cambridge
is green with envy. Richard Jennings, of Cambridge University's industrial
liaison office, says: 'None of the companies we've set up here have floated yet.
We'd certainly like them to.'

    The closest yet is Cambridge Display Technology, which makes innovative
light -emitting devices which could replace the technology in television sets.
The business has just been through a refinancing valuing it at pounds 81m.

    'It's probably worth much more than that,' says Mr Jennings. 'If there was a
public offering, we would consider realising some value.'

    The boom looks set to continue - hi-tech biotechs have replaced 'dot.com'
companies as targets for many small investors. Just yesterday, the value of
Oxford university's shares increased by nearly pounds 3m, as the drugs sector
surged further. Enough to fund a few more library books, surely? Dr Hayes is yet
to be convinced that it is time to take profits. 'Not in the short term,' he
says. ' We will treat these shares just like any other investment organisation
would, though.' If the university's portfolio keeps soaring, he may find it hard
to resist the temptation to get out at the top.


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             963 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                 March 2, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: Gene hope for victims of haemophilia

BODY:

    American scientists claim today to have successfully delivered gene therapy
to people with the inherited bleeding disorder haemophilia.

    Haemophilia B affects one male in 30,000 worldwide, and severe cases usually
need frequent treatment with a clotting factor to protect their joints and
prevent internal bleeding that can lead to death.

    The scientists report in the magazine Nature Genetics that they altered a
human adenovirus to carry the genetic instructions to make a blood-clotting
protein, factor IX, and injected three adult sufferers. After 100 days, two
required significantly less of the infused clotting factor to keep their disease
at bay, none showed any adverse effects, and all three showed evidence the gene
had transferred to the patient's muscle cells.

    'This exciting new treatment offers the possibility of converting severe
haemophilia B to a milder form through a relatively non-invasive procedure,'
said Katharine High, of the children's hospital of Philadelphia, who led the
study.

    Gene therapy has been proposed as the ideal treatment for up to 4,000
diseases based on single gene defects. Attempts to treat inherited disorders
began 10 years ago, but were disappointing and caused alarm in the US at the
deaths in such experiments.

    'We are at the beginning,' said Dr High, 'but our results strengthen the
possibility that gene therapy may help patients with other diseases.' Tim
Radford


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2000


                             966 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 22, 2000

SECTION: Guardian City Pages; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: City briefing

BODY:

    Dolly creates 150 jobs

    PPL Therapeutics, the company which created Dolly the sheep, has secured
funding to build a pounds 42m factory in Scotland. The facility will extract
AAT, a protein used in treating cystic fibrosis, from the milk of transgenic
sheep.

    It will mean at least 150 new jobs in the Lothians. The company's shares
rose 18.5p to 135p on the announcement.

    PPL threatened last year to move the project to the US or New Zealand,
complaining that few incentives were on offer in Scotland. However, it has
secured pounds 2.5m in regional assistance and a pounds 13.5m loan from Royal
Bank of Scotland underwritten by Scottish Enterprise. Biomedica's pet project

    Gene therapy company Oxford Biomedica is to develop cancer vaccines for cats
and dogs in a tie-up with French veterinary drugs group Virbac.

    Chief executive Alan Kingsman said the market in cancer products for pets
was worth $ 200m ( pounds 125m) in America and Europe.

    The company has several vaccines already in development for humans and
believes these could be replicated for animal use. AstraZeneca spin-off inquiry

    The US federal trade commission has asked AstraZeneca for more information
about the pounds 9.5bn spin-off of its agrochemicals division.

    The business is due to be merged with Swiss group Novartis's agrochemicals
operation, creating a new group, Syngenta. Analysts believe regulators will
require the sale of products in seeds and crop protection to overcome
competition concerns.

    Despite the request, AstraZeneca said it believed it could complete the deal
in the second half of this year as planned. Tesco, Barclays row over pounds 1
levy

    Tesco will remove Barclays' cash machines from its stores if the bank
introduces fees for using them.

    Barclays, which has 200 machines in the company's stores, last year proposed
introducing fees for customers of other banks who use its machines.

    Tesco reacted today by saying it had invited Nationwide building society,
which backs free access to cash machines, to tender for Barclays' slots.

    Barclays and Tesco are due to sit down with the 32 other members of the cash
machine alliance, Link, next week to make a final decision on charges. Red Star
makes drastic cuts Red Star Parcels, the company sold by British Rail for less
than pounds 1 when it was privatised, has shut down 60 collection points, a
third of its entire UK network because of heavy losses. In some cases customers
will now have to travel more than 100 miles if they want to send goods by rail.
David Burtenshaw chief executive of Lynx, the company which bought out Red Star
two years ago, said the decision was due to 'commercial viability'.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2000


                             968 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 15, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Foreign Pages; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: Prospectors hunt human gene clues in New World

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:

    James Meek

    Centuries after waves of emigrants sailed from the British Isles in search
of the riches of the New World, a British biotechnology firm is crossing the
Atlantic to prospect for treasure too small to be seen with the naked eye: human
genes.

    The Cambridge-based biotech company Gemini Holdings announced yesterday that
it was forming a multi-million-pound joint venture with a group of doctors in
Newfoundland to hunt in the province's unique gene pool for the elusive mutant
genes which cause illnesses.

    Because the bulk of the Newfoundland's 550,000 citizens are descended from
just 25,000 English, Scottish and Irish settlers who colonised the province
between the 17th and 19th centuries, they are genetically much more similar than
the inhabitants of big communities with diverse origins, such as 21st century
Britain.

    The more similar a group of people's genes are, the more the differences
stick out, making it easier for researchers to spot the subtle mutations which
could be the cause of diseases such as cancer or Alzheimer's.

    It remains to be seen how news of the project will play in greater Canada,
where Newfies are already popularly regarded as having lived too long together
in remote isolation.

    'I think 'inbred population' is a recognised genetic term,' said Howard
Christley, Gemini's clinical director. 'I'm not sure whether it's politically
correct.'

    So far the best known case of large scale gene prospecting is in Iceland,
where a local firm, deCode Genetics has - with parliamentary consent, and
majority public support - won the exclusive right to put the medical records and
scrupulously maintained family trees of the entire population of 250,000 into a
giant genetic database.

    Even more than the Newfies, the Icelanders are genetically similar, mostly
tracing their ancestry back to the small groups of Norse settlers who colonised
the island at the turn of the last millennium.

    That project has raised questions both about patient confidentiality and
potential 'ownership' of naturally occurring human genes.

    If commercial gene prospectors isolate genes responsible for illnesses,
their first step, even as they publish their findings in scientific journals, is
to patent the gene in order to make commercial use of it. Non-profit researchers
now do the same thing, ostensibly to keep the gene in the public domain.

    The Newfoundland project is on a smaller scale than the Icelandic effort. To
be known as Newfound Genomics, it brings Gemini together with a consortium
called Lineage Biomedical, set up by Newfoundland doctors.

    The doctors will recruit families with a high proportion of sufferers from
diseases common in the province such as psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis and
diabetes. Gemini will use its genetic data-processing expertise, gained working
on thousands of sets of non-identical twins, to identify genes in the patients
which differ from those in healthy Newfies.

    As in Iceland, family trees will help show how genetic diseases are
transmitted from generation to generation. But unlike in Iceland, Newfound
Genomics will not have access to the medical records of everyone in the
province.

    The researchers aim to develop drug or gene therapies to counter the effect
of the isolated genes - a boon for mankind and a rich prize for the firms which
find the genes.

    Dr Christley said his company was focusing on gene discovery and would leave
it up to the big drug companies to create treatments. Newfoundland, old
stereotypes

    Population 560,000

    Size 156,185 sq miles

    Capital St John's

    Economy Canada's poorest province, with lowest per capita income and highest
unemployment

    Culture Resentment at perception of Newfies as congenital idiots, and hence
the butt of national humour, fuels self-expression through songs, plays and
film. The Rock, as it is known, was the setting for E Annie Proulx's novel The
Shipping News

    Moose 7,700 live in the Gros Morne national park, a world heritage site, a
land of fjords, glacial lakes, marshes, bogs, and alpine plateaux

    Sex Bad weather, isolation, a close-knit community, and a lack of
multi-screen cinemas conspire to make Newfies Canada's most enthusiastic
copulators. Surveys show that 69% are sexually active, 10 points ahead of the
national average


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000


                             969 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                               February 12, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Foreign Pages; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Aids threat to gene therapy volunteers

BYLINE: James Meek Science Correspondent

BODY:

    James Meek Science Correspondent

    Fresh concerns over the conduct of gene therapy research were raised in the
United States yesterday when it emerged that a group of young cancer patients
acting as guinea pigs had not been told that they could have been accidentally
exposed to the virus which causes Aids.

    Researchers at the St Jude children's research hospital in Memphis,
Tennessee, discovered in December that genet ically modified cells implanted in
more than a score of patients could have been contaminated.

    But according to yesterday's Washington Post, the scientists only decided to
warn patients and their families on Thursday, when the newspaper told them it
had learned of the problem.

    The hospital was last night expected to make a statement on the issue.

    The Memphis revelations come at a time of intense anxiety over the pace and
style of gene therapy research in the US.

    The death last year of the teenage gene therapy trial volunteer Jesse
Gelsinger; the subsequent government shutdown of all gene therapy trials at the
respected Pennsylvania institute where Gelsinger was being treated; and the
discovery that gene therapy research teams nationwide had failed to properly
report deaths and complications among trial patients have all contributed to a
widespread fear in the US that researchers are putting the interests of science
and commerce before the interests of patients.

    The Memphis trials, run jointly with a smaller study at the Baylor college
of medicine in Houston, Texas, began in 1995 and involved patients aged under 26
who were dying of cancer.

    Samples of their tumour cells were removed, modified with a gene carried by
a specially tailored virus and reinjected in the hope of provoking the patients'
immune system to attack the tumour.

    On Thursday Laura Bowman, who headed the study at St Jude, admitted that
some of the cells used to grow the engineered viruses did not appear to have
been screened properly for contamination.

    Tests late last year showed that some of the engineered viruses could have
been contaminated with HIV-1, which causes Aids, and HCV, which causes hepatitis
C.

    Researchers and federal officials point out that the initial test results
could prove wrong. But the episode casts fresh doubts over the tightness of
procedures to care for patient welfare in this frontier medical technology.

    Fears have been expressed in the US that pressure for results from biotech
companies plugging their stocks on Wall Street could have led to the scientists
they sponsor cutting regulatory corners.

    Gene therapy has yet to produce a proven clinical treatment, let alone a
cure. But some commentators argue that its past reputation as being relatively
harmless in trials may have led researchers to become too relaxed about
reporting problems - particularly when so many patient volunteers are fatally
ill anyway.

    Dr Bowman said that only four of the 20 patients she had treated in the
trials were still alive; two out of six patients in the Houston study had died.
All died from cancer, she said.

    Earlier this week President Bill Clinton said that federal health agencies
would have to speed up their review of US gene therapy rules and guidelines to
see whether patients who volunteered to be guinea pigs needed better protection.

    The agencies responsible for licensing gene therapy tests in Britain, which
have given permission for 40 trials since 1992, argue that procedures here are
already tighter than in the US.

    Despite the slow pace of gene therapy research, the scientific community
remains optimistic that it will, eventually, start to produce results.


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000


                             972 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 9, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Foreign Pages; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 738 words

BYLINE: Martin Kettle in Washington

BODY:

    Martin Kettle in Washington

    President Bill Clinton moved yesterday to try to defuse growing public
anxiety about the misuse of human genetic research.

    In one of the most detailed speeches on medical research issues given by a
US president, Mr Clinton barred American federal government agencies from
discriminating against employees on the basis of genetic tests. He also gave his
backing to a senate bill which aims to extend similar protections to the private
sector and insurance purchasers.

    Concern is mounting that genetic testing and research which allow doctors to
predict the future health of their patients are already being used to
discriminate against workers, and to assess insurance risks.

    'This extraordinary march of human understanding imposes on us a profound
responsibility to make sure that the age of discovery can continue to reflect
our most cherished values,' Mr Clinton said yesterday. 'We must protect our
citizens' privacy - the bulwark of personal liberty, the safeguard of individual
creativity.'

    Mr Clinton also waded into the current controversy over problems surrounding
clinical trials of gene therapies. Gene therapy research projects at several US
centres have been halted since news of the death of a patient in a university of
Pennsylvania experiment last year became public.

    The president announced that federal health bodies must 'expedite their
review of gene therapy guidelines and regulations to determine whether the
current informed consent requirements need to be strengthened.'

    The president announced his initiatives yesterday in a speech to the
American Association for the Advancement of Science in Washington.

    In addition to issuing an executive order affecting every federal government
department and agency, Mr Clinton said he endorsed a bill sponsored by the
Democratic senators Tom Daschle and Edward Kennedy and the Republican
congresswoman Louise Slaughter, which extends the same provisions to the private
sector.

    The Daschle bill would prohibit all employers from refusing to hire workers
who are at risk as a result of health problems and would prevent insurers
refusing to sell them cover.

    Mr Clinton, who spoke with Dr Francis Collins, the director of the US human
genome research institute, standing at his side, echoed a plea which he has made
in several recent speeches, including in his recent state of the union address
that 'we must see that science serves humanity, not the other way around'.

    Mr Clinton said it was vital not to allow concerns about the misuse of
genetic information to discourage people from seeking the tests which could
improve their lives. 'If we do not protect the right to privacy, we may actually
impede the reach of these breakthroughs in the lives of ordinary people, which
would be a profound tragedy,' he said.

    The White House said that the speech sent 'a powerful message' to the
private sector to adopt a similar approach. 'I think it starts an important
process on an issue that all the surveys show Americans are very concerned
about, moving into the future,' presidential spokesman Joe Lockhart told
reporters.

    The central issue in the new policy initiative is to prevent progress in
genetic testing from being used by employers and risk assessors to discriminate
against workers - including those who have not yet or may never show the signs
of illness - in an attempt to avoid possible health care costs.

    The fear of such discrimination is very real, American research has shown. A
1996 study in the journal Science showed that 15% of individuals who had been
identified as being at risk of developing a genetic condition reported that they
had been asked questions about genetic diseases on job applications. One in 10
claimed that they had been denied a job or had been fired because of a genetic
condition in their families.

    Such experiences and anxieties are likely to increase in the coming years as
improved medical research techniques mean that more people become aware of their
own genetic conditions.

    A 1997 study by the US national centre for genome resources found that 63%
of people surveyed would not take genetic tests if they believed that employers
were able to have access to the results.

    In addition, half of the survey respondents said they believed that most
employers were likely to ask their workers to take genetic tests in the future.


LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000


                             973 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 8, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Features Pages; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: The inherited diseases that gene therapy could cure

BODY:

    Cystic fibrosis

    Affects about 7,000 people in the UK. One in 25 people is a carrier of the
faulty gene. The disease causes a thick mucus to build up in the lungs which,
along with other symptoms, impairs breathing. Medical improvements have pushed
average survival age up to adulthood, but the disease still cuts life
drastically short, usually from respiratory failure.

    Muscular dystrophy

    A family of disorders caused by abnormal genes. The most common form affects
about one in 15,000 male births. Muscles progressively waste away, with death
normally in the late teens or early 20s. Identification of the gene responsible
has made diagnosis straightforward even before symptoms develop but scientists
are wary of seeking a gene therapy to treat it; it appears that working genes
would somehow need to be introduced into every affected cell, a daunting task.

    Huntington's disease

    About one in 10,000 people have the faulty gene that causes this
degenerative nerve disease. It usually appears between the ages of 35 and 40.
Involuntary muscle movements and dementia usually lead to death within 10 years.

    Haemophilia

    A disease that prevents normal blood clotting, causing a major crisis even
from the most minor injury. The defective gene that causes the disease is passed
by father to daughter; the daughter doesn't suffer from it, but becomes a
carrier. Researchers have recently announced encouraging results from gene
therapy trials to combat haemophilia.

    Epidermolysis bullosa

    One of thousands of extremely rare genetic disorders waiting for a gene
therapy miracle, the faulty gene here fails to hold skin together properly. Skin
comes off when rubbed; parents cannot pick up their children. One in every
20,000 UK babies is affected.

    JM


LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000


                             976 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                February 1, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Foreign Pages; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 655 words

HEADLINE: Researchers suspected of hiding deaths in gene tests;
US discovers hundreds of human experiments that failed

BYLINE: Julian Borger in Washington

BODY:

    Julian Borger in Washington

    Gene therapy experiments on seriously ill patients in the US have gone wrong
far more often than previously thought and hundreds of problems, including a
number of deaths, have gone unreported, medical authorities said yesterday.

    An official at America's National Institutes of Health (NIH) confirmed a
report in yesterday's Washington Post that there had been 691 'serious adverse
events' - serious deterioration or death - in US gene therapy experiments on
human patients and that 652 of them had not been reported to the NIH as federal
regulations required.

    US researchers expressed concern yesterday that the failure to report the
deaths sprang from fear that bad publicity could affect the financial standing
of private medical corporations funding the research.

    Gene therapy - the attempt to cure diseases by altering a patient's genetic
makeup - is in its early stages and has yet to provide a cure after 10 years of
studies.

    It is unclear how many deaths have been caused by gene therapy experiments
as many of the subjects are terminally ill patients. But the Washington Post
reported that in one Harvard-run trial in Boston, three out of six patients
died, and the gene-therapy experiment was quietly suspended last summer without
the NIH being informed at the time.

    Richard Junghans, the researcher conducting the study, blamed the deaths on
tragic coincidences related to the patients' chronic diseases, but the failure
to report the deaths meant that other researchers were not given the opportunity
to review that conclusion.

    'It is important to make these reports promptly so that appropriate measures
can be taken by other researchers to safeguard the health of other patients,' an
NIH official said. Results of an NIH investigation into the problemare due to be
presented to a congressional committee at an open hearing tomorrow.

    The scale of the problem came to light after the death last September of
Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old undergoing experimental therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania, after the infusion of a genetically modified cold
virus into his diseased liver.

    The university gene therapy programme was closed down 10 days ago after
several professional lapses were discovered which might have contributed to the
death.

    After Gelsinger died, the NIH sent reminders that any 'adverse events' had
to be reported immediately.

    The reminders prompted 691 responses, 652 of which were late. It was found
that many researchers were reporting only to the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), which keeps information secret. The NIH, which publishes all the
information it gets, was being kept in the dark.

    Several researchers claimed they had not reported deaths in their trials to
the NIH because they did not know it was a requirement. The NIH claims it did
enough to make research laboratories aware of their obligations.

    Stuart Newman, a professor of cell biology at the New York Medical College,
said: 'Whenever there are these kind of experiments, there are human subject
committees and biosafety committees which inform the experimenter what the
protocols are, to make sure nothing slips through the cracks.

    'But it looks like a lot has been getting through the cracks, which makes me
think these problems are being deliberately withheld.'

    'Because of the heavy commercialisation of this research there really is an
incentive to keep secret anything that reflects badly on the progress of the
work,' said Professor Newman, who is also on the board of directors of a
watchdog medical body, the Council for Responsible Genetics.

    Gene therapy trials are normally carried out on patients with terminal
illnesses who are in a desperate condition, he argued, so 'experimenters can
convince themselves that it was because they (the subjects) were sick anyway,
and chalk it up to that. It gives them wiggle room'.


LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2000


                             978 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 25, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Leader Pages; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: Making gene therapy safe

BYLINE: Alastair Kent

BODY:

    All medical research carries with it risks, otherwise doctors would move
straight to treatment. Rather then exposing particular risks for gene therapy,
the death of Jesse Gelsinger highlights the importance of the regulatory bodies
set up to monitor this work protecting patients who participate in trials (Death
exposes risks of gene therapy, January 24) .

    The Pennsylvanian Institute appears to have mismanaged its research, and to
have shown a disregard for good practice that must be condemned. But this should
not be taken to imply that gene therapy is inherently unsafe and that properly
regulated clinical trials should be halted.

    Progress in genetics, and its application through gene therapy offers the
best hope for a cure for many currently untreatable conditions. Without the
research, and without volunteers willing to participate in clinical trials, then
for those affected the inevitability is chronic ill health, progressive
disability and premature death. Research must continue, and the mistakes or
misjudgments at one centre should not be used to damage an aspect of scientific
endeavour which hold out great hope for many millions of people with incurable
diseases.

    After all, the regulatory system in the UK is very different from the US.
Alastair Kent

    Genetic Interest Group

    mail@gig.org.uk


LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2000


                             979 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 24, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 948 words

HEADLINE: Death exposes risks of gene therapy;
Inquiry uncovers safety breaches and deception in case of teenager who died at
esteemed centre

BYLINE: James Meek

BODY:

    James Meek

    When Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old volunteer from Arizona, died during
trials of an experimental gene-based medical treatment last September, his
father called him a hero and praised the scientists treating him.

    But at the weekend, after US investigators probing an astonishing catalogue
of safety violations and deception shut down all experiments at the
once-esteemed Pennsylvania Institute for Gene Therapy, a shattered Paul
Gelsinger was seeing his son in a new light: that of victim.

    'Everybody was wrong,' he said in a US interview. 'Even me.'

    The Arizona teenager is the first person to die as a direct result of gene
therapy, the medical revolution-in-waiting which promises to cure scores of
incurable diseases but has yet to cure one.

    In the wake of his death increasingly troubling accounts began to emerge of
the institute's cavalier practices. But the radical move on Friday by the US
food and drug administration to suspend indefinitely all seven gene therapy
studies at the institute, one of the world's biggest, still shocked the
international genetic research community.

    In Britain, Norman Nevin, chairman of the government's gene therapy advisory
committee (GTAC), said that there were no plans to re-examine the 40-odd gene
therapy trials under way here in the light of the FDA's move.

    About 350 patients are involved in the trials.

    The GTAC, which licenses all gene therapy experiments in the UK, had already
reviewed its programme after Gelsinger's death, Professor Nevin said. None of
the British trials was directly comparable to what was going on in Pennsylvania.
Risk

    'I'm very happy that no patient in the UK is at risk as a result of what
happened to Jesse,' said Prof Nevin.

    Jesse Gelsinger suffered from an inherited liver complaint called ornithine
transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC). The institute was testing a method of helping
sufferers by using a modified cold virus to carry the gene which produced the
deficient enzyme into their liver.

    After he was injected with the virus, Gelsinger's immune system launched a
massive counter-attack to reject it which destroyed his liver and spleen and
badly damaged other organs, killing him four days later.

    The institute is accused of giving Gelsinger too high a dose of the virus,
ignoring clinical signs that Gelsinger was not fit to take part in the test and
concealing from the authorities that previous volunteers had shown toxic
reactions to the virus.

    Investigators could find no evidence that all the 18 patients recruited for
the trial had been fully informed of the risks beforehand. Consent forms were
doctored without the authorities' permission to omit the fact that monkeys who
took part in a similar trial had died.

    Instead of screening the 18 for eligibility before they were recruited, the
institute printed up eligibility forms only after Gelsinger died, leaving them
unsigned and undated.

    The institute, which has an annual budget of $ 25m, is headed by the
distinguished James Wilson, past president of the American Society for Gene
Therapy.

    Dr Wilson has yet to respond publicly to the FDA's latest move. As founder
of the biotech firm Genovo, he stood to benefit financially from a successful
outcome of the trial which led to Gelsinger's death.

    Genetic researchers and biotech lobbyists were trying to distance themselves
at the weekend from what happened at Pennsylvania, arguing that it was down to
bad administrative practice rather than bad science and that a crackdown by the
regulators would ultimately be good for the field's image.

    'I think the public will have more confidence if they know the FDA will
enforce the rules,' said Michael Werner of BIO, the Biotechnology Industry
Organisation. The crisis at Pennsylvania comes as biotech shares are surging on
world stock markets. Wake-up call

    'This is really a wake-up call, where perhaps we get a little comfortable
with things as they're going on and then get a little cavalier," said Estuardo
Aguilar-Cordova, a gene therapy adviser to the US national institutes of health.

    The first gene therapy trials were in 1990. Hundreds are now under way
around the world, none yet offering a definitive cure but all sustained by the
enthusiasm of drugs companies, the desperate eagerness of sufferers from
inherited illnesses and the conviction of scientists that breakthroughs are
near.

    Gene therapy covers a multitude of treatments, all involving somehow getting
artificially manipulated genes into the human body to alter the way it works.

    This can mean changing the genes of a virus to kill cancer cells, using a
gene to trigger an otherwise inert drug, or - the greatest challenge - replacing
genes which do not work properly.

    It was this last method that the Pennsylvania team was trying to use. But
their technique - injecting a cold virus modified to carry 'good" genes directly
into the bloodstream of a sufferer - was known to carry a risk of triggering an
immune system reaction.

    Prof Nevin said that 11 gene therapy studies were under way in Britain using
the cold virus, or adenovirus, but none involved injecting into the blood.

    Sufferers from inherited diseases fear that kneejerk public hostility to
genetic medicine could rob them of a cure.

    Bill Gleeson, spokesman for Britain's 200,000 sufferers of retinitis
pigmentosa, a genetic defect which causes blindness, said: 'There's a difference
between clamping down on someone who might be a bit of a rogue and stopping
research altogether. Early surgery costs lives. Early anaesthesia costs lives.
You wouldn't want to turn the clock back on anaesthesia, would you?'


LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000


                             980 of 1016 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Guardian Newspapers Limited
                             The Guardian (London)

                                January 24, 2000

SECTION: Guardian Home Pages; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: Fooling the body: how trials are proceeding in UK

BODY:

    Brain cancer

    Royal Marsden hospital, Institute for Cancer Research

    The idea: fool cancer cells into triggering their own destruction. Genes
wrapped in a virus are injected directly into a brain tumour.

    The genes switch on production of an enzyme in the tumour cells which, in
turn, makes an otherwise inert chemotherapy drug start working, killing the
cells.

    Cystic fibrosis

    MRC human genetics unit, Edinburgh, Royal Brompton Hospital, Oxbridge-Leeds-
Manchester group

    With 6,000 sufferers in the UK, cystic fibrosis is the most common life
-shortening single gene disorder. The method under test involves spraying
synthetic fat droplets carrying the 'working' CF gene into the lungs of
sufferers. Initial trials with a nasal spray showed good results, but only for a
very short time. Head, neck and ovarian cancer Beatson Institute, Glasgow, and
other centres

    Uses the modified cold virus employed by the Pennsylvania researchers, but
in a completely different way. Instead of being a courier to deliver 'good'
genes into an ill human, here the virus's own genes are modified so that,
introduced into the human body, it becomes a cancer killer.

    Breast cancer

    Guy's hospital, London

    In 1997 permission was given to begin testing gene therapy to counter the
most common cancer for women over 35 in the UK.

    Two human genes which play a key part in breast cancer are packaged in a
virus called vaccinia and injected into the body. One gene 'unmasks' breast
tumour cells while the other 'recruits' specialist cells able to destroy them.

    Gastrointestinal cancer

    Royal Marsden hospital

    This family of cancers, including stomach cancer, causes about 44,000 UK
deaths a year. A minority of sufferers develop malignant ascites, a life
-threatening build-up of fluid in the abdominal cavity.

    The trial aims to use the same cold virus used in Pennsylvania to introduce
a human tumour suppression gene into the affected area.


LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000
