
                             1001 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1993 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                            October 15, 1993 Friday

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 495 words

HEADLINE: Milestone for Genzyme;
Analysts hail fibrosis find

BYLINE: MICHAEL E. KNELL

BODY:

   Researchers from Genzyme Corp. yesterday announced what experts called a
major milestone on the way to a treatment for cystic fibrosis, an inherited
illness affecting thousands.

   Analysts said the study's results fuel expectations that the firm will have a
life-saving product available in late 1997.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal genetic disease among whites, afflicts
30,000 Americans, who on average die by age 30. A genetic flaw affects the
cells' ability to move chloride ions, which has the effect of permitting
build-up of mucus.

   That affects breathing and can lead to fatal infection.

   Working with university scientists, Cambridge-based Genzyme used gene therapy
to treat symptoms of cystic fibrosis in the nose, but the technique must still
be extended to the lungs where the disease does its primary damage.

   Researchers who did the study said patients should be realistic.

   "There are many steps and this is one step along the route," said Michael
Welsh, professor of internal medicine at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at
the University of Iowa. "It is important that we tell people who have cystic
fibrosis about this, but it is also important that we caution them."

   The condition of cells in nose and lungs is similar, but bringing gene
therapy to the depths of "the bronchial tree" is very difficult, said Aubrey
Milunsky, director of the Center for Human Genetics at Boston University School
of Medicine.

   A cure depends on putting a corrected gene in all those cells, he said.
"Something that works and sticks around for good, forever or at least for long
enough. This is still a considerable distance from that."

   But Robert Dresing, president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, said the
distance is narrowing.

   "The study represents another significant step in the development of gene
therapy which should ultimately lead us to a cure," he said during an appearance
with Genzyme and Hughes researchers.

   Analyst Stuart Weisbrod of Merrill Lynch called the study "a great piece of
science" that is critical to reaching a cure.

   "If this didn't work, they would be nowhere."

   Wall Street's embrace of the news came quickly, as Genzyme stock yesterday
rose $3.875 to $38 a share.

   Genzyme stock price is about 18 times the firm's projected earnings for next
year, a relative bargain among biotechnology companies, he said.

   Yet, Genzyme has three other products that will likely reap large profits
before the firm has a treatment for cystic fibrosis, Weisbroad said. "That will
just be the icing on the cake if it works and I think it's going to work."

   Analyst David Stone of Cowen & Co. estimated the market for a cystic fibrosis
treatment at up to $1 billion a year. "This is a big product."

   In addition to saving thousands of lives, a treatment would be a cost-cutter,
he said. "They could charge $10,000 for the product and it would be a bargain
for the patient and the medical system too."

   A year from now Genzyme shares should trade for between $50 and $60, Stone
said

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1002 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     October 15, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: GENE STUDY MAY LEAD TO TREATMENT SCIENTISTS TARGET CYSTIC FIBROSIS
DEFECT

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY, Associated Press

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

    Scientists have shown for the first time that gene therapy can correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease of Americans.

   The approach, which uses genetically engineered cold viruses to ferry healthy
genes into the body, was widely praised as a major step toward the treatment of
a relentlessly fatal disease as well as a landmark in the infant field of gene
therapy.

   In the first tentative human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic
abnormality in the noses of three people with cystic fibrosis. However, they did
not attempt to fix malfunctioning cells in their lungs, the real source of the
diseases' tragic course toward death.

   Nonetheless, the genetic defects in the nose and lungs are the same. And the
latest work suggests that this approach may well restore the lungs so they work
normally.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
called the work "a giant step forward."

   "Unless there is something I cannot anticipate, we will get to the goal
line," he said.

   The research was conducted by Dr. Michael J. Welsh and colleagues from Howard
Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Iowa. He presented his results
Thursday at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference in Dallas.

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the preliminary experiment,
much larger doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the possible
hazards are still unknown.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in one in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000
Americans -- mostly whites -- have the disease, which runs in families.
Approximately one in every 25 white Americans carries a copy of the CF gene.
However, the disease occurs only in those who get two copies of the bad gene.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the chloride
flow defect.

   To work, the healthy gene will have to be inserted into the cells that line
the lungs' air passages. This would probably mean administering the treatment
through an aerosol spray or a bronchial tube.

   Two other research teams, headed by Drs. Ronald Crystal of Cornell University
and James Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania, are conducting similar
experiments. They are administering gene-carrying viruses directly to the lungs.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1993


                             1003 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: PROGRESS IS CITED ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   Using gene therapy, scientists have taken an important step toward correcting
the molecular defect thought to be the cause of cystic fibrosis.

   Dr. Michael J. Welsh of the Howard Hughes Institute of the University of Iowa
College of Medicine in Iowa City and his colleagues say they have used
inactivated cold viruses to carry corrective genes to cells lining the nose. The
genes, they found, provided the cells with a protein that is missing in cystic
fibrosis.

    But the result falls short of being a treatment. To alleviate cystic
fibrosis, investigators must deliver genes to the cells lining the lungs. Then
they must show that patients who receive these genes no longer secrete the
thick, sticky mucus that eventually leads to lung failure.

   Yet, Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, said the finding was very important because it showed for the first
time that the method of gene therapy can work. "It is a landmark observation,"
Dr. Lenfant said.

   Dr. Welsh and his colleagues are reporting their results in today's issue of
Cell.

30,000 Sufferers in U.S.

    Cystic fibrosis is the most common lethal genetic disease among white
people, striking an estimated 30,000 Americans. Patients lack a chloride channel
in their cells, a tunnel through the cell membrane that allows chloride ions and
water to pass through. Without such a passage, a viscous mucus builds up in the
lungs, which makes the lungs vulnerable to bacterial infections and which,
eventually, causes death from lung failure.

   Ever since the cystic fibrosis gene was found in September 1989, molecular
biologists have dreamed of supplying patients with healthy, functioning genes to
replace the genes that have gone awry. They knew from animal experiments that it
might be possible to supply those genes through an adenovirus, one of the virus
that causes the common cold. These viruses naturally infect the cells that line
the lung and they can be genetically altered so that they no longer cause
illness.

   In an infection, the adenoviruses act as a kind of molecular syringe,
injecting their own genetic material into cells they are invading. Researchers
decided to put copies of normal genes into adenoviruses so that the viruses
would inject these genes along with their own genes. The hope was that the
normal genes might function and allow the cells to make the needed chloride
channels. It would not be a permanent genetic change because the added genes
would not become part of the cells' genetic material. But researchers thought
they could treat patients with adenoviruses periodically as needed.

Earlier Experiments

    The first to try gene therapy in cystic fibrosis was Dr. Ronald Crystal of
New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York. Dr. Crystal and his
colleagues squirted adenoviruses directly into the lungs of three patients with
the disease. Last month, they reported that one woman who received this gene
therapy developed a lung inflammation and a cloudy spot on her lung. As a
result, Dr. Crystal reported that he had reworked his experiments to use a lower
dose and to put the virus in the nose first, to be sure the gene transfer worked
and was not harmful.

   Dr. Welsh said the next steps were to determine how long the added genes
function, how safe was the treatment and what was the best dose of adenovirus.

   "This is the first demonstration that we can actually do this in a human,"
Dr. Welsh said. But, he added, "we have a long way to go."


LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1993


                             1004 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            October 15, 1993 Friday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: GRAPHICS; Pg. A23

LENGTH: 242 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROGRESS

BODY:

   Friday, October 15, 1993 GENE THERAPY PROGRESS

   Recent advances in gene therapy:

   Researchers at the University of California at San Diego hope soon to insert
an AIDS-foiling gene into blood cells of people with AIDS.

   The gene makes a  protein, called a hairpin ribozyme, that destroys the AIDS
virus' ability to  make new copies of itself.

   At several hospitals, doctors are rebuilding children's damaged immune
systems. The youngsters have adenosine deaminase deficiency, a form of severe
combined immune deficiency, the so-called ``bubble boy'' disease. Doctors use  a
virus to replace the flawed gene that makes the enzyme, which is necessary  for
healthy blood cells to fight disease.

   Scientists are attempting to fight brain cancer by giving people a herpes
gene. The gene is carried into the body inside a harmless virus that infects
tumor cells. The gene makes the cancer susceptible to ganciclovir, a widely
used herpes medicine.

   Some people are at extremely high risk of heart disease because of a defect
in a gene that helps the liver remove cholesterol from the blood. In an attempt
to help them, researchers remove some of their liver cells, insert the missing
gene and put the cells back into their bodies.

   In an experimental effort against melanoma, the fatal form of skin cancer,
scientists are removing patients' white blood cells, giving them a gene that
makes a cancer-fighting protein called tumor necrosis factor, and returning
them.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1005 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    October 15, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 460 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS THERAPY SHOWS PROMISE;
GENETIC ENGINEERING TREATMENT IS HAILED FOR FATAL DISEASE

BYLINE: DANIEL Q. HANEY, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   Scientists have shown for the first time that gene therapy can correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease of Americans.

   The approach, which uses genetically engineered cold viruses to ferry healthy
genes into the body, was widely praised as a major step toward the treatment of
a relentlessly fatal disease as well as a landmark in the infant field of gene
therapy.

   In the first tentative human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic
abnormality in the noses of three people with cystic fibrosis. However, they did
not attempt to fix malfunctioning cells in their lungs, the real source of the
diseases' tragic course toward death.

   Nonetheless, the genetic defects in the nose and lungs are the same. And the
latest work suggests that this approach may well restore the lungs so they work
normally.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
called the work ''a giant step forward.''

   ''Unless there is something I cannot anticipate, we will get to the goal
line,'' he said.

   The research was conducted by Dr. Michael J. Welsh and colleagues from Howard
Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Iowa. He presented his results
yesterday at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference in Dallas. They will
be printed next week in the journal Cell, published in Cambridge, Mass.

   ''I'm cautiously hopeful,'' Welsh said. ''But I think many more questions
need to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety.''

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the preliminary experiment,
much larger doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the possible
hazards are still unknown.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in one in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000
Americans -- mostly whites -- have the disease, which runs in families.
Approximately one in every 25 white Americans carries a copy of the CF gene.
However, the disease occurs only in those who get two copies of the bad gene.

   The disease results from a mutation in the gene that produces a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. This protein
controls the flow of chloride in and out of the cells that line the airways.
When the protein is missing, thick mucous builds up in the lungs, causing lung
damage and eventual death, often by age 30.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the chloride
flow defect.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1006 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      October 15, 1993 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: THERAPY PROMISING ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scientists have shown for the first time that gene therapy can correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease of Americans.

   The approach, which uses genetically engineered cold viruses to ferry healthy
genes into the body, was widely praised as a major step toward the treatment of
a relentlessly fatal disease as well as a landmark in gene therapy.

   In the first tentative human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic
abnormality in the noses of three people with cystic fibrosis. They did not
attempt to fix malfunctioning cells in their lungs, the real source of the
diseases' tragic course toward death.

   Nonetheless, the genetic defects in the nose and lungs are the same. And the
latest work suggests that this approach may well restore the lungs.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
called the work "a giant step forward."

   The research was conducted by Dr. Michael J. Welsh and colleagues from Howard
Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Iowa. He presented his results
yesterday at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference in Dallas.

   "I'm cautiously hopeful," Welsh said. "But I think many more questions need
to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety."

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the experiment, much larger
doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the hazards are still
unknown.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in one in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000
Americans - mostly whites - have the disease, which runs in families.
Approximately one in every 25 white Americans carries a copy of the CF gene.
However, the disease occurs only in those who get two copies of the bad gene.

   The disease results from a mutation in the gene that produces a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. This protein
controls the flow of chloride in and out of the cells that line the airways.
When the protein is missing, mucous builds up in the lungs, causing damage and
eventual death, often by age 30.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the defect.

   To work, the healthy gene will have to be inserted into the cells that line
the lungs' air passages. This would probably mean administering the treatment
through an aerosol spray or a bronchial tube.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993; TIME=04:16:39
TYPE = N


                             1007 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                     October 15, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 412 words

HEADLINE: Progress is cited on cystic fibrosis

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

BODY:


   Using gene therapy, scientists have taken an important step toward correcting

 the molecular defect thought to cause cystic fibrosis.

   Dr. Michael J. Welsh of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the
University of Iowa and his colleagues say they have used inactivated cold
viruses to carry corrective genes to cells lining the nose. The genes, they
found, provided the cells with a protein that is missing in cystic fibrosis.

   But the result falls short of being a treatment. To alleviate cystic
fibrosis, investigators must deliver genes to the cells lining the lungs. Then
they must show that patients who receive these genes no longer secrete the
thick mucus that eventually leads to lung failure.

   Yet Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute, said the finding was very important because it showed for the first
time that the method of gene therapy can work. "It is a landmark  observation,"
Lenfant said.

   "Unless there is something I cannot anticipate, we will get to the goal
line," he said.

   Welsh and his colleagues are reporting their results in Thursday's issue of
Cell.

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the preliminary experiment,
much larger doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the  possible
hazards are still unknown.

   "I'm cautiously hopeful," Welsh said. "But I think many more questions  need
to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety."

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in 1 in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000  Americans
- mostly whites - have the disease, which runs in families.

   The disease results from a mutation in the gene that produces a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. This protein
controls the flow of chloride in and out of the cells that line the airways.
When the protein is missing, thick mucous builds up in the lungs, causing lung
damage and eventual death, often by age 30.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered  virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the
chloride flow defect.

   To work, the healthy gene will have to be inserted into the cells that line
the lungs' air passages.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993


                             1008 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         October 15, 1993 Friday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY BE CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY AP science writer

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scientists have shown for the first time that gene therapy can correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease of Americans.

   The approach, which uses genetically engineered cold viruses to ferry healthy
genes into the body, was widely praised as a major step toward the treatment of
a relentlessly fatal disease as well as a landmark in the infant field of gene
therapy.

   In the first tentative human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic
abnormality in the noses of three people with cystic fibrosis. However, they did
not attempt to fix malfunctioning cells in their lungs, the real source of the
disease's tragic course toward death.

   Nonetheless, the genetic defects in the nose and lungs are the same. And the
latest work suggests that this approach may well restore the lungs so they work
normally.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
called the work "a giant step forward."

   "Unless there is something I cannot anticipate, we will get to the goal
line," he said.

   The research was conducted by Dr. Michael Welsh and colleagues from Howard
Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Iowa. He presented his results
Thursday at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference in Dallas. They will
be printed next week in the journal Cell, published in Cambridge, Mass.

   "I'm cautiously hopeful," Welsh said. "But I think many more questions need
to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety."

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the preliminary experiment,
much larger doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the possible
hazards are still unknown.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in one in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000
Americans - mostly white people - have the disease, which runs in families.
Approximately one in every 25 white Americans carries a copy of the CF gene.
However, the disease occurs only in those who get two copies of the bad gene.

   The disease results from a mutation in the gene that produces a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. This protein
controls the flow of chloride in and out of the cells that line the airways.
When the protein is missing, thick mucous builds up in the lungs, causing lung
damage and eventual death, often by age 30.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the chloride
flow defect.

   To work, the healthy gene will have to be inserted into the cells that line
the lungs' air passages. This would probably mean administering the treatment
through an aerosol spray or a bronchial tube.

   As old lung cells die and new ones are created, the treatment would have to
be repeated, probably several times a year.

   Two other research teams, headed by Drs. Ronald Crystal of Cornell University
and James Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania, are conducting similar
experiments. They are administering gene-carrying viruses directly to the lungs.

   "They should be congratulated. It's great," Wilson said of the Iowa group's
findings. He has so far treated two patients but not released any results.

   However, he and Crystal cautioned that much more work needs to be done.

   "It's a demonstration that you can correct the abnormality in the nose, but
the disease is not in the nose," said Crystal, who has treated three patients.

   Welsh's experiments involved a mutant virus constructed by scientists at
Genzyme Corp. in Framingham, which partially financed the work with several
government and non-profit agencies.

   "I think it's a major milestone," said Dr. Robert Beall of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation. "We have to be very encouraged about this."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993


                             1009 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       October 15, 1993 Friday, WEST BANK

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 672 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE MAY BE ON HORIZON

BYLINE: By DANIEL Q. HANEY AP science writer

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

   Scientists have shown for the first time that gene therapy can correct the
underlying defect that causes cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited
disease of Americans.

   The approach, which uses genetically engineered cold viruses to ferry healthy
genes into the body, was widely praised as a major step toward the treatment of
a relentlessly fatal disease as well as a landmark in the infant field of gene
therapy.

   In the first tentative human experiments, researchers reversed the genetic
abnormality in the noses of three people with cystic fibrosis. However, they did
not attempt to fix malfunctioning cells in their lungs, the real source of the
disease's tragic course toward death.

   Nonetheless, the genetic defects in the nose and lungs are the same. And the
latest work suggests that this approach may well restore the lungs so they work
normally.

   Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
called the work "a giant step forward."

   "Unless there is something I cannot anticipate, we will get to the goal
line," he said.

   The research was conducted by Dr. Michael Welsh and colleagues from Howard
Hughes Medical Institute of the University of Iowa. He presented his results
Thursday at the North American Cystic Fibrosis Conference in Dallas. They will
be printed next week in the journal Cell, published in Cambridge, Mass.

   "I'm cautiously hopeful," Welsh said. "But I think many more questions need
to be answered. The really, really important issue is safety."

   Although the treatment caused no ill effects in the preliminary experiment,
much larger doses would be necessary to treat cystic fibrosis, and the possible
hazards are still unknown.

   Cystic fibrosis occurs in one in every 2,000 or 3,000 births; 30,000
Americans - mostly white people - have the disease, which runs in families.
Approximately one in every 25 white Americans carries a copy of the CF gene.
However, the disease occurs only in those who get two copies of the bad gene.

   The disease results from a mutation in the gene that produces a protein
called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator. This protein
controls the flow of chloride in and out of the cells that line the airways.
When the protein is missing, thick mucous builds up in the lungs, causing lung
damage and eventual death, often by age 30.

   In their experiments, the researchers inserted a healthy copy of the gene
into an adenovirus, a common cold virus. They put the genetically altered virus
into the nasal passages of volunteers with cystic fibrosis.

   They found that the virus infected the cells that line their noses and
carried in the gene. There, the gene made its protein and corrected the chloride
flow defect.

   To work, the healthy gene will have to be inserted into the cells that line
the lungs' air passages. This would probably mean administering the treatment
through an aerosol spray or a bronchial tube.

   As old lung cells die and new ones are created, the treatment would have to
be repeated, probably several times a year.

   Two other research teams, headed by Drs. Ronald Crystal of Cornell University
and James Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania, are conducting similar
experiments. They are administering gene-carrying viruses directly to the lungs.

   "They should be congratulated. It's great," Wilson said of the Iowa group's
findings. He has so far treated two patients but not released any results.

   However, he and Crystal cautioned that much more work needs to be done.

   "It's a demonstration that you can correct the abnormality in the nose, but
the disease is not in the nose," said Crystal, who has treated three patients.

   Welsh's experiments involved a mutant virus constructed by scientists at
Genzyme Corp. in Framingham, which partially financed the work with several
government and non-profit agencies.

   "I think it's a major milestone," said Dr. Robert Beall of the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation. "We have to be very encouraged about this."

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1993


                             1010 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 15, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: THE SUM OF THE PARTS

BYLINE: Arlene Vigoda

BODY:

    Adds up to No. 1 in radio shock jock Howard Stern's case. His autobiography,
Private Parts (Simon & Schuster), makes its debut at No. 1 on The New York Times
best-seller list for the week ending Oct. 24. And 75,000 Sternheads lined up
along four blocks on New York's Fifth Avenue Thursday for his book signing at
Barnes & Noble.

GOOD GOLLY: Hefty book alert. Make way for the the 11-pound Columbia
Encyclopedia, Fifth Edition (Houghton Mifflin, $ 125), due Oct. 25. Among the
famous entries making their first appearance: Madonna, Michael Jackson, Johnny
Carson, Aretha Franklin, Loretta Lynn, Ladysmith Black Mambazo, Maya Angelou,
Bill Clinton and Little Richard, whose bio (complete with typo) says: "One of
the first rock musicians in the 1950s, he recorded Tutti Frutti, Long Tall
Sally, and Good Golly Miss Molly . . . Since then, the (sic) has turned to
religion."

GENE THERAPY: An ongoing experiment to correct the genetic defect responsible
for cystic fibrosis has passed a critical juncture. In April, researchers began
giving patients nose drops with a healthy CF gene in an inactive cold virus.
That, in theory, could correct the defect and make healthy airway proteins.
Normal airway activity has been found in three patients. But, as expected,
symptoms did not change. "We haven't cured anybody, but this is the first
demonstration that this is a feasible strategy," says Dr. Michael Welsh,
University of Iowa.

MUSIC, MUSIC, MUSIC: Mariah Carey's Dreamlover remains in the top singles spot
on next week's Billboard chart; Garth Brooks' In Pieces is the No. 1 album.
Other No. 1's: Easy Come, Easy Go, George Strait, country single; The River of
Dreams, Billy Joel, adult contemporary single; Just Kickin' It, Xscape, R&B
single.

MEATY ISSUES: Beginning today, all ground meat and poultry products will display
labels with safe handling instructions, as mandated by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Non-ground products like roasts and other poultry products will
carry the label starting April 15, 1994. The instructions encourage consumers to
keep products refrigerated or frozen, cook them thoroughly, refrigerate
leftovers immediately and wash utensils and hands.

LET THEM ENTERTAIN YOU: Keystone in Colorado is making a bid to become a
world-class ski resort, but officials there and with Disney wouldn't confirm
speculation that the entertainment giant would buy the resort from owner Ralston
Purina.  Planned improvements: shops, restaurants, lodging and nearby condos.

BOOKS OF STAMPS: Prepubescent reading flashback. The U.S. Postal Service will
issue stamps depicting book covers of Little Women, Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm,
Little House on the Prairie and Huckleberry Finn on Oct. 23. The Postal Service
hopes to encourage kids to read more and collect stamps. We'll do our part if
they pay homage to Cherry Ames, Student Nurse.

NEW FOOD RULE: The Food and Drug Administration may be missing a chance to
prevent many serious birth defects with its proposal to require folic acid in
enriched breads, cereals and other grain products, the March of Dimes says.
Folic acid is believed to help prevent many spine and brain defects. But the
amounts proposed by FDA are too low, the group says.  The FDA says it wants to
avoid putting too much folic acid in the food supply because it can mask a type
of anemia.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, Ebet Roberts


                             1011 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                           October 14, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: OHIO URGED TO REVAMP EDISON CENTERS

BYLINE: Michael B. Lafferty; Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   A state science and technology panel yesterday called for a dramatic
reorganization of Ohio's efforts to aid industrial innovation.

   A report presented to Gov. George V. Voinovich by the Ohio Science and
Technology Council called for reorganizing the state's system of eight Edison
Technology centers, including the Edison Welding Institute in Columbus, as part
of a proposed Ohio Technology Network.

   The 41-member cAouncil was created in 1991 by Voinovich to reassess Ohio's
technology efforts.

   Although polymer research at the University of Akron and other institutions
has helped spawn enough businesses between Cleveland and Akron to dub the area
Polymer Valley, Voinovich said industrial research is not producing the expected
benefits.

   ''We're doing all the research work here, but we're not creating many
businesses,'' he said.

   The council called for more emphasis in research relating to gene therapy,
liquid crystals, coatings and ceramics, polymers and advanced manufacturing.
Helping small and medium-sized businesses to meet state and federal
environmental mandates was viewed as a key goal.

   Council Chairman Tom Moser, former chairman of BP America, said parochialism
had crept into the existing system, and that the reorganization should end that
by making it clear that each Edison center is available to help businesses
statewide.

   The reorganization ''takes away the aspect of pure regionalism,'' he said.
''It will be based on cooperation, not competition among centers.''

   Although he could not cite an example, Moser said he felt there were
instances in which a company in one part of the state was not able to get help
from an Edison center in another region.

   Moser also said Ohio's 25,000 businesses are not finding ready help from
universities, another problem he hopes will be eliminated.

   Voinovich said he does not support putting any more state money into the
system and that the reforms would speed the Edison centers toward becoming fully
self-supporting.

   Boosting public-private research efforts is important because the federal
government is beginning to base its funding on such activity, said Richard
Razgaitis, vice president for commercial development at Battelle Memorial
Institute and a member of a task force that helped form the recommendations.

   ''What the government likes to see is evidence that what is being proposed is
real rather than another scandal to get money out f the government,'' he said.

   The council also recommended an eight-member board to oversee the network.

   Under the recommendations, each Edison center would continue its operations,
but their efforts would be grouped and their missions redefined.

   The Cleveland Advanced Manufacturing Program, the Edison Materials Technology
Center in Dayton, the Edison Industrial Systems Center in Toledo and the
Advanced Manufacturing Sciences Center in Cincinnati would be technology
development centers.

   The Edison Polymer Innovation Corp. in Akron and the Edison Welding
Institute, Columbus, would be research and technology development centers. The
Edison Animal Biotechnology Center in Athens and the Edison Biotechnology Center
in Cleveland would be business assistance and commercialization centers.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             1012 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                   OCTOBER 14, 1993, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. C15; BAY AREA REPORT

LENGTH: 139 words

HEADLINE: SAN FRANCISCO
 UCSF Gets Grant For Gene Center

BODY:

    Research teams at the University of California in San Francisco have been
awarded more than $ 2 million by the National Institutes of Health to create a
new Gene Therapy Center, where researchers will focus on a wide variety of
baffling genetic disorders and birth defects.

   The center will be directed by Dr. Yuet Wai Kan, chief of UCSF's division of
molecular medicine, and will include some of the medical center's leading
experts in genetics who are developing novel systems for applying genetic
engineering to the treatment of diseases.

   The federal health agency is leading a major national effort to cure some of
the major genetic diseases, and is creating three specialized ''core centers''
for the task -- one at UCSF, one at the University of Washington, and one at the
University of Pennsylvania.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1013 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        October 12, 1993 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: PROTEIN MAY LEAD TO CANCER HELP

BYLINE: By JOHN POPE Staff writer

BODY:

   A protein found in breast- and bladder-cancer patients may lead to the
discovery of a gene that may help predict who will get those diseases and may
help treat those people, a Michigan cancer specialist said Monday in New
Orleans.

   But such applications may be years off, because no one is certain of all the
functions of the gene. So far, all the University of Michigan scientists know
about the compound is that the genetic sequence, known as AN43, is more likely
to be found in tumor cells than in normal cells, Dr. Nina Fukunaga said at the
annual meeting of the American Society for Therapeutic Radiology and Oncology.

   What she and her colleagues have done is an example of high-tech biological
sleuthing that started with the discovery of the protein in bladder-cancer
patients. The protein, found in urine after cancer cells shed it, piqued the
researchers' curiosity and led them to see where else the protein might turn up,
Fukunaga said.

   They found it in women with breast cancer, a disease that is Fukunaga's
special interest.

   Using their knowledge of the protein's structure, the Michigan scientists
developed an antibody to it, she said. Then they used the antibody to make a
replica of the gene.

   They haven't found the gene itself, and nobody knows exactly what it does,
Fukunaga said.

   Since it is found in cancer cells, but not in normal cells, Fukunaga said it
could be a marker - a sign of susceptibility.

   One theory is that AN43 is involved in cancer cells' growth and spread. If
that is true, Fukunaga said, the gene might become the focus of gene therapy, in
which the gene would be deactivated.

   This year, the American Cancer Society predicts 52,300 new cases of bladder
cancer and 183,000 new cases of breast cancer. It also expects 9,900
bladder-cancer patients and 46,300 breast-cancer patients to die this year.

   The outlook is worst for young breast-cancer patients, according to another
report presented Monday.

   No one knows why, said Dr. Barbara Fowble, who conducted a study at the
University of Pennsylvania of 980 women with invasive breast cancer.

   Women under 36 had a 73 percent chance of living eight years after treatment,
the report said, compared with 82 percent for women 36 to 50 years old and 87
percent for older women.

   The likelihood of a relapse-free survival is lower for the youngest group,
too - 53 percent for women under 36, compared with 82 percent for women 36 to 50
years old and 87 percent for women over 50.

   Women in the youngest age group account for about 10 percent of new cases
each year, Fowble said.

   Early detection by mammography is not common among this age group, she said,
because younger women's breasts tend to be denser with fibrous tissue, which
obscures tumors on mammograms.

   The American Cancer Society and National Cancer Institute recommend a
mammogram by age 40 unless there is a family history of breast cancer that might
put a woman more at risk. But in 85 percent of the cases, there is no family
history of the disease, Fowble said.

   Even though breast cancer is generally regarded as an illness for which the
risk increases with age, "breast cancer can strike at any age," she said.  "It
can strike whether there's a family history or not."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1993


                             1014 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 12, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 6D

LENGTH: 364 words

HEADLINE: Nobel honors gene gap discovery

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    The Nobel Prize in medicine was awarded Monday for the discovery of how
genetic coding is arranged on a gene.

   The $ 842,000 prize was awarded to British-born Richard J. Roberts, 50,
director of New England Biolabs, Beverly, Mass.; and Phillip A. Sharp, 49, head
of biology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.

   "Things don't get better than this," Sharp said.

   Learning the basic organization of genetic coding is Nobel Prize-worthy
because it provided a foundation for today's abilities to discover genetic
mutations and perform genetic engineering and gene therapy.

   Genetic coding is the set of instructions on genes that determine everything
from eye color to the production of basic proteins essential to life.

   Working on cold viruses, Roberts and Sharp discovered independently in 1977
that the coding was split into segments on a gene with long gaps in between.
Before, scientists held the simpler view that genetic coding was unbroken.

   Genetic researcher Mario Capecchi, University of Utah, says the discovery was
a "real surprise and added a new complication" in unraveling the function of
genes. It forced researchers back to the drawing board to learn how the split
genetic coding is "read" by a cell.

   Capecchi says this led to the knowledge that in reading genetic codes, cells
have an editing ability - skipping over the gaps and "splicing" the segments of
codes together.

   In turn, this led to the understanding that certain diseases, including
cancer, can be caused by splicing errors, and to the insight that having
segmented codes may allow new combinations of coding to be created to help
species evolve.

   "One of the beauties of this is they were trying to understand how a simple
organism works. By doing the best possible science, without any clear
understanding of where it was leading, they came across an unexpected finding,"
says Dr. Harold Varmus, 1989 Nobel Prize winner and director designate of the
National Institutes of Health.

   "This is a very rich mine for those who believe it's crucial to support
research that doesn't have an immediate payoff and to fund activities directed
at the best possible science."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, b/w, Stuart Cahill, AFP; PHOTO, b/w, Michael Quan, Reuter


                             1015 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 1, 1993, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 250 words

HEADLINE: Hemophilia experiment encouraging

BYLINE: Staff

BODY:

   A team led by a Houston scientist is the first to use gene
therapy to provide a long-term treatment for a form of hemophilia
in animals, members reported today.

   The experiment points the way toward gene therapy in humans,
said Dr. Savio C. Woo, the Baylor College of Medicine researcher
who led the team from his institution and the University of North
Carolina medical school at Chapel Hill.

   ""This study demonstrates the feasibility of gene therapy for
hemophilia B in humans,'' he said.

   Hemophilia B, usually found in males, occurs when the liver
cells do not produce a blood-clotting material called factor IX.

   The genetic disease can cause painful and crippling bleeding.

   Woo said the teams injected the gene that causes production
of factor IX directly into the blood vessels that lead to the liver
in the dogs that suffered from the disease.

   The genes were incorporated into some of the cells of liver,
leading to the production of small quantities of factor IX, Woo
said.

   ""There was long-term expression of the blood in the genes,''
he said, but the levels were relatively low.

   It took the dogs' blood 50 minutes to clot before the gene
treatment, but only 15 to 20 minutes after it, Woo said.

   He said he would like to see more cells take up the gene
correction before he is willing to introduce it into people.

   Woo remains optimistic gene therapy can be performed in
humans for diseases such as hemophilia.

   But he cautioned, ""Give us a few years. ''

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1993


                             1016 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 27, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 2B

LENGTH: 1561 words

HEADLINE: Some top health-care mutual funds

BODY:

    CAPSTONE MEDICAL RESEARCH Manager: Samuel Isaly Stocks in portfolio: 24 Min.
initial investment: $ 200

    Investment objective: Emphasis on foreign pharmaceutical, biotech firms.
Likes small companies.

    Largest holdings: Schering A.G.; Biota Holdings; Fisons Ltd.; Immuno A.G.;
Chiron.

    Assets: $ 10 million Sales charge: 4 3/4% Telephone: 800-262-6631

    Total return(1)

    Avg. health
                          Capstone                 fund
12 mos.                     +18%                       -1.3%
1993                        +15.1%                     -6.5%

DEAN WITTER HEALTH SCIENCE Manager: Ron Worobel Stocks in portfolio: 79 Min.
initial investment: $ 1,000

    Investment objective: Focuses on health maintenance organizations and
health-care providers. Largest holdings: Roche Holdings; Healthsource; Chiron;
Oxford Health Plan; HMO America.

    Assets: $ 234 million Sales charge: 5%(2) Telephone: 800-869-3863

    Total return(1)

    Avg. health
                         Dean Witter               fund
12 mos.                    new                        -1.3%
1993                       -7.4%                      -6.5%

FIDELITY SELECT BIOTECHNOLOGY Manager: Karen Firestone Stocks in portfolio: 128
Min. initial investment: $ 2,500

    Investment objective: Companies that research, develop or make biotech
products or services. Largest holdings: Chiron; Genentech; Schering-Plough;
Biogen; Pfizer.

    Assets: $ 502 million Sales charge: 3% Telephone: 800-544-8888

 Total return(1)
                         Fidelity               Avg. health
                  Sel. Biotech                  fund
12 mos.                     +1%                        -1.3%
1993                        -8.2%                      -6.5%

FIDELITY SELECT HEALTH CARE Manager: Charles Mangum Stocks in portfolio: 65 Min.
initial investment: $ 2,500

    Investment objective: Favors large drugmakers and drug delivery firms.
Largest holdings: Warner-Lambert; Schering-Plough; Pfizer; Imcera; SmithKline
Beecham.

    Assets: $ 533 million Sales charge: 3% Telephone: 800-544-8888

    Total return(1)
                          Fidelity Sel.         Avg. health
                    Health Care               fund
12 mos.                     -8.1%                     -1.3%
1993                        -6.9%                     -6.5%

FIDELITY SELECT MEDICAL DELIVERY Manager: Louis Salemy Stocks in portfolio: 35
Min. initial investment: $ 2,500

    Investment objective: Focuses on health-care providers. Largest holdings: US
Healthcare; Hospital Corp. of America; Health Management; Surgical Care
Affiliates; Allergan.

    Assets: $ 75 million Sales charge: 3% Telephone: 800-544-8888
Total                                           return(1)
              Fidelity Sel.             Avg. health
              Medical Del.                fund
12 mos.                     -10.7%                    -1.3%
1993                        -10.5%                    -6.5%

FRANKLIN GLOBAL HEALTH CARE Manager: Rupert Johnson/Kurt Von Emster Stocks in
portfolio: 47 Min. initial investment: $ 100

    Investment objective: Focuses on health-care products, services. Largest
holdings: Marine Health Care; Schering-Plough; St. Jude Medical; Health Sources;
Physicians Health Services.

    Assets: $ 5 million Sales charge: 4 1/2% Telephone: 800-342-5236

 Total return(1)
                       Franklin            Avg. health
                 Global                 fund
12 mos.                   +3.3%                 -1.3%
1993                      -5.7%                 -6.5%

G.T. GLOBAL HEALTH CARE A, B Manager: Team Stocks in portfolio: 105 Min. initial
investment: $ 500

    Investment objective: Pharma ceuticals, health-care services and
medical-technology companies. Largest holdings: Roche; Chiron; Medtronics;
Astra; Schering A.G. Assets: $ 434 million Sales charge: A, 4 3/4%; B, 5%(2)
Telephone number: 800-824-1580

    Total return(1)
                         G.T. Global       Avg. health
                   A        B(2)         fund
12 mos.                 -6.0%      new          -1.3%
1993                    -8.6%      new          -6.5%

J. HANCOCK FREEDOM GLOBAL Rx Manager: Ben Williams Stocks in portfolio: 55 Min.
initial investment: $ 1,000

    Investment objective: Companies that help control costs, such as
generic-drug makers and HMOs. Largest holdings: Coventry; Healthsource; Teva
Pharmaceuticals; Astra Pharmaceuticals; Elan.

    Assets: $ 16 million Sales charge: 5% Telephone: 800-225-5291

 Total return(1)
                         J. Hancock              Avg. health
                   Global Rx                  fund
12 mos.                  -0.1%                        -1.3%
1993                     -12.4%                       -6.5%

INVESCO STRATEGIC HEALTH SCIENCES Manager: John Kaweske, Barry Kurokawa Stocks
in portfolio: 73 Min. initial investment: $ 1,000

    Investment objective: Focuses on cost-containment firms, generic-drug makers
and HMOs. Largest holdings: Medco Containment; Qual-Med Inc.; A.L. Labs; Mylan
Labs; Elan.

    Assets: $ 514 million Sales charge: None Telephone: 800-525-8085

 Total return(1)
                     Invesco           Avg. health
               Strategic              fund
12 mos.                -11.5                -1.3%
1993                   -17%                 -6.5%

MERRILL LYNCH HEALTH CARE A, B Manager: Jordan C. Schreiber Stocks in portfolio:
52 Min. initial investment: $ 1,000

    Investment objective: Emphasis on biotech, medical technology,
cost-containment firms. Largest holdings: Roche Holdings; Carter-Wallace;
Warner-Lambert; Merck; AKZO.

    Assets: $ 114 million Sales charge: A, 6 1/2%; B, 4%(2) Telephone:
800-837-3863

    Total return(1)
                      Merrill Lynch         Avg. health
                  A       B(2)           fund
12 mos.               -1.2%    -2.3%           -1.3%
1993                  -6.5%    -6.5%           -6.5%

OPPENHEIMER GLOBAL BIOTECHNOLOGY Manager: Sandra Panem Stocks in portfolio: 100
Min. initial investment: $ 1,000

    Investment objective: Focuses on biotech companies. Largest holdings:
Genentech; Genetic Therapy; Chiron; Genzyme; Amgen.

    Assets: $ 195 million Sales charge: 5 3/4% Telephone: 800-525-7048

 Total return(1)
                        Oppenheimer                Avg. health
                    Biotech.                     fund
12 mos.                     +1.5%                      -1.3%
1993                        -9.8%                      -6.5%

PUTNAM HEALTH SCIENCES A, B Manager: JoAnne Soja Stocks in portfolio: 55 Min.
initial investment: $ 500

    Investment objective: Established pharmaceutical firms and health-care
providers. Largest holdings: Abbott; American Home Products; SmithKline Beecham;
Pfizer; Merck

    Assets: $ 770 million Sales charge: A, 5 3/4%; B, 5%(2) Telephone:
800-225-1581

 Total return(1)
                                  Putnam         Avg. health
                      A       B(2)             fund
12 mos.                     -7%       new            -1.3%
1993                        -8.8%   +2.1%            -6.5%

VANGUARD SPECIALIZED HEALTH CARE Manager: Edward Owens Stocks in portfolio: 75
Min. initial investment: $ 3,000

    Investment objective: Focuses on pharmaceutical, medical-supply firms,
health-care operators. Largest holdings: Pfizer; Ciba-Geigy; Beckman
Instruments; Schering A.G.; Zeneca Group

    Assets: $ 531 million Sales charge: None Telephone: 800-662-7447

 Total return(1)
                         Vanguard                Avg. health
                   Health                       fund
12 mos.                    +5.6%                      -1.3%
1993                       +1.1%                      -6.5%

1 - Through Thursday; 2 - max. redemption fee

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Sources: USA TODAY research, Lipper Analytical Services,
Stand alone graphic (Chart)


                             1017 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                    September 26, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: TELEVISION WEEK; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 419 words

HEADLINE: Asking the cosmic questions;
Cover Story

BYLINE: By Bruce McCabe, Globe Staff

BODY:

    What is the secret of life? What makes us male or female?  Why do we grow
old and die?

   PBS is asking these cosmic questions Sunday night through Wednesday night in
four pairs of one-hour programs (from 9 to 11 each night on WGBH-TV, Ch. 2). The
series is called "The Secret of Life."

   "Life" is hosted by David Suzuki, an internationally known geneticist, author
and host of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's television program "The
Nature of Things."

   The series tells its stories through people like twin brothers, one with AIDS
and one without; a nursery school teacher seeking to learn whether she has the
fatal gene that gave her mother Alzheimer's; and a breast-cancer patient getting
hope from an experimental treatment targeting her tumor cells for destruction.

   Sunday night's debut segment, "The Immortal Thread," examines the chemistry
of the DNA molecule, which is called the secret of life because all living
things share it, from humans to yeast and worms. The second hour, "Accidents of
Creation," explores the diversity of life rooted in the accumulation of errors
in DNA. All over the world, these mistakes lead to the critical genetic
diversity enabling organisms to adapt in different ways to changing conditions.
Without these mistakes, life wouldn't have advanced beyond its primitive
beginnings.

   Monday night's segments are more provocatively titled.  "Birth, Sex and
Death" traces an animal's growth from a single cell - and how genes influence
the processes of making us male or female and aging us up to the point of death.
"Conquering Cancer," the second hour, examines the scientific revolution in
understanding cancer, showing how the pivotal principals in the struggle are, as
is the case with all medical research, the patients and their families.

   Tuesday night's program starts out with "The Mouse That Laid the Golden Egg,"
a look at genetically engineered animals, plants and other life forms. The
second hour, "Cell Wars," examines how AIDS, multiple sclerosis and the flu are
a few of the diseases that can defeat the immune system.

   Wednesday night's opening hour, "Children by Design," explores the
revolutionary world of gene therapy in which scientists are attempting to fix
genetic problems, like cystic fibrosis, by inserting working copies of damaged
genes.  "Who Are You?" the second hour, shows scientists studying identical
twins and shows how twin studies offer insights into the inheritability of
character, of intelligence and other traits.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 1993


                             1018 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 25, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Review/Television;
From the Origins of Life to Its Future

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

BODY:

   Make way for a mind-expanding science series that gets to the genes of
things. "The Secret of Life," a remarkably lucid and visually vivid explanation
of the nature and promise of DNA, goes in eight engrossing hours from the mists
of prehistory into the fog of the future.

   The opener tomorrow night suggests how life might have begun about four
billion years ago, not in the "warm little pond" imagined by Charles Darwin but
in some sulfuric steam bath like the one that Karl Stetter, a German biologist,
is seen admiring near Naples. From the bacteria he finds there, he extracts what
he believes is ancient DNA of a sort that has carried instructions down the ages
for the making of many species, including humans.

    With his jargon-free narration, engaging manner and puckish looks, the
series guide, Dr. David Suzuki, a professor of zoology at the University of
British Columbia, becomes the latest star of public broadcasting. Don't be
surprised if he turns up as a guru in some Steven Spielberg extravaganza.

   Tomorrow he visits an entomologist who is extracting the DNA from insects
caught in amber tens of millions of years ago (with the obligatory nod to
"Jurassic Park"); scientists at the National Institutes of Health who are
deciphering the code in the human brain that controls much of what we do and may
explain why we do it; a researcher at Cambridge University who is studying the
nematode, a little worm that is a sort of microcosm of the human animal, and a
researcher at Oxford University who is finding clues to the behavior of humans
in the behavior of yeast.

   How such investigations may be helping scientists nudge human development in
a benign direction is the hopeful subject of the succeeding programs. In the
second hour tomorrow, you can learn all about mutations, the random errors that
have enabled humans, animals and plants to adapt and endure.

   In the quest for visual variety, the producers occasionally prettify things
(the famous double helix is shown as a sort of lace trimming from a fancy ball
gown), and the glowing pictures of animal life may remind you of innumerable
nature shows. (Sure, fish got to swim and birds got to fly, but do they have to
look like greeting cards?) And the generally down-to-cases Dr. Suzuki goes
trendy with rhapsodies upon the "oneness of life" he finds in the religions of
Indians in British Columbia. The laboratory scenes with that worm are at least
as impressive and more in the scientific spirit of the series.

   But these are pardonable lapses in a considerable accomplishment. Tune in
Monday for possible answers to the ever interesting question of what makes girls
different from boys and the ever urgent one of how to cure some forms of cancer.
Tuesday's episode goes into genetically engineered foods, drugs and human organs
and the workings and misworkings of the human immune system. The series ends on
Wednesday with examples of gene therapy that can help the body operate the way
one wants it to and of efforts to learn through studies of identical twins what
makes people the same and different.

   It must be mentioned that the executive in charge of "The Secret of Life" is
Paula Apsell, the director of the science unit at WGBH, the Boston public
station, and the executive producer of "Nova." Do we owe it all to her genes?

THE SECRET OF LIFE

PBS, tomorrow through Wednesday at 9
(Channels 13 and 49 in the New York area)

An eight-part documentary produced by James F. Golway, Andrew Liebman, Tim
Haines, Paul Gasek, Christine Zurbach Wiser, Graham Chedd, Larkin McPhee and
David Sington. Paula Apsell, executive in charge; Mr. Chedd, executive producer.
Produced for PBS by WGBH/Boston and the BBC-TV; Dr. David Suzuki, host.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1993


                             1019 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                    September 25, 1993 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: TODAY; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 524 words

HEADLINE: PBS GETTING DOWN TO BASICS OF LIFE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   Make way for a mind-expanding science series that gets to the genes of
things. "The Secret of Life," a remarkably lucid and visually vivid explanation
of the nature and promise of DNA, goes in eight engrossing hours from the mists
of prehistory into the fog of the future.

   Tomorrow's opener (9 p.m., WVIZ Channel 25 and WEAO Channel 49) suggests how
life might have begun about 4 billion years ago, not in the "warm little pond"
imagined by Charles Darwin but in some sulfuric steam bath like the one that
Karl Stetter, a German biologist, is seen admiring near Naples.

   From the bacteria he finds there, he extracts what he believes is ancient DNA
of a sort that has carried instructions down the ages for the making of many
species, including humans.

   With his jargon-free narration, engaging manner and puckish looks, the series
guide, Dr. David Suzuki, a professor of zoology at the University of British
Columbia, becomes the latest star of public broadcasting. Don't be surprised if
he turns up as a guru in some Steven Spielberg extravaganza.

   Tomorrow he visits:

   An entomologist who is extracting the DNA from insects caught in amber tens
of millions of years ago (with the obligatory nod to "Jurassic Park").

   Scientists at the National Institutes of Health who are deciphering the code
in the human brain that controls much of what we do and may explain why we do
it.

   A researcher at Cambridge University who is studying the nematode, a little
worm that is a sort of microcosm of the human animal.

   A researcher at Oxford University who is finding clues to the behavior of
humans in the behavior of yeast.

   How such investigations may be helping scientists nudge human development in
a benign direction is the hopeful subject of the succeeding programs. In the
second hour tomorrow, you can learn all about mutations, the random errors that
have enabled humans, animals and plants to adapt and endure.

   In the quest for visual variety, the producers occasionally prettify things
(the famous double helix is shown as a sort of lace trimming from a fancy ball
gown), and the glowing pictures of animal life may remind you of innumerable
nature shows. (Sure, fish got to swim and birds got to fly, but do they have to
look like greeting cards?)

   And the generally down-to-cases Suzuki goes trendy with rhapsodies upon the
"oneness of life" he finds in the religions of Indians in British Columbia.  The
laboratory scenes with that worm are at least as impressive and more in the
scientific spirit of the series.

   But these are pardonable lapses in a considerable accomplishment. Tune in
Monday for possible answers to the ever interesting question of what makes girls
different from boys and the ever urgent one of how to cure some forms of cancer.
Tuesday's episode goes into genetically engineered foods, drugs and human organs
and the workings and misworkings of the human immune system.

   The series ends Wednesday with examples of gene therapy that can help the
body operate the way one wants it to and of efforts to learn through studies of
identical twins what makes people the same and different.

GRAPHIC: If humans and chimpanzees have 99% of their genes in common, what are
the genes that make them different? That and other questions are explored on
"The Secret of Life" on PBS.

COLUMN: TV REVIEW

   'THE SECRET OF LIFE'

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1993


                             1020 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 25, 1993, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; PAGE B1

LENGTH: 975 words

HEADLINE: 'The Secret of Life': Untwisting Genetic Mysteries

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: David Brown, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Anybody who wants to know why future historians of science may look back on
our lifetime as the golden age of biology will find the answer in PBS's
gorgeous, fascinating and generally levelheaded series on genetics, "The Secret
of Life."

   You may not be able to pass a college biology final when you're done, but
you'll come away understanding why genetics today dominates biology, and in
varying degrees is changing medicine, industry, politics and philosophy as well.
Equally important, the series -- a four-part, eight-hour production airing
tomorrow night through Wednesday from 9 to 11 on Channel 26 -- offers an
antidote to the contemporary notion that genes explain just about everything.

   "The Secret of Life," in fact, is a little like the field of biology itself.
It's sprawling, colorful, sometimes contradictory -- a world of memorable
details and peculiar moments. The producers, WGBH-Boston and BBC-TV, spare no
expense in portraying the lushness of the subject. David Suzuki, the Canadian
biologist who is host and narrator, takes viewers around the world (several
times), into gestating embryos and, in one shocking sequence, down the
mucus-laden trachea of a cystic fibrosis patient to tell the story.

   The point of departure for the series is DNA, the double-stranded molecule
that stores inherited information in cells. In one of the series's few defects,
"The Secret of Life" unfortunately never gets around to explaining what DNA's
information is literally, and how it gets transformed into working matter.

   Undoubtedly done in the interest of keeping things simple, this decision
works against one of the series' purposes: to demystify at the same time that it
astounds. Many a nonscientific viewer will depart the eight hours still not
knowing how DNA works, and probably thinking of genes as quasi-magical elements
not subject to the laws of mechanics.

   Once you get above the level of the molecule, however, "The Secret of Life"
is wonderful.

   There's a fascinating section about the unity and the continuity of genetic
information. The instructions for designating head, rear and other features of
the "body plan" are nearly the same in human beings, fruit flies and
translucent, barely visible nematodes.

   "I think it is rather touching that we should share genes with a worm," says
Paul Nurse, a biologist at Oxford.

   The series refreshingly emphasizes the importance -- in fact, the necessity
-- of mistakes in genetics. (In an era of preoccupation about disease,
especially cancer, "mutation" has gotten a very bad name.) Inadvertently
duplicated genes become the raw material for new proteins; slight slips in the
machinery can drive human history.

   In a visit to West Africa, Suzuki and friends show how a one-letter error --
the smallest error possible -- gave rise to a mutant form of hemoglobin that, by
conferring resistance to malaria, essentially made the region habitable.

   An entire hour-long segment explores the biotechnology industry's attempt to
commandeer the udders of cows and the bone marrow of pigs to make medicines for
human beings, and otherwise genetically tinker with the machines of nature.
There's a fascinating story of medicine's yearly race to keep up with the
influenza virus, one of evolution's speedsters. There's a discussion of
eugenics' past, and its possible future. The last program looks at the role of
genes in determining behavior, starting with a visit to Twinsburg, Ohio's,
annual parade of identical twins.

   Inevitably, much is made of the "discovery" of disease-causing genes.
Unfortunately, the thorniest issues of this work (much of it the product of the
Human Genome Project) are only lightly touched.

   There's a sad and chilling story in one of Wednesday's segments, "Children by
Design," about a family afflicted with a rare inherited form of early-onset
Alzheimer's disease. In one scene, a man in his forties, already losing his
memory, wanders ahead of his wife and young son in a park in winter.

   Suzuki inexplicably says that for the unfortunate father the test forthe
disease "comes too late." He then adds that the man's son one day will have to
decide whether to get the test and learn his fate.

   "With luck, how the gene does its damage will by then be understood, and a
treatment devised."

   This optimism may turn out to be right. But it's probably wrong. Lifelong
treatment of chronic disease (or, in this case, an as-yet-undiscovered treatment
to prevent disease) is tricky and less than fully successful, even under the
best circumstances. As the segment on gene therapy -- perhaps unwittingly --
makes clear, this strategy is unlikely to be a practical one any time soon.

   Like it or not, abortion is going to be the treatment of choice for many
severe inherited diseases for a very long time. You don't hear much about that
in "The Secret of Life."

   Part of what makes the series appealing are the quirky mini-portraits it
presents of people.

   In just one of many examples, a German-accented biologist stands over a
boiling, sulfurous stink hole in Italy, out of which he fishes bacteria that may
be the closest living things to Earth's first organisms. "It's not hell," he
yells with wild eyes. "It is just heaven."

   There's also some pretty amazing lab photography, especially in Monday's
first segment, "Birth, Sex and Death," which features time-lapse video of
embryonic development. Millions of cells stream, mill about and bump against
each other. In a minute, bingo! -- you have a spinal cord, a beating heart and
parades of red blood cells.

   In the decisions and events of our day-to-day lives, genes are probably less
important than most people suppose them to be. It's perhaps too much to ask an
eight-hour series to hammer that idea home terribly hard. But as "The Secret of
Life" makes abundantly clear, they sure are interesting.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1021 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    September 24, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 47

LENGTH: 1076 words

HEADLINE: High drama with DNA in 'Secret of Life';
Television

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Did the makers of this year's flu vaccine accurately predict which virus
will attack this winter? Why do so many flu epidemics begin in Asia?

   If you carried a faulty gene that doomed you to begin losing your mind to
Alzheimer's disease in your 40s, would you want to know?  Would you have your
children tested for the gene?

   Which influences our behavior more strongly - genes or learning?  Do our
genes determine how long we'll live?

   These questions, and many more of equal fascination, are the subject of the
ambitious PBS series "The Secret of Life," which airs for two hours on each of
four consecutive evenings beginning this Sunday (Channel 2, 9-11 p.m.)

   The reach of this remarkable documentary is vast, because its theme is the
role that the wondrous chemical DNA plays in virtually all of life's processes,
from reproduction to health and illness to how we think and act.

   Says David Suzuki, the biologist who serves as a friendly, low-key guide: The
answer to life's amazing diversity and ability to survive over eons is "in a
single thread that's at the core of every living thing - a thread called DNA."

   Since James Watson and Francis Crick discovered the DNA molecule's
double-helix configuration 40 years ago, scientists have learned to decipher
DNA's code of information, which all our cells contain in the form of genes, or
packages of DNA.

   In its eight hours, "The Secret of Life" deals with everything from the
origin of life in hellish, bubbling pools of liquid billions of years ago to
today's most urgent questions of how the newfound ability to manipulate DNA
affects society.

   It's far from a dry biology lesson. The camera takes viewers into
laboratories around the world, to Third World countries where parasitic diseases
are a deadly part of everyday life, into the homes of American families and
individuals struggling with cancer and genetic diseases or hoping to have,
thanks to the latest techniques, a healthy baby.

   The documentary, whose executive producer is Boston's Graham Chedd, excels at
highlighting the role of chance in life's development.  Accumulations of the
smallest typographical errors when the DNA molecule is duplicated during
reproduction provide genetic variation for species to evolve.  But these
mistakes can also inflict pain and disability in the form of genetic diseases or
proneness to common illnesses like cancer and heart disease.  In the nonhuman
world, such "mistakes" explain how the same species of plant in Hawaii can have
a tall, exotic form in one environment but be a low, spreading bush in another.

   But scientists are not just reading the blueprints that are written in 6
billion chemical DNA letters in our cells: They are also starting to rewrite
them, raising momentous dilemmas for society.

   "We are on the brink of ultimate power - the power to refashion ourselves,"
says biologist Suzuki, who hosts the series.  One of the hourlong segments,
airing at 9 p.m. Wednesday, is titled "Children by Design" and deals with the
dilemmas posed by gene therapy, using DNA tests to predict future illnesses such
as early-onset Alzheimer's disease and using genetically engineered growth
hormone in an effort to make healthy but short children taller.

   "Once we start this redesigning of our children, where will we stop?" asks
Suzuki.  "The line dividing those who clearly should be changed and those who
could be changed will be very hard to fix."

   Suzuki, a Japanese-Canadian biologist whose family was interned in a rural
valley during World War II when all people of Japanese descent were viewed as
potential enemies, is candid about his own ambivalence.  He points out that if
gene therapy could have given him round, Caucasian eyes - or if he could have
had his children's eyes altered - it would have been tempting.

   Mistakes in DNA copying can also disrupt the mechanisms that make individuals
male or female, and the episode called "Birth, Sex and Death," airing at 9 p.m
Monday, illustrates such a case with a moving account of a woman born with male
chromosomes.

    Inevitably, the parts dealing with human issues are often the most engaging
- particularly the intellectually thrilling episode at 10 p.m. Wednesday, "Who
Are You?," which probes the relationship among genes, environment and behavior.
With the provocative "Children By Design" airing the previous hour, Wednesday's
final two segments make for the most compelling single evening of "The Secret of
Life."

   The series manages most of the time to make DNA science highly relevant to
our lives.  The filmmakers also worked hard to show the scientists' personal
sides and to interview the most articulate, quotable researchers. Paradoxically,
while the outcome of genetic experiments can be high drama, the actual
laboratory work is not visually very interesting, as sometimes becomes obvious
in the course of eight hours. Fortunately, the series makes good use of animated
graphics and scenes shot through the microscope.

   At times, the writing and narration seem ploddingly paced, but perhaps this
reflects a mission to be clear and understandable, and "The Secret of Life"
certainly is that, despite its complicated subject matter.

   The opening episode isn't a fair reflection of the series' strengths. It
jumps awkwardly among topics (a sequence on ancient DNA in amber, a nod to the
hit film "Jurassic Park," seems to have been inserted at the last minute), and
the episode doesn't build enough momentum before delving into details of the
genetic code. Later episodes are more successful, opening with a dramatic,
attention-holding vignette and then stepping back to explain the science.

   While "The Secret of Life" is characterized by a high level of craftsmanship
rather than imaginative brilliance, it's an important achievement. Anyone who
views even a portion will be better informed about the fast-moving field of
genetics, and sobered about the challenges it poses for all of us.

 Ch. 2 schedule for 'The Secret of Life'

    Sunday: 9 p.m., "The Immortal Thread"; 10 p.m., "Accidents of Creation."

   Monday: 9 p.m., "Birth, Sex and Death"; 10 p.m., "Conquering Cancer."

   Tuesday: 9 p.m., "The Mouse That Laid the Golden Egg"; 10 p.m., "Cell Wars."

   Wednesday: 9 p.m., "Children By Design"; 10 p.m., "Who Are You?"
, AP PHOTO / David Suzuki, a biologist and host of "The Secret of Life," raises
the question: "Once we start this redesigning of our children, where will we
stop?"

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1993


                             1022 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    September 24, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: WEEKEND; Critics' Calls; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 975 words

BYLINE: JENNIFER L. STEVENSON; JOHN FLEMING; MARY ANN MARGER; STEVE PERSALL

BODY:


   TV / Jennifer L. Stevenson

   THEY'RE STILL ODD - Oscar and Felix that is. Television's Odd Couple reunites

 tonight for a two-hour special. Felix (Tony Randall) has been tossed out by
Gloria again and Oscar (Jack Klugman) is recovering from throat cancer (which
Klugman also fights). Penny Marshall, who got her start as Oscar's secretary,
Myrna, stops by even though Marshall is now a big-time movie director. The  plot
is familiar, as Felix tries to straighten Oscar's apartment and life out,  but
the series has matured, as have the characters. Tonight at 9, WTVT-Ch. 13.

   ROUND 'EM UP  - CBS' new comedy western Harts of the West is sensitive and
funny as it follows the life of a disenchanted lingerie salesman who gives up
the glamorous life of girdles and under-wire bras to start a dude ranch. Beau
Bridges stars as Dave Hart. His dad, Lloyd Bridges, makes a guest shot as Jake
the Cowpoke. Good family fun in the City Slickers tradition. Saturday at 9 on
WTVT-Ch. 13.

   DON'T THE BOOKS GET WET?  - On an engaging episode of seaQuest DSV, the crew

 discovers the ancient library of Alexandria. Sunday at 8 on WFLA-Ch. 8.

   A DOUBLE (HELIX) FEATURE - Mr. DNA from Jurassic Park doesn't star in PBS'
fascinating new eight-hour series, The Secret of Life, but the DNA molecule
does. The study looks at why DNA causes certain illnesses, gene therapy and
lives of people who are affected by DNA's quirks and twists. Sunday at 9 on
WEDU-Ch. 3 (continues until Wednesday).

THEATER / John Fleming

   ROUGH TALK - Paul Potenza stars in Eric Bogosian's heady blend of stand-up
comedy, performance art and social commentary, Sex, Drugs, Rock & Roll, which
opens tonight at 8 and runs through Oct. 16 at the Loft Theater. The show is a
series of interlocking monologues by a self-important rock star, a panhandler,
a loudmouth lawyer and other jerks. The production is directed by Loft  artistic
director David O'Hara. (A documentary film of Bogosian performing  Sex, Drugs,
Rock & Roll was released in 1991.) Tickets are $ 10. Call 972-3383.

   SOLO POLITICO - In Claude Pepper: Live Performance, Lively Discussion, Kelly

 Reynolds portrays the longtime congressman in a one-man show at noon Wednesday

 in Davis Hall 130 on the University of South Florida's St. Petersburg campus.
Admission is free. Call 893-9840.

MUSIC / John Fleming

   MAHLER - In a highlight of the Florida Orchestra season, music director Jahja

 Ling conducts Mahler's Symphony No. 2 (Resurrection). The performance features

 a pair of top soloists - mezzo-soprano Janis Taylor and soprano Marvis Martin
- and the Master Chorale. Concerts are at 8 p.m. Saturday at Tampa Bay
Performing Arts Center and at 7 p.m. Sunday at Ruth Eckerd Hall. Tickets are  $
19-$ 30. Call 286-2403 in Hillsborough or (800) 662-7286.

   ZARZUELA - Selections from Spanish light opera are performed at 7:30 p.m.
Saturday at the Playhouse of the Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center. The Spanish
Lyric Theater production is directed and narrated by Rene Gonzalez. Tickets  are
$ 12.50-$ 17.50. Call 221-1045 or (800) 955-1045.

   INDIA AND CHINA - Indian dancer Shubha Chakravarthy and Chinese musician Ann

 Yao perform in a program at 8 p.m. Saturday at the Tarpon Springs Cultural
Center. Tickets are $ 6. Call 942-5605.  ART / Mary Ann Marger

   EXPOSURE - Grand Central Gallery's season opener, 5-8 p.m. Sunday, features
manipulated photography by Alison Burnett, Diane Farris, Lorraine Genovar,
Ellie Massaro, Esther Solondz and Anna Tomczak. Ten percent of tonight's sales
go to the Tampa AIDS Network. Hours following the opening are 11 a.m. to 6  p.m.
Tuesday through Thursday; 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. Friday; 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. and  5:30
p.m. to 9 p.m. Saturday through Nov. 30. Free. Grand Central Gallery is  at 442
Grand Central Ave., Suite 100, Tampa (next to Mise en Place). Call  254-4977.

   JANICE JAMES - Popular St. Petersburg watercolorist Janice James exhibits at

 receptions from 6 to 8 p.m. tonight and 1 to 3 p.m. Saturday at Top Hat
Gallery. Ten to 20 percent of sales throughout the show will benefit the St.
Petersburg Free Clinic. Hours following the opening are 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.
Tuesday through Friday and 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Saturday, through Oct. 9. Free.
Top Hat Gallery is at 111 Second Ave. NE, St. Petersburg; 821-5995.

   STUDIO WALTZ - North Pinellas artists open the doors to their studios
Saturday for a second annual Studio Waltz. Details and map, see Art Beat.  FILM
/ Steve Persall

   THE AGE OF INNOCENCE - Anyone who doubted Martin Scorsese's decision to
tackle an austere adaptation of Edith Wharton's 1920 Pulitzer Prize-winning
novel can rest easy. There isn't any Goodfellas gore or Raging Bull uproar in
this sparkling production, but the director's knack for unforgettable imagery
and a palpable underpinning of emotion cascades from the screen. Oscar winner
Daniel Day-Lewis (My Left Foot) cuts a striking figure as Newland Archer, a  man
caught between his desires and the proprieties of turn-of-the-century New  York.
Michelle Pfeiffer (Batman Returns) is a sensual delight as a woman who  tempts
Archer away from his fiance (Winona Ryder). A bold, but sure-footed  step
forward in the ever-expanding body of work from America's greatest  filmmaker.

   THE GOOD SON - Macaulay Culkin throttles the life out of Kevin McAllister,
the Home Alone character that made him a household name. Culkin is a  pint-sized
portrait of evil as Henry Evans, a 12-year-old boy whose agreeable  nature
conceals a dark heart. Anyone who loved Home Alone will find The Good  Son
shocker, mainly because of Culkin's violent, profane performance. Those of  us
who tired quickly of the tousled terror can sit back and enjoy what amounts  to
a terrifically funny sick joke.

GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO, KEN HELLE; COLOR PHOTO; Paul Potenza is Stag in Sex,
Drugs, Rock & Roll at the Loft Theater.; Alison Burnett's oil-painted photograph
The Blue Chair is at Grand Central Gallery.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1993


                             1023 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-19

A NEW RUSSIAN ORDER?
President Yeltsin dissolved Parliament, the Supreme Soviet deposed him and Vice
President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, a former ally, was sworn in as acting President.
A1

CLINTON JOINS THE FRAY
A surprised President Clinton quickly bolstered President Yeltsin's actions,
saying he supported the Russian President fully.  A1


   SHADOW OF A NIGHTMARE
Compared to the nightmare of August 1991, Moscow was quiet, the protesters
nonviolent and the barricades of debris they built only knee-high, unlike the
mountains amassed during the coup that brought down Mikhail S. Gorbachev.A18

Yeltsin took a gamble, but he held on to an important chip.  A19

A NEW FOREIGN POLICY VISION
The National Security Adviser, Anthony Lake, outlined a new foreign policy
focused on enlarging the world's network of democratic market economies to
replace years of policy based on containment of a Communist threat.  A13

POPE AND RABBI MEET
Pope John Paul II met one of Israel's chief rabbis today in a visit that drew
criticism but that could mean progress toward full Vatican-Israeli relations.
A16

RABIN URGES APPROVAL
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin pressed the Israeli Parliament to approve the
Government's accord with the Palestine Liberation Organization.  A16

ARISTIDE DEMANDS DISMISSALS
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's exiled leader, demanded the removal of
military and police leaders and troops he said have been responsible for recent
politically motivated killings.  A3

Haiti's hopes for a restored Government are undercut by fears.  A3

Hope increased for a breakthrough in Bosnian peace talks.  A12

Advisers disagree on the peacekeeping role of the United States.  A8

Tokyo Journal: Shades of the "Howaito Hausu." A4

National A20-25, B9-10

ACCEPTING TAXES FOR HEALTH CARE
President Clinton tonight addresses a nation that perceives a crisis in the
health care system and says it is willing to pay higher taxes to make care
available to all, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found.  A1

THE WHITE HOUSE AS BEE HIVE
White House Memo: Not in many years have as many people from as many different
groups poured into the White House in one day on as many different errands.
Government activism is back in vogue.  A1

Last touches on the health plan and an endorsement from labor.  A24

The metamorphosis of Hillary Clinton, continued.  A24

GEPHARDT DENOUNCES TRADE PACT
Representative Richard Gephardt announced his opposition to the North American
Free Trade Agreement, widening the rift in the Democratic Party over the pact.
A1

Lawmakers fought over $305 million in transportation projects.  B9

AT ASPIN'S RIGHT HAND
Washington at Work: A combination of necessity and personal connections has
transformed John M. Deutch, a little-known chemistry professor, into a chief
powerbroker at the Pentagon.  A22

LENDING PLAN APPROVED
The Administration's program to spur lending in poor communities was approved by
the Senate Banking Committee.  D2

MORE FATHERS AS CARE GIVERS
Fathers are taking care of one in every five preschool children while their
mothers work, the first big increase in more than 10 years, the Census Bureau
said.  A20

QUAKE HITS SOUTHERN OREGON
The day after an earthquake shook southern Oregon, most schools and businesses
in Klamath Falls were closed for damage inspection.  A20

GIVING UP ON HEART ATTACKS
It is futile, and economically wasteful, for emergency medical workers to rush
heart attack victims to the hospital after resuscitation efforts have failed,
two studies found.  A23

WILD IMAGINATION OR CHILD ABUSE?
A San Diego child-care worker is on trial, accused of sexually molesting small
children and frightening them with bizarre acts.B10

A scientist who said her research was stolen won $1.2 million.  A23

Education Page B11

In the Ivy League's bidding for the best, the currency is scholarships.

The journey of Bessie Pender:

From school custodian to teacher.

Metro Digest B1

EMPIRE CONCEDES ERRORS
In what amounted to an official admission of keeping double records, Empire Blue
Cross and Blue Shield said that an internal inquiry showed the company filed
false information with the New York State Insurance Department for years.  A1

A G.O.P. ECONOMIC PLAN
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for governor of New Jersey,
unveiled an economic plan promising $1.4 billion in tax cuts, significant
reductions in the size of government and the creation of 450,000 jobs.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Restaurant empires built of diverse pieces.  C1
Backstage with Kurt Masur: Politics, podiums and two homes.  C1
Three rules of salons: talk, talk,
talk.  C1
Fires in the pods: the chili cult is winning converts.  C3
Wine Talk C10

Health Page C12

Pinpointing the source of voices "heard" in the brain.
Personal Health: Dangers of outpatient surgery.
Gene therapy for cystic fibrosis: worries and a new approach.

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Theater: Richard Thomas in
"Richard II." C13
"Blown Sideways Through Life." C13
Film: "The Red Circle." C13
Music: Notes.  C13
Kasparov wins Game 7.  C17
Books: Dawn Steel on Hollywood.  C17
Book Notes C17
Television: Critic's Notebook C18

Sports B13-19

Baseball: Twins beat Yanks.  B13
Boxing: Cuban coach convinced his fighters are best.  B18
Columns: Araton on baseball.  B13
On Baseball B15
Football: Place-kickers are new stars of N.F.L. B13
Little things are big in Reeves's game plan.  B17

Obituaries B12

John P. Vukasin Jr., Federal judge in a Navy spy case.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Russia: a democrat's coup.
New York's deteriorating schools.
Justice for jurors.
Topics: Capitol games.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Fudging health care costs.
Henry Aaron: At last, a solid health care plan.
Pepe Eliaschev: Argentina's war on journalists.

Bridge C18

Chronicle A28

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1993


                             1024 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

              September 22, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 914 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Experiment Hits a Snag

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   THE first effort to install healthy genes in the lungs of cystic fibrosis
patients has hit a few bumpy spots, forcing researchers in the United States to
redesign their projects and sharply reduce the dose of the experimental therapy
they give to people taking part in the trials.

   At the same time, scientists in Britain have begun a human gene therapy trial
of their own, using a very different and theoretically gentler method of
inserting new genes into the diseased airways of cystic fibrosis patients.

    A woman taking part in Dr. Ronald Crystal's gene therapy trial at the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md., suffered lung
inflammation, fever and a drop in oxygen levels in the blood and showed evidence
of a cloudy patch on her lung after receiving a moderately potent dose of the
novel treatment.

   In the gene therapy trials, patients receive copies of the cystic fibrosis
gene they lack, packaged in a type of cold virus able to infect lung cells and
deliver the essential genes. The genetically altered cold viruses, called
adenoviruses, are introduced into the lungs through an inserted bronchoscope
tube.

Adverse Reaction Ends Trial

    The woman was the third patient Dr. Crystal had treated since the clinical
trial began in the spring, and neither of the first two suffered any
complications. But he had been steadily increasing the dose of adenovirus with
each patient, and when the third patient showed signs of an adverse reaction to
the adenovirus, he called off the trial. The woman's symptoms dissipated in
about a week, and she was released from the hospital.

   "We don't yet know what this means," Dr. Crystal said. "It could be that this
patient is idiosyncratic, and this wouldn't happen to anybody else, or it could
be that we've found the upper limit of how much adenovirus we can put into the
lung. We're assuming the latter, so we're going to go back and work our way up
to see if we can get efficacy with a lower dose." Dr. Crystal, who is now with
New York Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center in New York, plans to
restart the trial in Bethesda within the next several days.

   Cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disease among whites,
afflicts about 30,000 Americans. The disorder results when an inherited defect
renders inoperable a gene needed to keep chloride molecules flowing smoothly
across the membranes of cells in the body's airway tissue. Without a working
molecular traffic guard, the body's salt and water levels are thrown out of
balance and a thick mucus gathers in the lung, serving as a broth for bacterial
infections. Many cystic fibrosis patients die of chronic lung infections before
the age of 30.

   By giving patients working versions of the cystic fibrosis gene, researchers
hope to forestall the mucus buildup, prevent lung damage and essentially cure
the disease, rather than simply treat the symptoms as is now done. Ideally, the
therapy would be given to very young children before their lungs are damaged.
But the latest complications underscore the difficulties of turning a highly
experimental therapy into a workaday clinical method.

   "To think we're going to cure cystic fibrosis in a year is naive," Dr.
Crystal said. "I'm not discouraged, but this is going to take time and people
shouldn't have unrealistic expectations."

   Two weeks ago, Dr. James Wilson of the University of Pennsylvania in
Philadelphia also began a gene therapy trial using the adenovirus to shepherd in
copies of the cystic fibrosis gene, treating a 32-year-old woman from New
Jersey. But in light of the complications seen in the Bethesda trial, Dr. Wilson
has decided on a lower-dose regimen.

   "The lowest dose we'll start with was lowered by tenfold over what we'd
originally planned, and the highest dose was lowered by a hundredfold," Dr.
Wilson said. "It's a conservative approach, but we think it's reasonable."

   Dr. Wilson said the New Jersey woman seemed to be faring just fine, and that
his group planned to treat 19 more patients over the next several months.

   Nobody knows yet whether any dose of the therapy will correct the defect in
the lungs or cure the disease. The early stages of the trial are simply designed
to explore questions of safety, to determine whether the gene switches on once
the adenovirus has infected lung cells and to learn how long the effect lasts.

Different Approach in Britain

    In Britain, researchers at the Royal Brompton National Heart and Lung
Hospital in London have taken a different tack to gene therapy. Rather than
using adenovirus to bestow the cystic fibrosis gene on airway cells, they have
wrapped the genes in bubbles of fat called liposomes. These fat packets are able
to penetrate cell membranes and drop their genetic consignment within.

   In principle, liposomes are less inflammatory than are cold viruses, but they
may also be less efficient in inserting genes. Whether that relative
desultoriness will make a difference remains to be seen.

   "We wanted to try something different than what's going on in the United
States, and we thought liposomes would be potentially less prone to side
effects," said Dr. Charles Coutelle of St. Mary's Hospital Medical School, who
is working on the trial.

   So far, the British researchers have treated six patients in three weeks,
limiting delivery of the liposomes through inhalation alone. If the approach
proves benign, the doctors will begin applying the fat particles to the lungs.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1993


                             1025 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 14; Column 4; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1667 words

HEADLINE: Medical Students Take to the Streets

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

BODY:

   FOR 1,560 students returning to the University of Connecticut Health Center
in Farmington this fall, there's going to be less time in the classroom and more
time in clinical settings.

   The school is arranging for many medical and dental students to care for the
homeless and indigent in shelters in the Hartford area. Others will work with
primary care doctors in general practice.

    The plan includes a child health network that will work with the new
Children's Hospital in Hartford and help establish a series of school-based
clinics in the city. An adult care clinic will operate in conjunction with
Hartford hospitals, an addictive disorders program and a task force that will
work in cooperation with other hospitals in the state to develop the most
effective AIDS treatments at the lowest cost.

Real People, Real Health Care

    The new emphasis on primary care, particularly to the medically underserved,
represents a new direction for the school and a departure from the nationwide
trend toward specialization.

   "You have to expose students to poor people, to real health care," said Dr.
Leslie S. Cutler, the executive director of the health center. Students should
deal firsthand with the effects of alcoholism and drug addiction, Dr. Cutler
said, because they will encounter those problems in general practice.

   The health center has already won some regional awards for the medical and
dental care its students provide for the poor, with 77,000 patient visits in
clinics in the Hartford area last year alone, but Dr. Cutler said the efforts
should go beyond volunteerism.

   "Why can't we be doing that as a part of our curriculum?" asked Dr. Cutler, a
triathlete who brings the same intensity to supervising a health center as he
does to running, swimming and biking. "Look at the whole debate on national
health care. If you open health care to 37 million people, who will provide that
care? Medical schools can play a major role in that process."

   The goal of the plan is to get 50 percent of the doctors into primary care
practices, Dr. Cutler said. In recent years the average has been 35 to 40
percent in UConn's 80-doctor graduating classes. But even that is better than
the national average, which has been closer to 15 or 20 percent, he said.

   "If you talk to a lot of primary care doctors out there today, they are
already overloaded," Dr. Cutler said. "And if you open up access to health care,
you're going to overwhelm the system. You've got to have the people to take care
of them."

Primary Goals

    The new emphasis on primary care, or general practice medicine, is part of a
strategic plan for the health center, the first in the school's 30-year history.
The plan was developed last year by a committee under Dr. Cutler, and while many
of the goals are long-term, they are being set into motion immediately, with
curriculum, a physical plant and other changes planned for autumn.

   Dr. Susan S. Addiss, Commissioner of the State Department of Public Health
and Addiction Services, an official consulted in the development of the plan,
said she was surprised with the nature of the plan and the speed with which it
was being implemented.

   At a recent meeting with the health center staff, Dr. Addiss and her staff
were asked to come up with priorities for urban health care, like getting more
primary care physicians into underserved areas. Dr. Cutler appointed liaisons
between her department and the health center and set a September deadline for
reports on how the initiatives would be accomplished.

   "He's serious about this strategic plan," Dr. Addiss said. "They are
practical proposals that he is proving are doable. They will figure out how to
make it work.

   "It's exciting, the way they're forging alliances with real folks in the real
community. They're addressing needs that have been building for many years.
They're doing what all medical schools need to be doing. We have too many
specialists."

The Reality of the 90's

    Dr. James E. Kennedy, dean of the UConn School of Dental Medicine, said,
"This plan represents the next stage in the evolution of the health center."

   The plan is practical, he said, because many of the proposals, like hiring
more doctors to teach primary care instead of specialties, can be accommodated
within the existing budget.

   "I've been involved in academics since the 1960's and 1970's, when you began
with the assumption that large amounts of resources would be available," Dr.
Kennedy said. "That's not the reality of the 90's."

   Dr. Kennedy said Dr. Cutler has stayed in touch with Gov. Lowell P. Weicker
Jr. and the Governor's budget staff, trying to determine what the school can
realistically expect, and the plan reflects that.

   "There's still a lot of dreaming in this plan, from finding solutions to
clinical problems that are now unsolved, to finding the genetic mechanisms of
disease," Dr. Kennedy said. "But the dreams are in the science, or the quality
of the science. What isn't there is fanciful thinking."

   Dr. Bruce M. Koeppen, dean of academic affairs and education in the medical
school, said, "When we started this process everybody knew it had to be doable,
that this was no wish-list kind of process." Dr. Koeppen is a member of the
planning committee. "I think everyone came to the table with realistic
expectations."

Hospital Is a Major Player

    The health center has existed for more than 30 years, but the medical school
in Farmington, and the John N. Dempsey Hospital attached to it, opened in 1973.

   The curved walls of concrete and glass look out over Interstate 84 stretching
toward Hartford to the east and Waterbury to the west. The 3 stories for the
hospital on one side and 10 stories for the medical school on the other are
built around a central courtyard of ivy, grass and trees.

   Since the hospital opened there have been few years when there was no
construction, and currently a major expansion and renovation project is under
way.

   With 313,437 patient visits last year and 3,428 employees, UConn's Farmington
campus is a major hospital in the state. And with $42.6 million in Federal and
foundation grants, 654 interns and postdoctoral students and 11,729 participants
in its continuing education programs for physicians and dentists, it is also a
major research institution. The strategic plan attempts to unite the two.

   The plan sets out new research initiatives grounded in molecular biology and
molecular medicine. For instance, the school will develop its molecular research
into the causes of cancer, with an eye toward gene therapy to treat it.

   "There's no question that within the lifetime of our current students
molecular genetics and molecular medicine will become very important to
diagnosis and treatment," Dr. Koeppen said. The emphasis on molecular biology in
medical school will allow the graduates to keep up with what promises to be a
rapidly developing field, he said.

To Plan or Not to Plan

    Dr. Kennedy acknowledged that not everyone at the school is happy with the
strategic plan. While the plan calls for a new program in neurobiology,
particularly to develop treatments for Alzheimer's disease, other areas of
specialized treatment have not done so well.

   "There has to be some balancing," Dr. Kennedy said. "For some people it's
going to require some adjustment and reassessment of what they're doing."

   Dr. Cutler said he's heard some grumbling as well, some of it over the
concept of a strategic plan at a university.

   "There are some people who don't like the idea of a plan, who say you can't
plan the course of research," Dr. Cutler said. "But we aren't planning research.
We're just saying, 'We're going to hire scientists within these areas and let
them do their research.' Our new hires, our new investments in human capital,
have to be in certain areas. We can't be all things to all people. But there are
some people who just resist any structure."

   The other problem has been the grumbling about allocation of resources, Dr.
Cutler said.

   "Just deciding who gets how much space and where has created some tension in
the building," Dr. Cutler said.

   But it is the emphasis in the plan on primary care that has caught the
attention of people outside the institution, Dr. Cutler and others say.

   Some of the necessary changes cannot be accomplished at the health center
alone. For instance, legislation to forgive education debts for doctors who set
up primary care practices in medically underserved urban areas has been
suggested as an incentive.

   "All health care experts realize there is a shortage of, and need for, more
primary care services," Dr. Koeppen said. "We're going to need help. We can
recruit students with interests in primary care, but if there aren't enough
inducements to keep them in that field they're going to go into specialties."

   But the promotion of primary care as a career choice can be accomplished at
the health center, Dr. Cutler said. For instance, in the past students focused
mainly on science and had only minimal clinical experience during their first
two years. The plan calls for students to spend more time in a clinical setting
starting in their first year. It calls for training in a nurturing environment,
stressing problem-solving rather than specialization.

   It has been hotly debated whether the health center as an educational
institution should strive to recreate the atmosphere of a small liberal arts
college, or the impersonal environment of the typical large research-based
university, Dr. Cutler said.

   "I think there's a dogma out there in the educational community that you
can't have it both ways, that if you're a strong research-oriented institution
and driven by these more demanding activities, you can't be human toward the
students and the people who work for you, and if you're caring and nurturing you
can't be serious about research," Dr. Cutler said. "You can match those things
up, but it takes work. It's much easier to do just A or B."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1993


                             1026 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 19, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: By the luck of begats, one San Diego is No. 1

BYLINE: Neil Morgan

BODY:

   The Padres are in the cellar.

   Beloved relics of small-town San Diego, like Starlight Opera, are tottering.

   Recession remolds our city.

   But one San Diego is still No. 1. In science research, San Diego is a New
York, a London, a Paris.

   By some current rankings, it is even better.

   Science is one of the few categories in which our city performs at a level
commensurate to its rank as America's sixth largest city. He's no Tony Gwynn or
Leslie O'Neal, but K.C. Nicolaou is a San Diegan whose name is known around the
world.

   So are the names of Michael Karin and Ron Evans and Inder Verma and Walter
Munk and hundreds more. Research brings a billion dollars or more each year to
San Diego.

   It is so recent a part of this community that we are not sure how it happened
or what to make of it. Its origin fits the profile of San Diego as accidental
tourist.

   Our leaders fought for decades, largely in vain, to lure manufacturing and
industry. Then science was dropped in our lap. Modern San Diego began with the
arrival of the University of California 30 years ago.

   Like a biblical epic of begats, Roger Revelle recruited Harold Urey who
recruited David Bonner who recruited S. Jonathan Singer.

   The result was a biology department that became an academic world legend at
its birth. That department was the seed tree that grew a hundred or more San
Diego high-tech companies and tens of thousands of science-trained in-migrants.
If a Padres player won the National League's Most Valuable Player award year
after year, it would be no more startling than to see two chancellors of UCSD
elected to six-year terms as the third and fifth directors of the National
Science Foundation: Bill McElroy and Dick Atkinson. Such newcome San Diegans of
science have tilted whole communities of northern San Diego into what we
conveniently call "new San Diego."

   Its wide boulevards and mirrored facades and landscaped labs are
neighborhoods that some of us venture into, uncomprehending, like a foreign
land. But what San Diego scientists are doing is known throughout the one-world
network of men and women absorbed in the most accelerated discoveries in the
history of science.

   A startling share of them occurs here, but are lost on most of us because the
scientists' world has moved faster than our grasp. Examples: Chemist K.C.
Nicolaou, shared by UCSD and Scripps Research Institute, has designed and
synthesized enediyne, one of the most potent anti-cancer substances yet
produced. As physicians find that anti-viral drugs like AZT are less effective
than thought against HIV-infection, UCSD's Flossie Wong-Staal has won federal
approval to begin trials of a genetic therapy for AIDS. UCSD researchers have
teamed with the defense industry to convert stealth bomber technology for an
earthquake-resistant bridge over Interstate 5. At Salk Institute, named for the
polio vaccine discoverer, Verma and Tony Hunter have made discoveries in
oncogenes that have launched entirely new directions of investigation into the
origins of cancer. From uninhabited Heard Island, a dot in the South Indian
Ocean, the veteran Walter Munk of Scripps Institution of Oceanography fires
underwater sound waves through thousands of miles of sea to answer, once and for
all, the disputes over ocean warming. Diabetics could be freed from daily
insulin shots through the glucose sensor being tested by David Gough at UCSD. In
a recent world survey by Science Watch of institutions involved in the white-hot
field of molecular biology and genetics, Salk Institute ranked first.

   UCSD ranked 14th, and Scripps Research Institute 21st. For comparisons: MIT
was eighth, Harvard 13th, Massachusetts General Hospital 22nd, Caltech 23rd, and
UC Berkeley 24th. The research of two of the San Diego scientists ranked highest
in this study is supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, which allots
its grants to researchers at their respective institutions or hospitals.

   They are Ronald Evans of Salk and Michael Rosenfeld of UCSD. In the warm glow
of dollars flowing to this city's distressed economy, Hughes dollars are at
least as good as federal or state or corporate dollars. As big business,
research provides San Diego jobs in diverse non-science categories. Even the
beleaguered University of California currently receives more than a billion
dollars in federal research awards.

   The UCSD share is $224 million in the recent fiscal year.

   That represents more than 1,500 different research grants at UCSD, or about
$187,000 per year per faculty member.

   On that basis, UCSD is the second-ranked public institution in the nation in
federal funding for research. In R&D spending among both private and public
universities, UCSD ranks sixth, like its city's population.

   In contrast, UCSD does not appear among leading institutions in funding for
arts and humanities. (National leaders are UC Berkeley, UC Santa Barbara and
UCLA.) The future of the San Diego research community is unknown.

   It is incredible that scientists cannot yet confirm approval of low-level
nuclear waste disposal at Ward Valley in the Mojave Desert.

   It is ominous to hear our public universities called on to reduce their
commitment to research.

   It could help if more San Diegans understood that in the world of scientific
research, this city has, in an astonishingly brief 30 years, achieved heights
unprecedented at any time, anywhere.

   Science has become a major leg of our San Diego economy. At Salk, Glen Evans
leads the effort to map human chromosomes, a gargantuan scientific inventory
inspired by the discovery of DNA, one that will provide the human geography for
future health care.

   He flies tomorrow for a week with fellows in the science labs of London.

   He is comfortable about taking a week away from his own lab. "We all thought
this was going to take 20 years and billions of dollars," he says.

   "Here at Salk we are a year or two ahead of schedule.

   There's a high likelihood that San Diego is becoming the No. 1 or No. 2 city
in the world for this historic project." NEIL MORGAN'S column appears Tuesday,
Thursday and Sunday.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1027 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 17, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Dan Dorfman; Pg. 5B

LENGTH: 1129 words

HEADLINE: Three bears still grumpy on market outlook

BYLINE: Dan Dorfman

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

    I got an angry call from Muriel Marcus, a reader in San Francisco.

   "Do you ever look back at the crazies you write about?" she shouted. "Do they
know at your paper what an a - - - - - - you are?"

   Marcus howled about a column I did last Feb. 5 in which I quoted three bears
- none a doomsayer, though one predicted a big decline. She claimed, as a result
of the story, she sold all the stocks she owned (seven), plus her two mutual
funds. "You cost me retirement money," she screamed. "They should outlaw you."

   Actually, the pros I quoted, all money managers, are anything but crazies.
They've all made some excellent calls. And I figure no one on Wall Street - nor
anywhere else - is perfect all the time.

   Clearly, though, that wasn't their finest hour.

   Take Rick Eakle. "No question about it," he said in February. "It's time to
sell. Any idiot can see that."

   Michael O'Higgins, our No. 1 grizzly, flatly forecast a 20% to 30% stock drop
in 18 months. "The public is out of its mind to trade in bank certificates of
deposit for stocks and mutual funds," he said. "They'll rue the day. The money
they'll lose will be enormous."

   Our third bear, B.J. Willingham, had told me: "It's a good time to take money
off the table. We'll see an 8% yield on 30-year Treasury bonds (the yield was
then 7.18%) and stocks will sell off maybe 10%." Thursday's close on 30-year
Treasury bonds: 6.03%.

   At the time I interviewed our trio, the Dow Jones industrial average was at
3417. It backed off a bit after that, but later ran up nearly 7% to a high of
3652 and closed Thursday at 3621. So obviously the bears went into hibernation
too soon.

   Still, it has been a tough year for many investors. Though various averages
are up, many stocks are down. Take the Wilshire 5000 index: As of Aug. 31,
almost four of every 10 stocks in it are down for the year.

   The actual numbers: Of 5,830 stocks in the index, 3,634 - that's 63% - are up
or unchanged for the year. And 2,196, or 36%, are down.

   So what now from our three grizzlies? They're still growling. O'Higgins and
Eakle continue to see a falling market; the third, Willingham, is kind of
neutral. He sees a narrow Dow trading range the next six to nine months of 3400
to 3700. In brief, a tough-to-make-a-buck environment.

   "I'm struggling; it has been one of the most frustrating periods in the 26
years I've been in the business," Eakle says. "I guess we all have our cycles."

   Eakle runs Eakle Associates, a $ 35 million investment firm in Fair Lawn,
N.J. From '88 through '92, he shows a compound annual average gain of 32%, vs.
11% for the Standard & Poor's 500. This year, though, he's only up about 2%, vs.
a rise of 5.4% in the S&P 500.

   Aside from getting bloodied on a couple of high-tech stocks (Apple Computer
and Borland International), his bum '93 showing also reflects high cash reserves
in a rising market. At one point, his cash position was as high as 52%. He also
underestimated the Federal Reserve's determination to keep interest rates low.
And that, in turn, forced many holders of bank certificates of deposit and
Treasury bills into stocks.

   So what now? Eakle, 30% in cash, sees the Dow falling 3% to 5% the next four
to six weeks. And he reckons the NASDAQ composite, a measure of small-company
stocks, could drop 2 1/2 times that in the same period. His reasoning:

   - Stepped-up press harpings on October sell-offs. Stocks have sold off six of
the last seven years in October, historically one of the worst months of the
year.

   - Since World War II, the average market advance has run 29 months from its
low to its high before a sustained, sizable sell-off. The current advance is in
its 35th month.

   Eakle pretty much rules out a big sell-off. He says serious drops are
unusual, given recent highs in the Dow Jones utilities average and in major
brokerage stocks. Eakle also cites another big plus - the continuing high level
of money pouring into mutual funds.

   "It's time for caution, but that doesn't mean you still can't make money," he
says. His focus: depressed stocks such as retailers Dress Barn and Costco
Wholesale. He's also looking to build stakes in telecommunications companies
Nextel, Geotek Industries and Dial Page. And he likes biotechs MedImmune and
Genetic Therapy.

   Our chief grizzly is O'Higgins, head of Michael O'Higgins & Co., a $ 275
million firm in Albany, N.Y. I only could chat with him about three minutes for
this column. He was dashing off to catch a plane for an overseas trip.

   Up only about 3% this year, vs. a 29% gain last year, O'Higgins tells me:
"The clock is ticking. I wouldn't want to own stocks past Sept. 30" - a
reference to the October sell-off risk. "The 13-year bull market in paper assets
is over."

   His prediction, would you believe: a 35% drop in the S&P 500 the next 12
months.

   His negative thesis: rising inflation - 3.5% the remainder of '93 and 4% in
'94. This reflects his expectation of an improving global economy and higher
commodity prices. So his top plays: oil and gold, such as Maxus Energy, Oryx
Energy, USX-Marathon, Battle Mountain Gold, Echo Bay Mines and Royal Oak Mines.

   Our final bear, Willingham, is the investment chief of Houston's Transamerica
Fund Management (assets: $ 3 billion). He's about on par this year with the S&P
500.

   His negative view of the market in February stemmed from his expectations of
a stronger economy and a bottoming of inflation. "I was about six months off
base," he says. Why? He blames sharp cutbacks in defense spending, plus
recessions and tight money in Europe and Japan. But the worst of the defense
cuts is over, he says. And rates and recessions are easing in Europe.

   Contrary to many worry-warts, Willingham sees economic growth of 3.5% the
next 12 months. He also sees S&P 500 earnings growing 25% the same period. The
basis of it, he says: "the biggest tax cut in history" - a reference to the
sharp decline in interest rates. And that, he says, should be a big economic
stimulus.

   Still, he says wary investors aren't ready to buy an economic recovery. And
this will blunt any decent market progress.

   Like O'Higgins, Willingham is an energy fan. Pegged as 20% price gainers in
12 months are service companies Baker-Hughes and Dresser Industries and gas
plays Noble Affiliates and Nuevo Energy.

   What about the concern that Iraq will resume oil production? Willingham says
it's overblown. "We haven't been drilling holes in the ground. Demand will
exceed capacity - even if OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries)
is at full production."

   So there you have 'em - our three bears. Only time will tell if we should
have hibernated with 'em.

    Stocks' bullish performance Dow Jones industrial average
Feb. 5:       3442
Thursday:     3631

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, J.L. Albert, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research (Line
graph); PHOTO, b/w, Gittings; PHOTOS, b/w (2)


                             1028 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 14, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 594 words

HEADLINE: U.S. Panel Backs Plan to Culture Armies of Immune Cells to Fight AIDS

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Sept. 13

BODY:

   An experimental technique that would infuse armies of virus-killing cells
into AIDS patients has been approved by a National Institutes of Health
committee of experts.

   The technique, proposed by researchers at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center at the University of Washington in Seattle, calls for removing antiviral
immune cells from AIDS patients, culturing the cells into vast numbers and then
injecting them back into the patients.

    The N.I.H. Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, a panel that evaluates
proposed human experiments using manipulated genes, approved the procedure for
15 patients.

   One researcher, Dr. Phillip D. Greenberg, said the idea was to boost the
body's defense against the human immunodeficiency virus, or H.I.V., which causes
AIDS, and perhaps defeat or control the disease.

   The cells selected for procedure, called CD8 lymphocytes, seek out and kill
other cells that have been infected with a virus. In the laboratory, Dr.
Greenberg said, blood samples from an AIDS patient will be processed to isolate
CD8 cells that target the AIDS virus. They will then be cultured.

   A safety question about the technique brought Dr. Greenberg and his
co-investigator, Dr. Stanley R. Riddel, to the N.I.H. committee. Dr. Greenberg
said there was a danger that the augmented numbers of CD8 cells could be so
strong that they would cause a dangerous inflammation in critical organs, like
the lungs or brain, that harbor large numbers of H.I.V.-infected cells. The
technique the researchers chose as a safety measure was to insert part of a gene
taken from the herpes virus into the CD8 cells. This gene fragment would make
the cells sensitive to two antiviral drugs, acyclovir and ganciclovir.

   Dr. Greenberg said that if the attack of the CD8 cells caused a dangerous
inflammation, then patients would be treated with the antiviral drugs to kill
the altered CD8 cells.

   Because the technique uses manipulated genes in human experiments, the plan
required consideration by the N.I.H. advisory committee, which voted unanimous
approval. Before the experiment can proceed, however, it must also be approved
by the director of the health institutes and by the Food and Drug
Administration.

Still Another Gene Experiment

    Last Friday, the committee also approved another gene therapy experiment
aimed at AIDS.

   Dr. Flossie Wong-Staal, Dr. Eric Poeschla and Dr. David Looney of the
University of California at San Diego, have proposed an experiment in which a
lymphocyte that is the target of H.I.V. would be armed with a "molecular knife"
that would prevent the virus from reproducing.

   Dr. Wong-Staal said the technique called for removing a few CD4 cells, the
principal targets of H.I.V., from an AIDS patient. Researchers would splice into
the CD4 cells a molecule called a hairpin ribozyme, which can slice up
ribonucleic acid, or RNA. The AIDS virus uses RNA to reproduce itself inside CD4
cells.

   If the CD4 cells are altered to contain the hairpin ribozyme, said Dr.
Wong-Staal, this will prevent the virus from reproducing in that cell. If enough
CD4 cells carry this altered gene, it could lower the level of H.I.V. infection.

   The committee actions were its third and fourth approvals of gene therapy
experiments against AIDS. Last year, the group approved a slightly different
technique proposed by Dr. Greenberg and Dr. Riddell, and last June the committee
approved a technique proposed by Dr. Gary J. Nabel of the University of Michigan
Medical Center in Ann Arbor that would attack a specific gene in the AIDS virus.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1993


                             1029 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                   September 14, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; BREAKTHROUGHS; Discovery; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1279 words

HEADLINE: Antibody treatment for arthritis on fast track for human testing

BODY:


   A new treatment appears to stop painful inflammation from rheumatoid
arthritis and may lead to treatment for lupus and multiple sclerosis. "It has
extraordinarily high therapeutic value," Randolph Noelle, a Dartmouth
University microbiologist, said of the   treatment involving the use of
antibodies. The immune systems of people with rheumatoid arthritis, which
afflicts more than 2-million Americans, are overly aggressive and cause the
body to attack its own healthy joint tissue, leading to painful and sometimes
crippling inflammation and joint damage. The antibody treatment was tested on
laboratory mice with success, essentially stopping the immune system's attack
on the healthy tissue. Noelle said the antibody might also lead to an  effective
treatment for multiple sclerosis, a degenerative disease of the  central nervous
system. He said his team hopes to move rapidly to test a human  version of the
antibody.

Love Potion No. 9?

It appears that humans, like most animals, may exude a copious cloud of
odorless chemicals called pheromones that send meaningful signals to other
humans. If research now under way pans out, it signifies the discovery of a
cryptic sensory system that exists without conscious awareness yet may
influence fundamental human behaviors involving sexual reproduction and the
ability to discriminate between individuals. Unfortunately, release of the
research is complicated by commercial concerns. Dr. David Berliner, a medical
doctor and anatomist who now runs a private biotechnology company, contends
that he has isolated pheromones from human skin cells. But to the frustration
of scientists who want to get their hands on the pheromones for basic  research,
he is keeping their identity and structure secret until patents are  granted for
their use in scents and pharmaceuticals, which he expects to  happen early next
year. He has announced plans to market a perfume containing  them as a potent
ingredient.

"Big bang' of evolution compressed

A little more than 500-million years ago, the primordial seas played host to a
spectacular event that shaped the rest of the history of life on earth. There
in the ancient waters of the Cambrian period, evolution had what biologists
call its big bang: an explosive radiation of life forms in which nearly all  the
major animal groups now on Earth and others long since extinct first  appeared.
Believed to have occurred over 20-million to 30-million years, a  blink of an
eye in paleontological terms, this evolutionary explosion and its  diversity of
life forms were considered a biological marvel, an example of a  time when
evolution more than excelled in the rapid production of vastly  different
creatures. And now, in a report published in the current issue of  Science,
scientists say this momentous event probably lasted no more than  5-million
years and may even have taken as few as 1-million years, in either  case a
breathtakingly short period. Dr. Stephen Jay Gould, a paleontologist at
Harvard, said, "Now this greatest of all evolutionary bursts is even more of  an
evolutionary burst than we'd thought. You've taken the most accelerated  period
of evolutionary rates and made it a whole lot shorter. The degree of  speed is
so fast, it's downright peculiar. The strange gets stranger, the fast  gets
faster."

Maps to become multimedia

Map reading will never be the same. Everyone from road builders to
environmentalists will soon be able to cast aside their charts and crumpled
town plans and use comprehensive computer maps, the most sophisticated ever
developed. The system emerging from a European research project is far more
than a flat representation of cities and countryside. It can represent the  land
in text, images or sound. Select a species of bird, for example, and you  can
listen to its song. But what makes the system unusual is its seeming  powers of
deduction. Light an imaginary fire in a specific spot in the forest,  and it
will show where the blaze will spread and how quickly, given the  direction of
the wind. And with large sections of woodland habitat destroyed,  it will
predict the consequences for the wildlife. How will the food chain be  affected?
Which animals will thrive and which will be hardest hit by the  dramatic change
in the environment?

Date of first tools pushed back

The oldest stone tools yet found - 2.6-million years old - were unearthed
earlier this year near the Gona River in Ethiopia, a Rutgers archaeologist
announced at a conference here earlier this month. The tools - such as
sharp-edged flakes of rock that were probably used for cutting or whittling,
and larger rock "cores" from which such flakes were chipped - would be
difficult for a casual observer to pick out from the surrounding rubble. But  to
scientists studying human evolution, they extend by nearly a  quarter-million
years the earliest date at which at least one species of  human-like primate had
discovered that stones could be deliberately broken to  create an implement
useful in getting food. Before the discovery, the oldest  decisively dated stone
tools - found in the Omo River region of Ethiopia -  were found to be
2.3-million to 2.4-million years old.

Gene therapy studied for MD

In what is being called a major step forward in the fight against muscular
dystrophy, researchers have shown that gene therapy prevents muscle  destruction
and loss of muscle function in mice that carry the genetic flaws  that cause two
forms of the disease. By inserting a gene for the protein  dystrophin into mouse
embryos that lacked a functioning form of the gene, the  researchers, from the
universities of Michigan, Iowa and Washington, were able  to correct the defect
and cure the diseases. Although the genetically altered  mice produced about 50
times the normal amount of the protein in their  muscles, they suffered no ill
effects, the researchers said. Moreover, the  offspring of these transgenic
mice, which were bred with mice that had  muscular dystrophy, carried a
corrected version of the gene.

Has lobotomy thinking returned?

A federal advisory panel recommended Wednesday that the Food and Drug
Administration allow limited human testing of a potent hallucinogenic drug,
ibogaine, that is believed to help some heroin and cocaine addicts overcome
their addictions. After strenuous debate, the committee voted to allow
University of Miami researchers to begin testing the drug on as many as 12
human volunteers, according to a member of the research team that submitted  the
formal proposal to the FDA. In making their case for the trials, Mash and  other
proponents of the drug cited recent reports from the Netherlands  indicating
that some addicts lose their craving for narcotics after a single  treatment
with ibogaine. But the evidence is anecdotal, and the treatment  controversial:
Ibogaine, derived from the root of a West African plant, is  said to produce an
intense, trip-like experience, with vivid hallucinations  and unsettling
insights. Some researchers believe it may curb addiction by  damaging brain
cells in the cerebellum, a region of the brain they now suspect  may control
addictive behavior.

   Want to know more? Longer versions of Breakthrough items can be obtained by
mail or fax. Just call the Answer Desk between 9 a.m. and 1 p.m. Monday to
Friday at 893-8176. Outside Pinellas County, call (800) 333-7505, ext. 8176.  Or
leave your request on the Discovery voice mail, 892-2310.

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1993


                             1030 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 September 14, 1993, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 1C

LENGTH: 1026 words

HEADLINE: BOOMER'S DAY RISES, SETS WITH SON; FOR JETS QB, OFFSPRING'S ILLNESS
MEANS 'REAL TASTE OF REALITY'

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   Each morning and afternoon, for about an hour, 2-year-old Gunnar Esiason must
take a treatment of steam mist with drugs to help open his lungs.  Then his
father, Boomer, or his mother, Cheryl, does chest physical therapy by patting
him on his side and back.  Gunnar has cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease
characterized by mucous secretions through the body that affect the respiratory
and digestive systems.  The average life expectancy of cystic fibrosis patients
is 29.  "You try to keep his mind off the therapy, because sometimes he gets
sore," Cheryl Esiason said. "Quite often, we run out of the rhymes, then it's
time for Christmas carols. He loves the carols. It's a great bonding session."
Boomer Esiason said: "You are doing something that is going to prolong his life,
that is going to save his life, and you're doing it because you love to do it.
It's a very rewarding and valuable time for all of us." Concern for Gunnar's
condition sometimes takes Esiason's mind off the National Football League
season. In March, Esiason was traded by the Cincinnati Bengals to the New York
Jets, a move that created a lot of questions: Can Esiason, a nine-year veteran
and one of the league's big stars in the late 1980s, revive his career? He may
already have answered this, having passed for more than 300 yards in each of the
Jets' first two games.  Can he help save the job of his longtime friend and
former position coach with the Bengals, Jets head coach Bruce Coslet? The Jets
were 4-12 last season, and are 1-1 after Esiason passed for 323 yards Sunday in
a 24-14 upset of the Miami Dolphins. How will Esiason, from East Islip, N.Y., on
Long Island, cope with the pressure of being the hometown hero?  "I'm not
worried about the New York media or the fans," said Esiason, who also has an 11
1/2-month-old daughter, Sydney, who has tested negative for CF.  "Bruce Coslet
and (general manager) Dick Steinberg have been very generous to us. They have
helped me find doctors and hospitals, so all I have to do is play.  "Playing is
like therapy to me. It's what I've lived for and what I want and what I do.
There will be no juggling of a schedule, though. No. 1 on the docket is my son.
There is no more fantasy land." Esiason said he got a "real taste of reality"
May 6.  That's when a physician walked into Gunnar Esiason's hospital room in
Cincinnati and told Boomer and Cheryl that Gunnar's test for cystic fibrosis was
positive.  "You never prepare for something like this," Esiason said. "We were
there for about 45 minutes, the three of us, but Gunnar was asleep. In that time
span, you go through depression, sadness, anger." Cheryl said Boomer thought
briefly about quitting football.  "Boomer was asking so many questions, like,
'What I should do? Should I stop playing?' " Cheryl recalled. "Gunnar was lying
there asleep like a little angel. I think Boomer quit until Gunnar woke up, and
said, 'Hi, Mom and Dad.' That's when we started restructuring our lives, because
Gunnar was so innocent and full of hope." Boomer and Cheryl Esiason are carriers
of CF, but neither of them knew it.  There was no history of the disease on
either side of the family.  One in 20 Americans carries the CF gene, and the
frequency of CF is one in 2,000 births. Nearly 30,000 children and young adults
in the United States have the disease, according to Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
officials in Baltimore.  When Gunnar was about 6 months old, he began wheezing
and developed a cough. About a month later, a chest X-ray and a test for CF were
negative.  Gunnar was treated for asthma.  "The CF test was done at a local
hospital in Kentucky, but it was eight years outdated," Cheryl said. "It's not
even used at a CF hospital now.  But a lot more is known about CF now around the
country than years ago." That's one reason the Esiasons have such a positive
outlook.  Medical advances in the field, such as gene therapy to reduce lung
complications, have increased the average life expectancy nearly 10 years per
decade since 1960, according to Dr. Beryl Rosenstein, director of the CF center
at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.  On Aug. 10, the Food and Drug
Administration advisory committee unanimously approved the drug dornase alfa,
which was found to reduce infections and improve the quality of life for stable
CF patients over age 5. It was the first new agent drug for CF in 30 years,
Rosenstein said.  Since the diagnosis in May, Gunnar has been taking enzymes
with his food.  He has gained 3 1/2 pounds and grown 2 inches in that time.  He
swims three times a week. He likes baseball, basketball and football. He loves
to hook up trains, feed animals and watch sports on television with his father.
"A lot of progress has been made in finding a cure," Rosenstein said. "The
average life span may be around 30 for those already with the disease, but a
child born with CF today can expect to live to be about 40. I think we're about
five or six years away from finding a cure." There has been an outpouring of
concern for Gunnar from the football world.  Buffalo Bills backup quarterback
Frank Reich, a former Maryland teammate of Esiason's, went to Cincinnati
immediately when he heard the news. Esiason has heard from other league
quarterbacks, such as Buffalo Bills starter Jim Kelly, the Dolphins' Dan Marino
and the Houston Oilers' Warren Moon.  Esiason, because of a friend and business
partner who was associated with the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, had been active
in fund raising before his son's diagnosis.  But now the disease has hit home,
and Esiason has started a crusade. He has played in numerous charity golf
tournaments. Earlier this summer, he helped raise $60,000 for CF research after
he got 10 NFL quarterbacks (five from each conference) to participate in the TV
game show "Family Feud." "We all think, 'Why us?' " Esiason said, his voice
starting to tremble.  "But it happened for a reason, so I can get out and wage
the fight and beat this thing in the next couple of years. By the end of the
decade, if it's not cured, the life expectancy will be 50 to 60 at least. But
I'm determined to help find a cure."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GRAPHIC; (1) Color Photo by AP...Though Boomer Esiason faces
pressure on the field, "No. 1 on the docket" is his son's battle with cystic
fibrosis. (Photo appeared black and white in the Illinois Three Star Edition)
(2) Photo by AP...Boomer Esiason, from Long Island, faces the expectations of
being a hometown hero. (Photo appeared in the Illinois Three Star Edition) (3)
Graphic/Chart....Boomer Esiason is off to a fast start with the New York Jets.
He leads the league in the following. Pass completions              51 Passing
yards                684 Yards per attempt              9.51 Completion
percentage (51-73) 69.9

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993


                             1031 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 1993 The Sunday Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                    The Sunday Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                           September 12, 1993 Sunday
                                 SECOND Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. B12

LENGTH: 1704 words

HEADLINE: ESIASON TRIES TO FOCUS ON JOB AS SON BATTLES SERIOUS DISEASE

BYLINE: MIKE PRESTON, The Baltimore Sun <

BODY:

   Sunday, September 12, 1993 ESIASON TRIES TO FOCUS ON JOB AS SON BATTLES
SERIOUS DISEASE

   Summary: Gunnar Esiason, 2-year-old son of the Jets quarterback,  suffers
from cystic fibrosis

   Each morning and afternoon, for about an hour, 2-year-old Gunnar Esiason
must take a treatment of steam mist with drugs to help open his lungs.

   Then his father, Boomer, or his mother, Cheryl, does chest physical therapy
by patting him on his side and back.

   Gunnar has cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease characterized by mucous
secretions through the body that affect the respiratory and digestive systems.
The average life expectancy of cystic fibrosis patients is 29.

   ``You try to keep his mind off the therapy, because sometimes he gets
sore,'' said Cheryl Esiason. ``Quite often, we run out of the rhymes, then  it's
time for Christmas carols. He loves the carols. It's a great bonding  session.''

   Said Boomer Esiason: ``You are doing something that is going to prolong his
life, that is going to save his life, and you're doing it because you love to
do it. It's a very rewarding and valuable time for all of us.''

   Concern for Gunnar's condition has taken Esiason's mind off the National
Football League season. In March, Esiason was traded by the Cincinnati Bengals
to the New York Jets, a move that created a lot of questions:

   *Can Esiason, a nine-year veteran and one of the league's big stars in the
late 1980s, revive his career?

   *Can he help save the job of his longtime friend, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet?

   *Does his left arm, earning $3 million a year, still have enough strength
and accuracy to throw down field?

   *How will Esiason, from East Islip, N.Y., on Long Island, cope with the
pressure of being the hometown hero?

   ``I'm not worried about the New York media or the fans,'' said Esiason, who
also has an 11 1/2 -month-old daughter, Sydney, who has tested negative for  CF.
``Bruce Coslet and (Jets General Manager) Dick Steinberg have been very
generous to us. They have helped me find doctors and hospitals, so all I have
to do is play.

   ``Playing will be like therapy to me. It's what I've lived for and what I
want and what I do. There will be no juggling of a schedule, though. No. 1 on
the docket is my son. There is no more fantasy land.''

   Esiason said he got a ``real taste of reality'' May 6.

   That's when the doctor walked into his son's hospital room in Cincinnati
accompanied by a pulmonary nurse, and told Boomer and Cheryl that Gunnar's  test
for cystic fibrosis was positive.

   ``You never prepare for something like this,'' said Esiason. ``We were  there
for about 45 minutes, the three of us, but Gunnar was asleep. In that  time
span, you go through depression, sadness, anger.''

   Cheryl said Boomer thought briefly about quitting football.

   ``Boomer was asking so many questions, like, `What I should do? Should I
stop playing?' '' Cheryl recalled. ``Gunnar was lying there asleep like a
little angel. I think Boomer quit until Gunnar woke up, and said, `Hi, Mom and
Dad.' That's when we started restructuring our lives, because Gunnar was so
innocent and full of hope.''

   Boomer and Cheryl Esiason are carriers of CF, but neither of them knew it.
There was no history of the disease on either side of the family.

   One in 20 Americans carries the CF gene, and the frequency of CF is one in
2,000 births. Nearly 30,000 children and young adults in the United States  have
the disease, according to Cystic Fibrosis Foundation officials in  Baltimore.

   When Gunnar was about 6 months old, he began wheezing and developed a  cough.
About a month later, a chest X-ray and a test for CF were negative.

   Gunnar was treated for asthma.

   ``The CF test was done at a local hospital in Kentucky, but it was eight
years outdated,'' said Cheryl. ``It's not even used at a CF hospital now. But  a
lot more is known about CF now around the country than years ago.''

   And that's one reason the Esiasons are so positive.

   Medical advances in the field, such as gene therapy to reduce lung
complications, have increased the average life expectancy nearly 10 years  since
1960, according to Dr. Beryl Rosenstein, director of the CF center at  the Johns
Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.

   On Aug. 10, the Food and Drug Administration advisory committee unanimously
approved the drug dornase alfa, which was found to reduce infections and
improve the quality of life for stable CF patients over age 5. It was the  first
new agent drug for CF in 30 years, said Rosenstein.

   Since the diagnosis in May, Gunnar has been taking enzymes with his food.  He
has gained 3 1/2  pounds and grown 2 inches in that time.

   He swims three times a week. He likes baseball, basketball and football. He
loves to hook up trains, feed animals and watch sports on television with his
father.

   ``A lot of progress has been made in finding a cure,'' said Rosenstein.
``The average life span may be around 30 for those already with the disease,
but a child born with CF today can expect to live to be about 40. I think  we're
about five or six years away from finding a cure.''

   There has been an outpouring of concern for Gunnar from the football world.
Buffalo Bills backup quarterback Frank Reich, a former Maryland teammate of
Esiason, went to Cincinnati immediately. Esiason has heard from other league
quarterbacks, such as Bills starter Jim Kelly, the Miami Dolphins' Dan Marino
and the Houston Oilers' Warren Moon.

   Esiason, because of a friend and business partner who was associated with
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, had been active in fund raising before his
son's diagnosis.

   But now the disease has hit home, and Esiason has started a crusade. He has
played in numerous charity golf tournaments. Earlier this summer, he helped
raise $60,000 for CF research after he got 10 NFL quarterbacks (five from each
conference) to participate in the television game show ``Family Feud.'' The
show will air in September.

   ``We all think, `Why us?' '' said Esiason, his voice starting to tremble.
``But it happened for a reason, so I can get out and wage the fight and beat
this thing in the next couple of years. By the end of the decade, if it's not
cured, the life expectancy will be 50 to 60 at least. But I'm determined to
help find a cure.''

   Esiason fell from the league's top-rated passer in 1989 to 11th last  season.
In his past 41 starts, he has thrown 53 interceptions. From 1990 to  1992, only
one quarterback was intercepted more often: the Los Angeles Rams'  Jim Everett
(55).

   In 1992, Bengals Coach David Shula benched Esiason for the last four games
in favor of rookie David Klingler.

   Something had gone wrong.

   ``I saw him play last year, and he just looked like he was banged up,''  said
Ernie Accorsi, special adviser to the Maryland Stadium Authority and the  vice
president for football operations of the Cleveland Browns from 1985 to  April
1992. ``Now, whether or not he lost velocity because he was banged up, I don't
know,'' he said. ``You can only tell that if you're out there on the  field with
him.''

   But speculation has spread around the league that an arm injury restricts
Esiason's motion, causing him to have less zip on the ball.

   Esiason denies the rumors.

   Esiason and Coslet offer this proof: Esiason captured second place in the
long-distance event of the NFL Quarterback Challenge on April 25, throwing the
ball 63 yards.

   Then in last Sunday's season opener against the Denver Broncos, Esiason was
29 of 40 for 371 yards two touchdowns.

   ``There is a perception that I'm injured, but I don't know where that came
from. When the Jets' doctors examined me, they said, `What the heck is that  all
about?' '' said Esiason, 32.

   Coslet and Esiason say Esiason had become sloppy fundamentally. Esiason had
started to throw sidearm. And because he held the ball too low, his release  was
slower.

   Esiason said he improved in those areas in the Jets' minicamps.

   ``Physically, I haven't changed much, but the players around me in
Cincinnati did,'' said Esiason, pointing to the departure of running backs
Ickey Woods and James Brooks and receivers Eddie Brown and Rodney Holman.
``Then the offensive line started flaking away. The Bengals were more
interested in filling the stadium than filling those holes.''

   Bengals General Manager Mike Brown disagrees.

   ``When things don't go right, players tend to look for reasons beyond
themselves,'' he said.

   Coslet simply said: ``Boomer got the stuffing knocked out of him.''

   So now it's Boomer and Bruce, close friends, student and teacher, together
again in a game of professional survival.

   Coslet was the Bengals' offensive coordinator from 1986 through 1989. He
helped turn Esiason into the league's MVP in 1988, and Esiason helped lift
Coslet through the coaching ranks.

   The tandem almost pulled off a victory in Super Bowl XXIII, when the  Bengals
lost to the San Francisco 49ers 20-16.

   But times have changed.

   Coslet is 18-30 in the three seasons as coach of the Jets, including a 4-12
record last season.

   ``There's no question, this could work well for both of us,'' Esiason said,
smiling. ``On the day I was traded, I had the Jets' playbook down in 20
minutes. We're the architects of this system.''

   Coslet says he sees more in Esiason than a quarterback. He sees a winner  and
a survivor, a player most major colleges didn't want out of high school  and the
Bengals didn't draft until the second round.

   So Coslet sent former starting quarterback Ken O'Brien to the Green Bay
Packers, and has named Esiason the starter over third-year player Browning
Nagle.

   ``There won't be a lot of pressure on me,'' Esiason said, ``because the  Jets
have brought in some other quality players, like Ronnie Lott and Leonard
Marshall. They are committed to winning. I've got something here with the Jets
that I never had in Cincinnati, a top-five defense. That makes a big
difference.''

   And so does Coslet. And others.

   ``I think Bruce (leaving) had more of an effect on Boomer than anything
else,'' said cornerback Eric Thomas, who signed with the Jets after six  seasons
in Cincinnati. ``When we lost Bruce, we never got another offensive
coordinator. Sam (Wyche, former Bengals head coach) didn't have anybody to
second-guess him or overrule him. That affected Boomer a lot.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by Associated Press/

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1032 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 11, 1993 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: UCSD plan for AIDS research advances

BYLINE: MARCUS STERN, Copley News Service

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. -- The National Institutes of Health (NIH) gave researchers at
UCSD preliminary approval yesterday to begin experimenting with an innovative
gene therapy for treating AIDS patients. The decision by a key NIH advisory
committee was the most significant hurdle facing the researchers, but it still
must be affirmed by the director of the NIH and the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. If granted, UCSD will have taken a significant stride in the
promising new area of gene therapy research. The university would be conducting
the first experiment of a particular gene-splicing technique to treat
HIV-positive patients, only the second time gene therapy has been experimentally
applied in the war against AIDS. The process involves attaching a molecular
strand that researchers refer to as a "hairpin ribozyme" to lymphocytes, the
crucial immune system cells most likely to be targeted by the HIV virus.
Researchers hope the ribozyme will act as a molecular knife to disable the HIV
virus and prevent it from spreading, thereby reducing the level of HIV infection
within the body. UCSD is close to completing a deal to sell to an unspecified
San Diego-area firm rights to develop and market the ribozyme technology, a
source said. That firm would be expected to underwrite the cost of experiments.

   In the meantime, UCSD is hoping NIH will pay for the initial experiment. UCSD
researchers Flossie Wong-Staal and Eric Poeschla told the NIH advisory committee
yesterday that laboratory results show that ribozymes can effectively slow the
spread of the virus in HIV-positive patients, and that the researchers have the
ability to measure the results. While members of the NIH Recombinant DNA
Advisory Committee praised the project as novel, creative and promising, they
spent more than an hour sharply questioning the researchers about their
techniques. "Will you be able to measure what you want to measure?" asked Susan
Hirano, a panel member from the University of Wisconsin.

   She noted that at least one aspect of the proposed experimental technique has
never been performed previously.

   She wondered if it would be possible. In the end, Hirano and the committee
unanimously approved the initial experiment, setting aside concerns over the
uncertainties surrounding the new techniques and UCSD's inexperience in gene
therapy.

   It would be the university's first such project. "It's a major hurdle and
we're pleased with the results," said Wong-Staal, a world-renowned AIDS
researcher, in an interview after the committee approved the project.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1033 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                  September 11, 1993, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE C1; DIGEST

LENGTH: 263 words

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Club Resorts signed an agreement to purchase the Homestead, a resort in Hot
Springs, Va., and spend $ 12.5 million on improvements despite an ongoing
dispute between the resort and a union. Club Resorts required a rejection of
union representation for the purchase to proceed, Homestead President Dan
Ingalls has said.

   U.S. airlines marked the end of the summer travel season by raising
round-trip ticket prices by $ 20, starting today. TWA initiated the hike on
tickets to U.S. destinations. Continental and Delta matched the move; American
said it would match TWA's fare increase on excursion fares only; USAir was
studying the move.

   The U.S. Postal Service, which has been criticized for violence in its
workplace, awarded a $ 3.75 million contract to Policy Management Systems of
Blythewood, S.C., for background checks on job applicants.

   Northrop said it will close its sprawling B-2 bomber plant in suburban Los
Angeles, probably in 1997 when the planes' production nears an end.

   Some MCI phone service nationwide was disrupted when a construction crew
accidentally cut one of the Washington-based long-distance firm's fiber-optic
lines in Ohio yesterday, MCI said.

   Genetic Therapy of Gaithersburg got approval from an independent panel
convened by the NIH to use three new gene therapy treatments in tests on humans
suffering from brain cancer, breast cancer and skin cancer.

   A European group of satellite operators, broadcasters, manufacturers and
regulators agreed to adopt a common standard for digital transmission of HDTV on
the continent.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1034 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 10, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A2, HEALTH ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 102 words

HEADLINE: 'TUMOR VACCINE' WATCHED

BODY:


   A 69-year-old Kittanning man undergoing treatment with an experimental
''tumor vaccine'' made from pieces of his own tumor and skin has encountered few
side effects, doctors at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center said
yesterday. Two days after becoming the first patient at Pitt to undergo gene
therapy, the man had redness around each injection site. But doctors won't know
whether the treatment is affecting the man's deadly skin cancer until the week
after next. Doctors will check the injection areas in the man's lower back for
anti-tumor activity when he gets more injections in two weeks.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1035 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 10, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: MORTAL MANIA

BYLINE: Arlene Vigoda

BODY:

    More than two million copies of the new video game Mortal Kombat have been
shipped to retailers worldwide.  More than 50,000 copies of the fighting game,
which comes out in four formats Monday, already have been sold to buyers who've
paid a deposit in advance, game maker Acclaim says.  Mortal Kombat orders so far
have accounted for 25% of all of Radio Shack's express order sales, in which
customers pre-pay for Nintendo and Genesis games and have them delivered to
their homes on the first day of availability.  More proof that Kombat is hot -
5,500 copies of the games were stolen from a Florida warehouse last week.

GARTH SCORES BIG: Garth Brooks' In Pieces album premieres at the top of next
week's Billboard country and pop charts. Sales represent the biggest first week
for an album in the Garthman's career, breaking records formerly held by The
Chase and, before that, Ropin' the Wind. Brooks' Ain't Goin' Down (Til the Sun
Comes Up) is also tops on the country singles chart. Other No. 1s: Dreamlover,
Mariah Carey, pop single; The River of Dreams, Billy Joel, adult contemporary
single; Right Here (Human Nature)-Downtown, SWV, R&B single.

GOOD LUCK: The Joy Luck Club, which opened Wednesday in three theaters in New
York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, grossed a healthy $ 34,893.  The adaptation
of Amy Tan's best seller broke the Wednesday house record at L.A's AMC-Century
City, taking in $ 14,919.

SEIN OF THE TIMES: As in the Sept. 19 New York Times hardcover non-fiction
best-seller list, where comedian Jerry Seinfeld's SeinLanguage lands in the No.
1 spot after less than two weeks on sale. Now in its fourth printing, there are
600,000 copies in print.

NEW LIBEL TRIAL: A federal judge in San Francisco granted a new libel trial
Thursday for writer Janet Malcolm because the jury couldn't decide on damages
after finding she misquoted psychoanalyst Jeffrey Masson in a 1983 New Yorker
magazine article. Malcolm focused her article on Masson's firing in 1981 as
projects director of the Sigmund Freud Archives.  The first trial ended June 3
when jurors found that all five quotes had been fabricated or distorted and that
Malcolm had been aware that two of them were libelous. But they were unable to
agree about the amount of damages to award Masson, who had sought $ 7.5 million.


NEW AIDS EXPERIMENT: A National Institutes of Health panel has approved a
request to try an experimental gene therapy technique on 15 AIDS patients.
Doctors at the University of Washington, Seattle, will remove immune cells from
the patients, culture them into vast numbers and then inject them back into the
patients. The cells, CD8 lymphocytes, seek out and kill other cells that have
been infected with a virus. The goal is to boost the body's defense against HIV,
the AIDS virus. Before trials can proceed, the director of NIH and the Food and
Drug Administration must also approve the experiment.

SOUNDS OF SILENCE: Broadway musicians voted Thursday to authorize a strike
against all nine musicals on Broadway, including Cats, The Phantom of the Opera
and Tommy. The union's contract with the League of American Theaters and
Producers expires Sunday.

CORRECTION: Billy Joel plays the Carrier Dome in Syracuse, N.Y., Nov. 12-13.
Incorrect dates were listed in the Thursday Life section.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, AP


                             1036 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                  September 9, 1993, Thursday, Sunrise Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: DOW DROPS 18.17 IN HEAVY TRADING; KEY T-BOND RISES

BYLINE: From News Wire Services

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

    Stocks closed sharply lower Wednesday, extending their correction into a
second day after last week's record-setting rally.

   The Dow Jones industrial average fell 18.17 points to 3,588.93.

   Declining issues outnumbered advancers 1,430-606 on the New York Stock
Exchange. The average share fell 20 cents.

   Volume on the floor of the Big Board came to 278.70 million shares as of 4
p.m., up from 229.32 million in the previous session.

   The Nasdaq index slumped 8.62 points to end at 730.73, bruised by setbacks in
technology and health care stocks.

   The Wilshire Associates Equity Index -- the market value of NYSE, American
and Nasdaq issues -- was 4,533.568, down 29.831 or 0.65 percent.

   But analysts said they were not overly worried about the market's decline.

   Stocks "had reached priced projections and much had been accomplished," said
A.C. Moore at Argus Investment Management. "It's leaving not too much to be
anticipated, so it's a usual time for selling," he said.

   While the stock market could show larger losses down the road, "I don't think
this is the break," said Jack Solomon, a technical analyst at Bear Stearns.

   He said concern about the economy were resurfacing. "There's an overriding
fear that things are not that good," he said.

   Among individual stocks, Baxter International slumped 3 1/2 to 22 7/8 after
the company predicted lower quarterly results and outlined restructuring plans
on Tuesday to address the impact of health-care reform.

   Pacificare A lost 5 3/4 to 34 and its B stock dropped 5 1/2 to 29 1/2.
Oppenheimer took Pacificare off its recommended list, citing lower than expected
1994 Medicare reimbursement rates.

   That news pulled down similar stocks. Oxford Health slid 6 3/4 to 63 3/4,
United Healthcare lost 3 3/4 to 56 1/2, and U.S. Healthcare shed 2 to 44.

   Among technology stocks, Hewlett-Packard lost 2 3/4 to 68 3/8, while IBM fell
1 1/8 to 44 3/8.

   USAir fell 1 1/2 to 13 1/8. Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette downgraded the stock.

   AnnTaylor Stores fell 3 1/2 to 23 1/2 after saying third quarter profits will
be hit by weak August sales and current earnings estimates are too rich.

   On the Nasdaq, Borland International lost 2 to 15 after brokerage houses cut
their earnings estimates on the computer software maker.

   Structural Dynamics tumbled 5 1/4 to 13 3/4. The company said it expects to
report third-quarter earnings that are lower than the analysts estimates.

   Genetic Therapy added 2 to 17 1/4 following a positive report on its
treatment for malignant brain tumors.

   In bond trading, the Treasury's main 30-year bond closed up 7-16 point, or $
4.38 per $ 1,000 in face value. Its yield, which moves in the opposite direction
from price, plunged to 5.86 percent from 5.89 percent late Tuesday.

   Prices of intermediate maturities were unchanged to 3-16 point higher. But
prices of short-term issues fell 1-16 point, Telerate Inc. reported.

   The Bond Buyer index of 40 actively traded municipal bonds closed at 105
20-32, up 12-32 from late Tuesday. The average yield to maturity was 5.47
percent, down from 5.49 percent.

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1993


                             1037 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 9, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: Dow Falls 18.17 Points in 2d Day of Selling

BYLINE: By JEANNE B. PINDER

BODY:

   Growing concerns over the future of corporate profits caused the stock market
to plummet yesterday for the second straight day, before it recovered somewhat,
easing a wave of anxiety about the end of the bull market of 1993.

   The Dow Jones industrial average was down nearly 35 points from its high for
the day before being rescued by a 3 P.M. wave of buying. It finally closed at
3,588.93, off 18.17 points for the day, after a drop of 26.83 points on Tuesday.

    "The market's beginning to understand that lower inflation means lower
growth rate and nominal G.D.P., and that in turn will mean a lower growth rate
for corporate profits," David Shulman, chief equity strategist for Salomon
Brothers, said.

   Because low interest rates are no longer being viewed "as a complete blessing
for the stock market," Mr. Shulman said, stocks and bonds have ended a long
period in which they moved in direct inverse relation to each other. He
predicted that the market's movements would continue to reflect worries about
earnings.

'The Market Is Overreacting'

    The market's performance seems to reflect a belief among some investors that
the economic recovery is beginning to wane, said Robert Walberg, senior equity
strategist with MMS Equity Market Analysis.

   "It's our impression now that the market is overreacting, and using recent
economic reports as an excuse to take profits after having been through a fairly
strong rally," he said. "As we look at the third and fourth quarters, the
numbers look pretty good. but there's been a lot of anxiety over the last
several months or so of weak numbers."

   The Nasdaq suffered what Mr. Shulman described as "real carnage," yesterday
with the composite index falling 8.62 points, to 730.73, while the American
Stock Exchange composite index dropped 5.20 points, to 451.08. The Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index was down 1.87 points to 456.65. Trading volume was 283.1
million shares, up from 229.5 million on Tuesday.

   Mr. Shulman said skittishness about the economy was worsened by two big waves
of futures selling that drove down the cash market, one around 11:30 A.M. and
another around 12:30 P.M., before the buying wave began late in the day.

   Mr. Walberg said the market had been due for "at least a modest correction,"
and added: "We've gone approximately 200 days without even as much as a 4
percent correction in the market, which is abnormally long. As far as length of
rallies is concerned, this ranks up with one of the longest."

Selloff in Health Care

    Health care stocks led the fall. Baxter International, the world's largest
supplier of medical products, said after trading ended Tuesday that the
Government's new health care plan would hurt third-quarter earnings, and the
company said it would carry out a restructuring, layoffs and a hiring freeze.
Baxter closed at 23 a share, off 3 3/8.

   Health maintenance organizations also dropped, following news that the
Clinton Administration would trim Medicare and Medicaid spending to help finance
its health care plan. Oxford Health Plans plunged 6 3/4 a share, to 63 3/4;
United Healthcare dropped 3 3/4, to 56 1/2; U.S. Healthcare slid 2, to 44, and
FHP International fell 2 3/4, to 21 1/2. Pacificare Health Systems, a California
H.M.O., which said it had received a rate increase for Medicare patients that
was lower than expected, saw its class B stock fall 5 1/2 a share, to 29 1/2.

   Another group under pressure was the telecommunications equipment group,
sagging under profit taking. DSC Communications, fell 2 1/8 a share, to 62 1/8,
while Newbridge Networks, dropped 4 5/8, to 62.

   After I.B.M. forecast its 1993 minicomputer revenue would be about the same
as in 1992, citing weak European demand, the company's stock fell 1 1/8, to 44
3/8.

   Traders said shares of Microchip Technology fell 2 1/4, to 49, on news that
the maker of specialty semiconductors plans to sell 1.8 million common shares.

   Though second-quarter earnings of 43 cents for Circus Circus Enterprises, the
casino company, were higher than the 41 cents a share for the period a year ago,
it was below analysts' median forecast of 44 cents. The stock dropped as much as
1 1/4 before closing down 1/8, to 41 5/8.

   Shares of Genetic Therapy rose by 2 to close at 17 1/4, after the
biotechnology company said it was encouraged by early results of human tests of
an anti-tumor treatment.

   YPF Sociedad, the Argentine oil company, yesterday received buy
recommendations from analysts at Oppenheimer, Paine Webber, and Goldman, Sachs.
The company's American depository shares, each respresenting one class D share,
rose 7/8, to 23 1/2, in active trading.


GRAPHIC: Table: "The Favorite Stocks" shows performance of the 15 issues with
the most shareholders.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993


                             1038 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  September 9, 1993, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 814 words

HEADLINE: PITT ENTERS ANTI-CANCER GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   A 69-year-old Western Pennsylvania man with a deadly skin cancer this week
became the first person to undergo gene therapy at the University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center.

   The man received five injections Tuesday of an experimental ''tumor vaccine''
manufactured from his own tumor cells and skin cells that were genetically
altered to produce an anti-tumor agent. He will receive a second series of five
injections into his lower back in about two weeks.

   A second patient, a woman with breast cancer, may undergo gene therapy this
week and another half-dozen patients are being prepared for treatment.
Researchers hope to treat about 20 patients with the skin cancer melanoma or
cancers of the breast, colon or kidney during the clinical trial.

   Dr. Michael T. Lotze of the Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, co-investigator of
the study, said there was no guarantee that the treatments would help the
patients. The primary goal at this early stage of the research is to prove its
safety.

   But animal studies suggest that the tumor vaccine can work and the treatment
being provided represents researchers' best guess as to what might prove
therapeutic for the patients, who have failed to benefit from all other
available treatments.

   The trial is Pitt's first venture into the infant field of gene therapy,
which involves introducing new, beneficial genes into patients. The approach has
been used elsewhere to treat in-born immune deficiencies in children and various
cancers.

   In addition to the trial headed by Lotze and Dr. Joshua T. Rubin, Dr. John
Barranger hopes to begin gene therapy for Gaucher's disease by the end of the
year.

   Pitt investigators also are preparing gene therapies for muscular dystrophy
and arthritis and to prevent rejection of transplanted pancreatic islet cells in
diabetics.

   The tumor vaccine experiments are similar to earlier work by Dr. Steven
Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute, who injected patients with altered
cells from their own tumors in an attempt to activate the patient's immune
system to fight the cancer.

   But the vaccine developed by Lotze and Rubin also includes skin cells, or
fibroblasts, that have been genetically altered to produce interleukin-4, or
IL-4, a hormone that stimulates the immune system.

   Lotze and others have treated cancer patients in the past by infusing them
with IL-4. Though effective in some patients, high doses of IL-4 cause tissue
swelling and flu-like symptoms such as fatigue, weight loss and nausea. Most
patients can tolerate the treatment for only four or five days, Lotze said.

   The researchers hope to prove that smaller doses of IL-4, produced by the
genetically altered cells injected near the tumors, can be sufficient to fight
the cancer without causing toxic side effects.

   The Pitt study is the first use of genetically altered fibroblasts in gene
therapy and the first to enroll patients with four types of cancer.

   Genetically altered fibroblasts, Lotze suggested, could prove useful in
treating a wide variety of cancers.

   Some gene therapy researchers have tried to genetically alter the tumor cells
themselves, but Lotze said that worked well only for such cancers as melanoma
and kidney cancer, both of which are uncommon. Breast and colon cancers, which
together account for about a third of all cancer deaths, are difficult to treat
this way.

   Fibroblasts, by contrast, can be easily removed, cultured and inserted with
the gene responsible for producing IL-4.

   To prepare a patient for treatment, doctors remove a bit of tumor and a bit
of skin. The tumor cells are frozen and stored, while the fibroblasts are
removed from the skin and grown in culture for four weeks.

   IL-4 genes are then inserted into the fibroblasts by use of a mouse
retrovirus that itself has been altered so that it cannot duplicate itself and
cause disease.

   The altered fibroblasts and the tumor cells are then irradiated to prevent
them from dividing inside the patient. This tumor vaccine is then injected at
varying dosages at five sites on the patient's lower back.

   After two weeks, tissue samples from each injection site will be removed and
studied for signs of anti-tumor activity. The patient then receives five more
injections.

   The patients also will undergo radiographic studies one month and two months
after the second injections to see if the tumors have responded to therapy.

   In mouse studies, Lotze said, a single injection six days after kidney
cancers were introduced was sufficient to cure about 80 percent of mice. But
only 20 percent were cured when treatment began nine days after the cancers were
introduced and virtually no mice survived if treatment began later.

   A National Institutes of Health panel approved the Pitt trial about a year
ago and the NIH director approved the study early this year.

   Approval from the FDA came last week.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1039 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 9, 1993 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: `Molecular scissors' readied in AIDS fight;
UCSD scientists seek OK for gene therapy

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   A team of UCSD scientists is seeking federal permission to test a
gene-therapy technique for slowing the progression of AIDS in people infected
with the AIDS virus. The strategy involves arming cells critical to a healthy
immune system with a gene that builds "molecular scissors" that can disable the
attacking AIDS virus. Scientists hope the gene will protect the immune cells
from infection and prevent the virus from using the cells as factories to churn
out even more of the fatal human immunodeficiency virus. Flossie Wong-Staal, who
is developing the technique, will appear tomorrow before a National Institutes
of Health panel in Bethesda, Md., that reviews gene transfers for treating
disease. The technique could become the first gene therapy attempted at UCSD. If
approved, it would be only the second gene therapy undertaken in the country for
interrupting the replication of the AIDS virus.

   University of Michigan scientists have approval to use a genetic technique to
disrupt the virus' function. "The lack of progress in treating this disease
shows that innovative approaches are needed," said Eric Poeschla, a UCSD
physician working with Wong-Staal, "and our approach tries to get at the
fundamental problem of this disease." By adding the gene to crucial,
disease-fighting T-cells, scientists think they can prevent the AIDS virus from
destroying the T-cells. As infected T-cells are killed off, people are left
defenseless against a range of infections that are ultimately fatal. The trial
would be conducted at the UCSD Medical Center in Hillcrest and would at first
involve only six patients who are infected with the virus but who do not yet
have the disease.

   Scientists will assess the technique's safety and whether the engineered
immune cells survive in the patients for more than a year. If federal permission
is given soon, the researchers expect the test could begin before year's end.
About 500 million of the immune system's T-cells would be taken from each
patient's blood and armed with a gene that produces the molecular scissors, a
strand of genetic information the researchers call a "hairpin" ribozyme. The
cells would be allowed to reproduce until there are about 10 billion of them, at
which time they would be injected into the patient.

   That number represents about 1 percent of a person's normal number of
T-cells. The patients would not be hospitalized. When the AIDS virus penetrates
one of the genetically engineered T-cells, the molecular scissors would enter
the virus and sever the virus' genetic instructions, its RNA. With its genetic
code disrupted, the virus could no longer commandeer the T-cell's machinery for
the virus' own survival and replication. If some virus were to escape the
scissors and take control of a T-cell, scientists hope the ribozyme would snip
the genetic instructions of the new generation of virus particles before they
could escape into the bloodstream to infect more T-cells. The gene that produces
the ribozyme was isolated from a virus that lives in plants. Doctors are not
counting on dramatic improvement in the patients' health in the first test.

   However, if the genetically engineered cells survive in the molecular war
against the virus, it could be the first step toward a more dramatic treatment.
And they might increase the number of T-cells they genetically boost. They also
can imagine engineering the ribozyme into all the body's T-cells. In this case,
they would harvest from the bone marrow the immature cells that eventually form
T-cells, then insert the gene for the hairpin ribozyme into the immature "stem
cells." When the stem cells mature in the bloodstream, the AIDS virus would not
be able to replicate and spread.

   Such a treatment could represent a powerful means of eradicating the disease,
Poeschla said. To date, use of the molecular scissors against the AIDS virus has
only been demonstrated in lab dishes, where the ribozyme slowed the virus'
replication rate by about 75 percent to 90 percent, the scientists said.

   It is these lab results that the NIH panel will review tomorrow. The National
Institutes of Health panel, called the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, has
the option of either approving or deferring the proposal.

   More than 50 uses of gene therapy have been approved nationwide thus far. The
procedure must also be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1040 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 9, 1993 Thursday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-19

LENGTH: 832 words

HEADLINE: Gene-therapy fight on tumor promising but uncertain

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   An experimental gene therapy administered to a San Diego woman with a brain
tumor apparently has boosted an immune response that could fight the malignancy,
but the effect on her tumor is less certain, her physicians reported today.
After injections of the therapeutic genes, cancer-fighting immune cells
collected from her blood were able to kill about 40 percent of tumor cells in
laboratory tests, Dr. Robert Sobol, of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center,
reported at a medical conference in Stalheim, Norway. Before any treatments were
given, her immune cells could destroy only about 10 percent of the tumor cells
in similar tests, Sobol reported. "We're encouraged by those results," Sobol
said in a telephone interview. "It is suggestive of our ability to induce an
immune response against the tumor." Still, the results offer an inconclusive and
preliminary picture, he said. The woman's immune response was not boosted
following each of the nine injections, something that puzzled researchers.

   Moreover, scientists were surprised that the types of immune cells commonly
stimulated were not the most potent type they had expected, Sobol said. The
results, given at the 10th International Conference on Brain Tumor Research and
Therapy, was the first public airing of the therapy's impact. Doctors received
special federal permission last December to try the novel and unproven approach
when conventional treatments for the patient's brain tumor were proving
ineffective.

   As the first "compassionate use" of gene therapy, the effort has drawn wide
medical and public scrutiny. It is difficult to know whether the increased
activity in the woman's immune system is reaching the brain to attack the tumor,
a type of glioblastoma that is almost always fatal, Sobol said.

   Doctors hope the tumor-killing ability demonstrated in lab test reflects what
is happening in the brain, he said. Scientists can use imaging equipment to
examine the tumor's size, but, complying with a request from the woman's
husband, Sobol would not comment about how the tumor is responding.

   Nor would he characterize the 52-year-old woman's general medical condition.
Sobol did say that he considers the test results promising enough that the
cancer center will consider seeking permission later this year from federal
health officials to try the treatment in other patients. The woman's husband
would not discuss her condition except to say that she remains at home.

   The San Diego Union-Tribune has agreed to the husband's request not to
identify the family to guard their privacy. The woman has lived longer than the
doctors said they expected she would last December when they successfully
lobbied federal health officials to use the therapy. Sobol told the
neuroscientists in Norway that the woman has received injections of genetically
boosted cells every few weeks since January.

   The cells were altered to contain the gene that produces interleukin 2, a
protein expected to stimulate the activity of cytotoxic T-cells, immune agents
thought to be effective at fighting cancers. The injections are given in the
arm, and the last two, which were the largest, contained about 10 million
genetically altered cells occupying the volume of a thimble. To test the
therapy's effectiveness, physicians took blood samples from the woman days after
the shots, then isolated immune agents from it and exposed them to tumor cells
that were taken from her malignancy during a therapeutic surgery last year.
After the first two injections, the tests showed little increase in the immune
system's ability to attack tumor cells, but subsequent doses increased the
activity of "natural cells," immune agents whose activity peaks and then
dwindles. In the eight tests completed, the woman's immune system killed as many
as 47 percent of tumor cells in one instance and more commonly 30 to 40 percent.

   But three times it could kill no more than 10 percent. It was only after the
eighth dose that doctors saw activity of cytotoxic T-cells. Those are the cells
they hoped the treatment would produce. Sobol said the doctors are "surprised"
and "somewhat disappointed" that the lower-dose injections did not stimulate
T-cells production.

   But the prevalence of the "natural cells" may indicate the cells may have a
greater role in fighting cancer than previously appreciated, Sobol said. Sobol
acknowledged that it is difficult to know whether the boosted immune cells in
the bloodstream can move into the brain and affect the tumor there, in part
because of natural barriers that limit the movement of cells into the brain.
Other experts caution that it is too early to judge the value of the genetic
technique. "The bottom line of the research, what's important, is, `Does it
treat her cancer?

   Does it do any good for her?' " said Arthur Caplan, director of the Center
for Biomedical Ethics at the University of Minnesota. The ethicist believes it
is "way too early" to try the technique in other people based upon the
information in hand.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1041 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                   September 9, 1993, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE B11

LENGTH: 483 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Reveals Positive Test Results;
Trial of Biotech Firm's Treatment for Brain Cancer Conducted at NIH

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Daniel Southerland, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Genetic Therapy Inc., a biotechnology company in Gaithersburg, yesterday
announced positive results from a limited trial of a gene therapy treatment for
brain cancer.

   M. James Barrett, president and chief executive of Genetic Therapy, said that
the results of the treatment, "while still early in testing," represented "a
major milestone" in the development of his company and the genetic therapy
field.

   Jeffrey R. Swarz, an analyst for First Boston Corp. and a neuroscientist,
described the results announced yesterday as "remarkable" and an early-stage
indicator that gene therapy is "a viable form of treatment" for brain cancer.

   Five of the first eight patients treated demonstrated "measurable antitumor
responses," according to Genetic Therapy, while three did not.

   Two of the eight patients died due to the natural progression of the brain
cancer, the company said.

   All eight patients had progressive recurrent tumors and had failed to respond
to conventional therapy, including surgery, radiation and, in some cases,
chemotherapy, the company said.

   But scientists and company officials who reported results of the trial, which
began nine months ago at the National Institutes of Health (NIH), stressed that
much more work and testing must be done to develop the therapy.

   Genetic Therapy is one of the best- financed and best-staffed biotech
companies in the Washington area, with about $ 47 million in cash reserves and
more than 100 employees.

   Genetic Therapy shares rose $ 2 to close at $ 17.25 yesterday in Nasdaq
trading of 429,000 shares, compared with three-month average daily trading of
91,836 shares.

   Results of treatment of the eight patients were presented yesterday to the
10th international conference on brain tumor research in Stalheim, Norway, by
Zvi Ram and Edward H. Oldfield, two physicians from the National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke in Bethesda.

   The company said the therapy may have to be modified before it reaches the
stage where it can apply for government approval to use it on more than an
experimental basis.

   Genetic Therapy hopes to file an application to conduct phase three clinical
trials, considered definitive trials, in the first half of next year.

   Genetic Therapy develops "vectors" -- delivery systems containing therapeutic
genes -- and vector-producing cells.

   In this case, genetically altered mouse cells were injected directly into the
tumor mass. Those cells form vectors, which cause cancer cells to be vulnerable
to attack by an anti-viral drug called ganciclovir, scientists said.

   Swarz of First Boston said that while about a dozen biotech companies are
experimenting with various forms of gene therapy, Genetic Therapy is the most
advanced in developing possible treatments for brain cancer.

   NIH scientists working with Genetic Therapy conducted the first gene therapy
test in September 1990.



GRAPHIC: CHART, MARKET REACTION (CHART IS NOT AVAILABLE.), TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1042 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   International A3-15

SHARING POWER IN SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa has agreed to share broad powers with a multiparty transition
committee before its first universal election, placing the police, the army, the
budget and civil service under a predominantly black interim council.  A1

HOPE AND ANGER FOR ARABS
Arab-Americans are optimistic about the proposed Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement, but many say that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, has settled for
too little.  A1


   MOB DESCENDS ON JERUSALEM
Tens of thousands of protesters surrounded the offices of Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin, accusing him of committing treason by agreeing to a tentative peace plan
with the Palestine Liberation Organization.  A14

P.L.O. WRESTLES WITH WORDS
Palestine Liberation Organization negotiators searched for words to assure
Israel that they had abandoned armed rebellion against the Jewish state, but
stopped short of altering their charter.  A14

SECOND THOUGHTS IN UKRAINE
Ukraine is seen as a prosperous country with bountiful resources, but recent
concessions to Russia, including turning over the Black Sea Fleet, have led the
people to wonder what sovereignty really means.  A8

BOSNIAN LEADER COMES TO U.S.
President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, a leader in search of more land for the
Muslims, a reversal of "ethnic cleansing" and a free Sarajevo is carrying his
pleas to the United Nations and Washington.  A3

Sarajevans build a house from the stuff dreams are made of.  A3

ITALIAN WORKERS RIOT
After a violent night of rioting and fires in Crotone, Italian checmical workers
barricaded themselves in their factory to protest rampant unemployment in the
country.  A5

Canada's Prime Minister is to call a general election for Oct. 25.  A10

A lull between political storms in Venezuela.  A9

Koyasan Journal: Memorials to corporate culture.  A4

National A16-19, B10-12

GORE SETS TO TRIM GOVERNMENT
Vice President Al Gore announced a set of proposals that he said would
streamline government, save $108 billion over five years and cut 252,000 Federal
jobs by 1998.  A1

PAST HOLDS FEW SUCCESSES
News analysis: No one who has tried in the past to solve the problem of Big
Government can be confident that Clinton will succeed.  A1

The streamlining plan follows the path of Corporate America.  B10

LONG-TERM COVERAGE SOUGHT
The Administration's health plan will call for a new program to help finance
long-term care for people with severe disabilities.  A1

RETREAT ON TAX PLAN
Administration officials appeared to back away from the idea of limiting the tax
deductions that employers may take for the cost of employee health benefits.
B11

2 GUILTY IN BURNING CASE
Two white men were convicted of all charges in the burning of a black tourist
who said they taunted him with racial slurs, doused him with gasoline and set
him on fire.  A1

P.O.W. ISSUE STIRS CRITICISM
A Senator from New Hampshire is drawing criticism for accusing 10 officials of
perjury and other crimes, saying they were trying to cover up evidence about
Americans missing in Vietnam.  A16

LESBIAN IS DENIED CUSTODY
A court in Virginia upheld a lower court's decision to take a 2-year-old boy
away from his mother, a lesbian, and give him to her mother.  A16

SURGEON GENERAL CONFIRMED
The Senate confirmed as Surgeon General Dr. Joycelyn Elders, despite
conservatives' objections over her stance on sex education and abortion.  A18

PROSPECT FOR CIVIL RIGHTS POST
The corporation counsel for the District of Columbia has emerged as a top
candidate for the civil rights division in the Justice Department.  A18

NEW VIEW ON SHUTTLE ACCIDENT
A new book by the mother of Christa McAuliffe, the teacher who died in the
explosion of the Challenger in 1986, says that Ms. McAuliffe said the day before
the launching that NASA had decided to push ahead no matter what.  A19

NEW HOPE FOR TREATING TUMORS
A radical gene therapy treatment for brain tumors has proved promising in early
clinical trials, researchers reported.  B11

RIFT IN RELIGION AND MEDIA
A new study has concluded that a large misunderstanding exists between the news
media and religious leadership.  B12

Education Page B13

Dream in Detroit: 200 applicants for every spot at a new magnet school.
Campus Journal: Should a college on a California ranch go co-ed?

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-11

How do those cows do that?  C1
Agriculture Dept. emphasizing
nutrition.  C1

Health Page C12

A spreading mystery ailment linked to large reef-dwelling fish.
Personal Health: A dangerous folk "remedy" for MS.

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Italian orchestra threatens a
stereotype.  C15
Film: "The Joy Luck Club." C15
"Equinox." C20
Music: Womad festival discovers the U.S.  C15
Books: "Having Our Say." C19
Book Notes C16
Television: "Liberating America's Schools." C20

Sports B14-20

Baseball: Yankees lose and miss another chance at first place.  B15
Tennis: Courier is latest upset victim.  B15

Obituaries D21

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

The latest reinvention.
For City Council from Manhattan.
Mary Cantwell: Mostar's bridge.

Letters

Bob Herbert: No job, no dream.
Lynn Martin: For children who have children.
David Rusk: Suburban renewal.

Bridge C13

Chronicle A24

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993


                             1043 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 8, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

HEADLINE: Tumor Treatment Showing Promise

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   A radical treatment for brain tumors unlike any therapy used before has
proved promising in early clinical trials, researchers report. But they are
emphasizing that the trial is small, that the results are preliminary and that
much work remains to be done before the new approach can claim genuine clinical
value.

   The treatment is an elaborate type of gene therapy in which foreign genes are
delivered into a patient's tumor cells to make the malignant mass highly
susceptible to a drug called ganciclovir. In eight patients treated so far, five
responded markedly to the therapy, their brain tumors either shrinking or
showing signs that tumor cells were dying. The patients had previously failed to
respond to conventional therapies like surgery, radiation or chemotherapy.

    Dr. Zvi Ram and Dr. Edward H. Oldfield of the National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke in Bethesda, Md., are presenting the initial
findings today at the International Conference on Brain Tumor Research and
Therapy in Stalheim, Norway. The widely reported clinical trial began last
December, and today's results offered the first sign that it was a success,
although a modest one.

'Just Getting Started'

    "The message we have right now is that we are seeing evidence of an
anti-tumor effect, and the method appears to be safe in the limited number of
patients we've treated so far," Dr. Oldfield said in a telephone interview. "We
are encouraged, but we're just getting started."

   Dr. Ram echoed the note of restrained optimism. "It's a promising approach,
but it undoubtedly will need to be modified over and over again," he said. "It
would be foolish to draw too many conclusions on the basis of eight patients."

   Nevertheless, he said the results were heartening enough that his team would
be using it on at least a dozen other patients in the next several weeks.
Researchers are planning trials of their own at several other medical centers in
the United States, including the University of California at San Francisco, Los
Angeles Children's Hospital and the Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines.

   Dr. Kenneth J. Culver of the Iowa Methodist Medical Center, who with Dr. R.
Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute first conceived of the novel
therapy, said the method may also be useful for treating other intractable
tumors, like ovarian cancer.

Using Altered Cells

    "Esthetically, this is a truly beautiful approach, but whether those
esthetics will translate into a practical treatment for brain tumors, nobody can
say yet," said Dr. Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute.

   In the therapy, the researchers inject up to a billion genetically altered
mouse skin cells into the patient's tumor mass at several points. The skin cells
serve as viral factories, producing a pulse of viral particles able to infect
the rapidly dividing tumor cells while leaving the surrounding healthy brain
tissue untouched.

   Each viral particle carries a copy of a gene from a herpes virus that prompts
the infected tumor cells to begin generating an enzyme called thymidine kinase.
That enzyme makes the cancer cells vulnerable to ganciclovir, a potent
antiherpes drug. Shortly after receiving the mouse cells, the patient receives
intravenous treatment with ganciclovir.

   Through animal experiments, the scientists learned that much of the strength
of the method lies in a mysterious "bystander effect," in which tumor cells not
infected with viral particles nonetheless die with their infected neighbors,
perhaps because in dividing they absorbed toxic remnants of the virally
infiltrated tissue.

   Using magnetic resonance imaging scans, the surgeons have determined which
patients were responding to the initial treatment. Dr. Oldfield suggested that
in one patient the mass shrank to the point that it could not be detected on the
scan, but he warned that such a finding did not mean the patient was cured of
the tumor, for undetectable malignant cells might still be lingering. And one
patient who showed a particularly dramatic response nonetheless died of his
disease, a kidney cancer that had spread to multiple spots in his brain.

   Genetic Therapy, a biotechnology company in Gaithersburg, Md., that makes the
genetically altered viruses and mouse cells, is trying to increase the
effectiveness of the method and perhaps to eliminate the need for the mouse
factory cells at all.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993


                             1044 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 8, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1719 words

HEADLINE: The Gemini Experiment

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, Staff Writer

BODY:

   What AIDS patients need are healthy immune cells to replace those riddled by
the HIV virus.

   Identical twins can share such cells without risk of rejection.

   Now researchers have found that such sharing -- from healthy twin to
AIDS-infected sibling -- can forestall death and illness. Fifteen months ago,
Roddy Roy's immune system was pummeled by AIDS. Pneumonia and disfiguring
infections had almost left him a corpse. Today, the 32-year-old's symptoms have
disappeared.

   His immune system is revived, and he is back at work as an artist.

   "He's a new person," said Dr. Richard Hudson, his physician in Atlanta.

   "He's gained weight and looks wonderful." Roy's doctors say he owes his life
to his healthy twin brother, Robby Roy, who agreed to participate in a new type
of AIDS experiment.

   Robby's uninfected blood, containing precious infection-fighting T
lymphocytes, was transferred into his brother each month, replacing those
annihilated by the AIDS virus. "For as long as his brother is healthy, I believe
Roddy will continue to remain alive," Hudson said. "Roddy was dying," said Dr.
Jeffrey Wolf, an oncologist-hematologist at Oakland's Alta Bates Hospital and
the study's principal investigator. "Today he's doing better than you would have
ever predicted." The twins study is one of several under way to explore ways to
revitalize immune system cells, particularly the type of cells called CD-4
T-lymphocytes. These white blood cells, derived from the thymus, are the ones
infected and destroyed by AIDS. Some of the studies are trying to unlatch
secrets of how these key cells work and, at the same time, "teach" them how to
resist infection and respond by attacking the virus. "All these studies increase
our understanding of the immune system, which is critical to intervening in a
variety of diseases from cancer to lupus," said Dr. Robert Walker, who is
working on a similar twins study at the National Institute for Allergy and
Infectious Disease (NIAID). "The important concept is that the immune system, by
itself without drugs, may be able to do some fairly impressive things," said Dr.
Clifford Lane, NIAID clinical director who worked with Walker on the NIAID
study. For some not fortunate enough to have a twin, studies are also enrolling
siblings and, on occasion, non-relatives whose blood and tissue types can be
closely matched. At the very least, said Jonathan Kagan, also of NIAID, the
strategy is to "juice the tank with gasoline from somebody else." The Roy
brothers are among nine pairs of twins, one healthy and one infected with the
AIDS virus, who have been enrolled in one study directed by physicians in the
San Francisco Bay Area for nearly two years. Of the nine infected twins, two --
including Roy -- demonstrated excellent improvement, four showed significant
gains in health, two were only recently started and one died of complications of
AIDS, apparently because "we got there too late," said Wolf. Robby, the
uninfected twin, was given three doses of a substance called granulocyte
macrophage colony stimulating factor or GMCSF. The substance stimulates the
production of stem cells, which eventually mature into CD-4 T lymphocytes.
Several days after he received GMCSF, Robby's CD-4 count tripled. His brother
Roddy was then infused with his healthy brother's blood cells, a process that
took several days.

   This procedure was repeated monthly. A yeastlike fungus that had infected
Roddy's lungs and a viral infection on his face went away. "My energy level came
back, and my body went back into a healing state," Roy said.

   His family had been prepared for the inevitable.

   "It blew my whole family away." Apparently, said Hudson and Wolf, the stem
cells took hold in Roy's blood and grew up into CD-4 cells strong enough to
fight Roy's infections. The experiment is particularly remarkable because when
the sick twins entered the study, each had an almost non-existent CD-4 T-cell
count, a critical measurement of the immune system.

   All nine had less than 50 cells per cubic millimeter of blood, compared with
a normal count of 800 to 1,000. Roy's CD-4 count, below 73 for the previous 12
months, soared to 630 after the infusion from his brother in April last year.

   It has since stabilized at around 375, well above the danger zone.

   "I haven't been sick a day since," Roy said. Wolf designed the study with Dr.
Larry Waites, a San Francisco AIDS specialist who died of heart failure and
complications of AIDS this summer. Before his death, Waites enthusiastically
touted the results of the study. "When they started out at 16, 11, 12 and 60
T-cells and go to 300, 400 and 600, how much more proof do you need?" Wolf's
position is more conservative.

   He does not believe the transferred cells are producing more CD-4
lymphocytes, as they had hoped, but "are merely doing their job to fight
infection for a few weeks and then, attacked by the AIDS virus, they die.

   I don't think we've taken a giant step.

   I think we've taken a baby step," he said. The monthly infusions also are
time-consuming and expensive.

   And clearly, they can help only those among the nation's one million infected
people lucky enough to have a twin.

   No one knows how many twins might be eligible. First with bone marrow The
idea of transferring healthy tissue from uninfected to infected twins was first
tried in 1983 when a team led by Lane and Dr. Anthony Fauci, now head of the
NIAID, extracted bone marrow from a healthy 36-year-old man and transferred it
into his infected twin. Other studies using twins involved treating transferred
blood and bone marrow tissue with various drugs in hope of killing the virus or
boosting the immune system.

   None was successful, however. But a year ago, Lane and Walker tried another
approach involving twins in preparation for using gene therapy. They are working
with 12 sets of identical twins, one infected and one uninfected, transfusing
white blood cells every six to eight weeks.

   But unlike the San Francisco Bay Area study, the NIAID study has several
additional steps. Before infusing the blood, Lane first "stimulates" the cells
in the test tube with a substance called interleukin-2 and an antibody that can
spur T-cell growth even further. "We're trying to go one step further, by taking
these cells out and teaching them to aggressively kill virus," Lane said. So
far, Walker and Lane said, the CD-4 cell count in the infected twins goes up
significantly, peaks two or three weeks later but then slowly declines back to
its pre-transfer point, less promising but similar to the pattern in the Roy
brothers. Lane said that suggests that the transferred cells are not making new
CD-4 cells, as was hoped.

   However, he said, "It does appear that "the AIDS virus is not destroying the
infected twin's immune system so fast that we can't rebuild it faster.

   While we're not clever enough to know exactly how to do it for everyone, we
think there's a chance we can." Lane hopes that with "the right manipulation" of
white blood cells researchers will find many other types of lymphocytes in the
immune system that may work together to fight the AIDS virus. With news about
the study publicized in AIDS newsletters around the country, Walker said the
NIAID study is much in demand, with nearly 70 sets of twins lining up to enroll.
Walker and Lane said the project is the initial step in an attempt to find a
gene therapy for AIDS. They hope to develop a gene that would confer protection
from the AIDS virus to CD-4 lymphocytes or prevent the virus from replicating.
"My hope is that the principles we uncover by doing this will be applied to
other settings, even to patients without siblings," said Lane. Using close
matches But a major problem when experiments are done in patients other than
identical twins is the risk that the infected patient will reject the
lymphocytes of the healthy donor, a sometimes fatal condition called graft vs.
host disease. A third lymphocyte transfer study under way at the Center for
Special Immunology in Fort Lauderdale hopes to solve that problem.

   It uses relatives who have partial tissue matches in an experiment with 16
extremely sick AIDS patients. The patients are given a blood product called
Passive Hyperimmune Therapy, which consists of plasma and antibodies against the
AIDS virus.

   In the second step, patients are given transfusions of T-cell lymphocytes
from uninfected but partially matched family members. Two of the patients have
died from AIDS symptoms, said Dr. William Reiter, director of CSI's clinical
research.

   But of the rest, he said, "I think they're doing well.

   The patients who died were well past the point where we could help." CSI
officials said no graft-vs.-host reactions were found.

   Using partially matched lymphocytes rather than identical ones "will make
this type of therapy available to a much larger group of patients," Reiter said.
Dr. Dobri Kiprov, chief of immunotherapy at California Pacific Medical Center in
San Francisco, hopes to receive NIH funding to transfer lymphocytes to siblings
or even unrelated people whose tissue samples can be matched. NIAIDS's Kagan
remains cautious.

   He acknowledged that while some of the procedures appear to have "short-term
benefit," there are concerns that feeding more immune-system cells to an
AIDS-infected body simply provides more cells for the virus to infect. But
several researchers are certain something can be found in the procedure to save
lives. In an interview last July, Waites said some of the studies have reunited
straight and gay family members who were torn apart over the issue of sexual
orientation.

   He said dozens of twins were waiting in line to be enrolled. "I think this is
great news," said Martin Delaney of Project Inform, an AIDS research advocacy
group based in San Francisco.

   "Everyone who has seen some patients has seen a remarkable turnaround.

   Everyone infected who has a healthy twin should be trying to line up with one
of these programs." AIDS Twin Studies HIV Twins Study, The National Institute
for Allergy and Infectious Disease Bethesda, MD Dr. Robert Walker and Dr.
Clifford Lane 1-800-772-6464, ext.311. Immune Reconstitution Therapy Program
Center for Special Immunology Fort Lauderdale, FL Dr. William Reiter
1-800-727-4274 Peripheral Stem Cell Reconstitution Alta Bates Hospital Oakland,
CA Dr. Jeffrey Wolf 1-510-204-1591

GRAPHIC: 2 DRAWINGS; 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1. On the left | Healthy immune
cells 2. On the right | Immune cells infected with the HIV virus shown by the
green 3. He's my brother: Roddy Roy's AIDS systoms have disappeared since he
received blood transfusions from his healthy twin brother Robby (right). (E-6)
4. AIDS Twin Studies (E-6); PHOTOBY: 1,2. Illustration / KRIS LINDBLAD 3.
ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1045 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    September 7, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; BREAKTHROUGH; Discovery; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 947 words

HEADLINE: Take two aspirin and call me in 100-million years

BODY:


   Even dinosaurs got sick. Australian researchers have found the skeleton of a

 small bipedal dinosaur that lived 106-million years ago whose left shinbone
was so badly infected that the limb's growth was slowed. This made the  affected
leg shorter than the other, which would have forced the  kangaroo-sized reptile
to limp. Dinosaur fossils showing evidence of disease  are rare. The new find,
reported in the summer 1993 issue of the National  Geographic Society's Research
& Exploration, offers an unusual glimpse of  prehistoric pathology. The
researchers found patterns of bone growth that led  them to estimate that the
infection lasted for several years until death and  that the animal may have
been in pain. (Editor's note: There is no shorter  version of this item.)

Smoking and pulmonary disease

One of the consequences of prolonged smoking is a condition known as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The major symptoms of COPD, which  affects
at least 15-million Americans, include chronic cough and sputum  production,
shortness of breath and difficulty with oxygenation. Even if one  quits, the
ex-smoker with COPD may need to employ precautions to avoid further  declines in
health. In reaction to smoke and irritation, the bronchial tubes  (the
passageways from the throat to the lungs) may produce mucus, which is  coughed
up. When smoking is stopped, mucus production decreases and coughing  is likely
to decrease. But in the long-time smoker, lung linings may be  permanently
damaged. These individuals may develop lung cancer or COPD, the  umbrella term
for such ailments as emphysema and chronic bronchitis. To help  counter any
complications, avoid infections by getting an annual flu shot and  treat any
bacterial infection with antibiotics. People with COPD may benefit  from
respiratory therapy.

A magazine on disc

Perhaps tweaking your perception of what constitutes a magazine, On Disk
Monthly has eliminated the middleman - paper - and delivers its computer news,
reviews and downloads on floppy disc. Softdisk Publishing of Shreveport, La.
has been at this sort of thing since 1981, and this new edition of On Disk
Monthly reflects the changing world of computers in the past decade. Minimum
requirements for this IBM-compatible magazine: VGA or better graphics, high
density 3.5-inch or 5.25-inch floppy drive and MS-DOS 3.3 or later. A user
interface navigates through the magazine, offering software, columns and
cartoons. If something strikes your fancy, you can copy it to your hard disc.
The interface will also take care of chores like printing, if appropriate.
Software include a TrueType font for use in Windows, some .PCX clip art with
fall themes, handy for teachers and such, a video poker simulator, a
this-date-in-American-history program and a to-do list generator for Windows,
among other items. Softdisk also has on-disk publications for Macintosh, Apple
II and IIgs machines, and Commodore 64 and 128 computers. Subscriptions are  $
19.95 for three months, $ 69.95 for a year and $ 199.95 for two years. Talk to
Softdisk at (800) 831-2694, or write 606 Common St., Shreveport, LA, 71101.

New gene therapy for CF

British researchers will use a new form of gene therapy to try to destroy
cystic fibrosis, a fatal, inherited disease that attacks the pancreas and
respiratory system. In most gene therapy, modified viruses are used as  vehicles
to carry gene therapies to target cells. But they can cause an  inflammatory
immune response, especially in repeated doses. The British team  is trying
another delivery system that uses microscopic fat globules called  liposomes.
Patients will be given the normal gene carried on the liposomes and  then tested
to see if the cells lining the nose have resumed normal function.  Trials on the
lungs can be expected to follow in three to four months.  Recently, a human gene
therapy trial at the National Heart, Lung and Blood  Institute, in Bethesda,
Md., was suspended when three patients developed lung  inflammations.

Improving on nature itself

In the search for ways to make substances that are harder, stronger, lighter
and more durable, scientists are mimicking nature - at times even enhancing  it.
Some scientists have discovered how to "petrify" wood to make it more  resistant
to pests, while others are duplicating the multilayered structure of  seashells
to make new ceramics that are tough without being brittle. Still  other
researchers have recently made fundamental discoveries about spider web  silk,
capping decades of study and raising the hope of mass-producing threads
stronger than Kevlar, the substance used to make bulletproof vests. The use of
natural materials as models for new ones is revolutionizing material science
itself, many researchers say, and expanding interest in the field among
scientists in previously unrelated specialties like genetics, geology, botany
and biochemistry. "Nature has taken millions of years, producing literally
millions of prototypes," said Dr. Wilbur C. Simmons, a materials scientist at
the Army Research Office in Research Triangle Park, N.C. "We need strong,
lightweight, thin materials, and it makes sense to sponsor basic research that
includes looking at natural materials."

   Longer versions of Breakthrough items can be obtained by mail or fax. Just
call the Answer Desk between 9 a.m. and 1 p.m. Monday to Friday at 893-8176.
Outside Pinellas County, call (800) 333-7505, ext. 8176. Or leave your request
on the Discovery voice mail, 892-2310.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993


                             1046 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                    September 7, 1993, Tuesday, City Edition

SECTION: FLORIDIAN; Discovery; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 100 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy touted

SOURCE: Times wires

BODY:


   Gene therapy can cure muscular dystrophy in mice, a finding that suggests it

 should also be safe and effective in humans, researchers say.

   The results appear to clear one of the major roadblocks in pursuing new
genetic technology as a cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects  one
in every 3,500 boys born in the United States.

   There is currently no treatment.

   "This finding removes all doubt that gene therapy is the avenue of choice
for treating Duchenne muscular dystrophy," said Don Wood, director of science
technology at the Muscular Dystrophy Association.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993


                             1047 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                 September 6, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 169 words

HEADLINE: Cystic Fibrosis Patient Gets Revolutionary Gene Therapy

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:
- A 32-year-old woman with cystic fibrosis received a revolutionary treatment
Friday of human genes to make up for a deficiency that caused her disease.

    The procedure was the first performed at the University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which is conducting one of
two federally approved trials of the therapy in cystic fibrosis.

    The patient, a New Jersey woman, received the genes in a small portion of
her left lung, Dr. James Wilson said.

    The genes, known as a cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulators,
were embedded in a common cold virus altered to prevent reproduction. The genes
prevent dangerous accumulations of mucus in several organs, including lungs.

    In cystic fibrosis, the most common fatal inherited disease, the gene is
absent and mucus accumulations interfere with the lungs' function.

    It would be a year before researchers know enough about the therapy's
effects to consider wider-area applications of the genes, Wilson said.

GRAPHIC: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1993


                             1048 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                           September 5, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Section G; Page 1

LENGTH: 1149 words

HEADLINE: The Telethon WAR SOME PEOPLE THINK the MDA's Jerry Lewis is a saint.
Other think he's, well, something else. 'Jerry's kids' face life-or-death issue

BYLINE: By Clyde Appling Jr. Clyde Appling Jr. is a higher education consultant
and former director of grants and contracts at Georgia State University. He
serves on the MDA's National Task Force on Public Awareness, an advisory
committee of individuals with neuromuscular disorders.

BODY:

   When you're few in number and short on valid arguments, the best way to
attract attention is to go after the biggest, most visible target available.
This appears to be what some so-called "disability rights activists" have done
in attacking the Muscular Dystrophy Association's Labor Day telethon and its
star, Jerry Lewis.

   A very small but vocal group of people have gained considerable publicity
recently by making baseless, and in some cases, ridiculous charges against the
MDA and Mr. Lewis, the MDA's national chairman. Although any response lends
unwarranted credibility to these people, by far the best response is that of the
American people who annually demonstrate their faith in the MDA and their belief
in what we're doing. They did that magnificently during the 1992 Labor Day
weekend by pledging a record $ 45.8 million.

   These funds allowed the MDA to continue providing hope for the future through
research, as well as help for today through patient services for more than 1
million Americans affected by neuromuscular diseases. Those have been the two
main objectives of the MDA since it was founded more than 40 years ago. They
will continue to be our objectives as long as these devastating diseases
continue to afflict people.

   That the hope represented by the MDA and its telethon can be fulfilled, and
soon, is now a matter of fact, not faith. Recently, MDA researchers announced
they had proven that gene therapy can halt the deadliest form of muscular
dystrophy. They believe trials of such therapy in patients could begin within
two to three years. This could mean saving thousands of lives. That's what is at
stake in this year's Labor Day telethon.

   It's easy for people with disabling conditions that don't cut short their
lives to argue that money spent on research, seeking treatments and cures, is a
waste and that instead more resources should be diverted to promoting equal
opportunity for those with disabilities. Of course, they might feel differently
if they were among those people facing a path of slow physical deterioration
ending in death, or if their children faced such a fate.

   There are many people alive today because of the advances made by
MDA-supported researchers. These individuals do not consider the MDA's efforts a
waste of time or money.

   Some of those who protest the telethon should watch it instead. In 21 1/2
hours, the telethon will present those served by the MDA in a positive,
dignified light. At the same time, it will show the reality of the situations
they face and how devastating neuromuscular diseases can be.

   Many of these people, including me, have the opportunity to lead productive
lives because of the efforts of Mr. Lewis and the MDA. Many others simply have
the opportunity to live because of the efforts of the MDA and the great
humanitarian who heads it.

   While pursuing its principal mission of saving lives, the MDA also has a keen
interest in educating the public, not only about the 40 neuromuscular diseases
in our program but also about the great contributions being made by people with
disabilities imposed by these diseases. The MDA's efforts helped achieve passage
of the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1990, which will increase
mainstreaming of people with disabilities into all areas of society.

   We're proud to have been a leader of the disability awareness effort. Without
the MDA and its telethon setting the pace, many important opportunities for
people with disabilities that exist today - such as greater media presence,
independent living centers, college campus programs and vital legislation -
might not exist.

   With the first nationally broadcast MDA telethon, America was introduced to
"Jerry's kids," people of all ages affected by neuromuscular disease. Mr. Lewis
put his entertainment genius to work and pioneered the use of television for
fund-raising and education. For 27 years, he's brilliantly communicated his
passion and vision for eradicating neuromuscular disease and improving lives
affected by these diseases. The result - more than $ 650 million raised for the
MDA through the telethon and greater public awareness and sensitivity to people
with disabilities resulting from neuromuscular disease, as well as other causes

   Each MDA telethon features both adults and children affected by neuromuscular
disease. These individuals come from every walk of life and include students,
attorneys, journalists, entertainers, business people and educators. As Mr.
Lewis has said, we introduce our viewers to adults who are "working, taking
charge of their lives, being credible citizens and a credit to their society."
Telethon profiles have made viewers aware of the contributions to society made
by people with disabilities and of some of the social and physical barriers they
often face.

   Yet, while the MDA has done its part for disability awareness, we never
forget that many of the diseases in our program are life- threatening. Full
equality may be the most urgent goal for people who have injury-related
disabilities, non-progressive diseases and relatively normal life expectancies.
But for those who face a future of muscle deterioration ending in death, staying
alive is paramount.

   When a healthy adult in her 30s or 40s learns that she has amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (Lou Gehrig's disease), she faces an average life expectancy
of two to five years after diagnosis. And a boy who has Duchenne muscular
dystrophy almost certainly will be using a wheelchair by junior high school and
be dependent upon a ventilator by his early 20s, as his muscles waste away.

   People with these and many other disabling neuromuscular conditions are ill
much, if not all the time, and many are dying. The reality of their situation
makes research and patient services the MDA's priorities. As a result of our
research, some formerly life-threatening conditions can now be stabilized. The
ultimate goal is to find cures for all 40 neuromuscular diseases. Meanwhile, we
provide the most up-to-date medical care and other services.

   In its 28th broadcast this weekend, the MDA telethon will show people with
neuromuscular disease in all their dignity, courage, humor, frustration and
fears. We'll continue our tradition of educating through the best kind of
disability awareness possible - presenting realistic information about
productive and positive people living with neuromuscular diseases.

   Labor Day telethon

   The 28th MDA Labor Day telethon begins at 9 p.m. tonight on WAGA-TV (Channel
5). The telethon concludes at 7 p.m. tomorrow .

   For information, contact the Atlanta district office of the Muscular
Dystrophy Association at 621-9800.

   Disability rights activists opposed to the telethon's tactics will stage
protests in several cities, including Denver, Detroit and Las Vegas. No protests
are planned for Atlanta. For information, contact Jerry's Orphans, 312-281-5599.

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 1993


                             1049 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   September 5, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Personal Health; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: Gene manipulation could help and harm

BYLINE: JANE E. BRODY; New York Times

BODY:

   It is not surprising that gene therapy is getting mixed
reviews.  Although hailed by many as the most exciting medical
development since the discovery of antibiotics, it is also a
source of concern and even fear among some intelligent people
who know what evil can lurk in the human mind.

   For gene therapy involves a kind of manipulation that, in
theory, can give doctors and scientists the tools to make
changes in the genetic blueprint that is the physical essence
of all living things.

   Frightening images of Dr. Frankenstein and his monster or,
more realistically, the Nazis' attempt to create a master race
haunt those who are concerned about this remarkable new
ability to manipulate genes.  They worry about sinister
possibilities, like trying to eliminate a predisposition to
homosexuality, or being short, or any characteristic viewed as
undesirable by parents or by scientists in control of the
technology.

   Even some leaders in the field are apprehensive about the
speed with which gene therapy seems to be developing.  They are
worried that rapid innovation will outstrip the pace of safety
checks needed if the techniques are to be widely applied.

   A federal regulation is already in place to permit the
premature use of gene therapy in ""desperate cases'' before the
treatment has been adequately studied for safety and
effectiveness.

   Every technological innovation, from antibiotics to atomic
power, has presented the possibility for misuse.  Guidelines
and safeguards eventually will have to be established for gene
therapy, but for now it is important that the public
understands what it is all about - its extraordinary potential
for good, and its possible dark side.

   Gene therapy is the logical extension of two quantum leaps in
modern genetics: the identification of specific fragments of
DNA that dictate production of particular proteins or that
modify the expression of other genes, and the ability to
insert those fragments into disarmed viruses or other vehicles
that can transport them into living beings without the
complications of sexual reproduction and without having to
wait a generation to fix a genetic wrong.

   Gene therapy involves changes in the somatic, or body, cells,
not in the sperm or egg.  Its effects are therefore limited to
the person being treated and cannot be passed on to future
generations.

   The concept of supplying living beings with substitute genes
grew out of the study of tumor viruses.  These retroviruses, as
they are known, can invade normal cells without killing them.

   Instead, they transform the cells by inserting viral genes
into the cells' genetic material.  And, when necessary, the
viruses can be directed to unload their cargo in specific
types of cells.

   A variety of biochemical tools are used in gene therapy, and
many others are sure to be developed in the near future.  For
example, to get a gene into the brain, gene therapists are
using a modified herpes virus that has a predilection for
nervous system tissue.

   The virus vector has been changed so that it cannot reproduce
but can still infect cells and deliver its therapeutic gene
cargo.  In other cases, modified tumor viruses or fatty
particles called liposomes are used as the carrier (for
example, to insert genes that can stimulate an immunological
reaction to a cancer).

   Through gene therapy, a person can be supplied with a healthy,
functioning gene to compensate for a missing or defective one,
experimentally with cystic fibrosis, for example, and
potentially for sickle-cell anemia. (Three patients are now
receiving experimental cystic fibrosis treatment at the
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.)
 There are 4,000 such genetic disorders, all of which in theory
may be amenable to correction through gene therapy.

   There are also a number of serious disorders that, though not
inherited in a one-gene fashion, run in families, like heart
disease, breast and colon cancers, diabetes and Alzheimer's
disease.

   As more is known about hereditary components of these
disorders, it may be possible to alter their course by
introducing genes that prevent the disorders by modifying the
action of the damaging genes.

   Then there are conditions like Parkinson's disease and
insulin-dependent diabetes in which certain organs have lost
the ability to produce a needed substance.  Genes that correct
these deficiencies might be introduced into the appropriate
tissue.

   Perhaps most exciting is the possibility, already showing some
success in hopeless cancers, of modifying the body's
immunological responses through gene therapy.  In the case of
cancer, this means overcoming the disguises that protect
cancer cells from immunological rejection.

   Another approach to cancer would be the introduction into
tumors of viral ""suicide'' genes that render the cells
vulnerable to antiviral drugs, a technique that has proved
highly successful in animals.

   Studies described last spring showed that a very promising
""bystander'' effect was at work; neighboring cancer cells not
infected by the suicide gene also became vulnerable to
antiviral therapy.

   Practical gene therapy is less than three years old.  In
September 1990, doctors at the National Institutes of Health
used gene therapy for the first time to correct an inherited
and invariably fatal immunologic disorder in a 4-year-old girl
from Cleveland.  The treatment worked better than even the
researchers had expected, and the child was able to start
school the next year with a fully functioning immune system.

   But while gene therapy has moved from the theoretical to the
practical in a remarkably short time, it has a long way to go
before it can become standard medical practice.  It is now
highly complicated and costly, and its application is largely
limited to federally approved experiments.  It will be some
time before gene therapy becomes a tool of practicing
doctors.

   Meanwhile, researchers are trying to define and limit its
risks.  One danger is that inserted genes might activate other
harmful genes, like cancer-causing oncogenes.  Fail-safe
mechanisms are needed to enable researchers to destroy an
inserted gene that malfunctions or causes other unexpected
problems.

   In a survey of 1,000 adults last year for the March of Dimes,
Louis Harris & Associates found that 89 percent approved of
using gene therapy to treat genetic diseases and an equal
percentage favored continued research in the field.  Almost as
many said they would be willing to have gene therapy performed
on themselves or their children.

   But those who remain skeptical about gene therapy are wise to
make their reservations heard, lest enthusiasm for this
technology overwhelm due cautions.


LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1993


                             1050 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  September 5, 1993, Sunday, FIVE STAR EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS, Pg. D6

LENGTH: 1503 words

HEADLINE: ADJUSTMENTS

BYLINE: MIKE PRESTON, THE BALTIMORE SUN

BODY:


   Each morning and afternoon, for about an hour, 2-year-old Gunnar Esiason must
take a treatment of steam mist with drugs to help open his lungs.

   Then his father, Boomer, or his mother, Cheryl, does chest physical therapy
by patting him on his side and back.

   Gunnar has cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease characterized by mucous
secretions through the body that affect the respiratory and digestive systems.
The average life expectancy of cystic fibrosis patients is 29.

   ''You try to keep his mind off the therapy, because sometimes he gets sore,''
said Cheryl Esiason. ''Quite often, we run out of the rhymes, then it's time for
Christmas carols. He loves the carols. It's a great bonding session.''

   Said Boomer Esiason: ''You are doing something that is going to prolong his
life, that is going to save his life, and you're doing it because you love to do
it. It's a very rewarding and valuable time for all of us.''

   Concern for Gunnar's condition has taken Esiason's mind off the coming
National Football League season. In March, Esiason was traded by the Cincinnati
Bengals to the New York Jets, a move that created a lot of questions:

   -- Can Esiason, a nine-year veteran and one of the league's big stars in the
late 1980s, revive his career?

   -- Can he help save the job of his longtime friend, Jets Coach Bruce Coslet?

   -- Does his left arm, earning $ 3 million a year, still have enough strength
and accuracy to throw downfield?

   -- How will Esiason, from East Islip, N.Y., on Long Island, cope with the
pressure of being the hometown hero?

Back to New York

   ''I'm not worried about the New York media or the fans,'' said Esiason, who
also has an 11 1/2-month-old daughter, Sydney, who has tested negative for CF.
''Bruce Coslet and (Jets General Manager) Dick Steinberg have been very generous
to us. They have helped me find doctors and hospitals, so all I have to do is
play.

   ''Playing will be like therapy to me. It's what I've lived for and what I
want and what I do. There will be no juggling of a schedule, though. No. 1 on
the docket is my son. There is no more fantasy land.''

   Esiason said he got a ''real taste of reality'' May 6.

   That's when the doctor walked into his son's hospital room in Cincinnati
accompanied by a pulmonary nurse, and told Boomer and Cheryl that Gunnar's test
for cystic fibrosis was positive.

   ''You never prepare for something like this,'' said Esiason. ''We were there
for about 45 minutes, the three of us, but Gunnar was asleep. In that time span,
you go through depression, sadness, anger.''

   Cheryl said Boomer thought briefly about quitting football.

   ''Boomer was asking so many questions, like, 'What I should do? Should I stop
playing?' '' Cheryl recalled. ''Gunnar was lying there asleep like a little
angel. I think Boomer quit until Gunnar woke up, and said, 'Hi, Mom and Dad.'
That's when we started restructuring our lives, because Gunnar was so innocent
and full of hope.''

   Boomer and Cheryl Esiason are carriers of CF, but neither of them knew it.
There was no history of the disease on either side of the family.

   One in 20 Americans carries the CF gene, and the frequency of CF is one in
2,000 births. Nearly 30,000 children and young adults in the United States have
the disease, according to Cystic Fibrosis Foundation officials in Baltimore.

   When Gunnar was about 6 months old, he began wheezing and developed a cough.
About a month later, a chest X-ray and a test for CF were negative.

   Gunnar was treated for asthma.

   ''The CF test was done at a local hospital in Kentucky, but it was eight
years outdated,'' said Cheryl. ''It's not even used at a CF hospital now. But a
lot more is known about CF now around the country than years ago.''

   And that's one reason the Esiasons are so positive.

   Medical advances in the field, such as gene therapy to reduce lung
complications, have increased the average life expectancy nearly 10 years per
decade since 1960, according to Dr. Beryl Rosenstein, director of the CF center
at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore.

   On Aug. 10, the Food and Drug Administration advisory committee unanimously
approved the drug dornase alfa, which was found to reduce infections and improve
the quality of life for stable CF patients over age 5. It was the first new
agent drug for CF in 30 years, said Rosenstein.

   Since the diagnosis in May, Gunnar has been taking enzymes with his food. He
has gained 3 1/2 pounds and grown 2 inches in that time.

   He swims three times a week. He likes baseball, basketball and football. He
loves to hook up trains, feed animals and watch sports on television with his
father.

   ''A lot of progress has been made in finding a cure,'' said Rosenstein. ''The
average life span may be around 30 for those already with the disease, but a
child born with CF today can expect to live to be about 40. I think we're about
five or six years away from finding a cure.''

   There has been an outpouring of concern for Gunnar from the football world.
Buffalo Bills backup quarterback Frank Reich, a former Maryland teammate of
Esiason's, went to Cincinnati immediately. Esiason has heard from other league
quarterbacks, such as Bills starter Jim Kelly, the Miami Dolphins' Dan Marino
and the Houston Oilers' Warren Moon.

   Esiason, because of a friend and business partner who was associated with the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, had been active in fund raising before his son's
diagnosis.

   But now the disease has hit home, and Esiason has started a crusade. He has
played in numerous charity golf tournaments. Earlier this summer, he helped
raise $ 60,000 for CF research after he got 10 NFL quarterbacks (five from each
conference) to participate in the television game show ''Family Feud.'' The show
will air in September.

   ''We all think, 'Why us?' '' said Esiason, his voice starting to tremble.
''But it happened for a reason, so I can get out and wage the fight and beat
this thing in the next couple of years. By the end of the decade, if it's not
cured, the life expectancy will be 50 to 60 at least. But I'm determined to help
find a cure.''

Downturn in career

   Esiason fell from the league's top-rated passer in 1989 to 11th last season.
In his past 41 starts, he has thrown 53 interceptions. From 1990 to 1992, only
one quarterback was intercepted more often: the Los Angeles Rams' Jim Everett
(55).

   In 1992, Bengals Coach David Shula benched Esiason for the last four games in
favor of rookie David Klingler.

   Something had gone wrong.

   ''I saw him play last year, and he just looked like he was banged up,'' said
Ernie Accorsi, special adviser to the Maryland Stadium Authority and the vice
president for football operations of the Cleveland Browns from 1985 to April
1992. ''Now, whether or not he lost velocity because he was banged up, I don't
know,'' he said. ''You can only tell that if you're out there on the field with
him.''

   But speculation has spread around the league that an arm injury restricts
Esiason's motion, causing him to have less zip on the ball.

   Esiason denies the rumors.

   Esiason and Coslet offer this proof: Esiason captured second place in the
long-distance event of the NFL Quarterback Challenge on April 25, throwing the
ball 63 yards.

   ''There is a perception that I'm injured, but I don't know where that came
from. When the Jets' doctors examined me, they said, 'What the heck is that all
about?' '' said Esiason, 32.

   Coslet and Esiason say Esiason had become sloppy fundamentally. Esiason had
started to throw sidearm. And because he held the ball too low, his release was
slower.

   Esiason said he improved in those areas in the Jets' minicamps.

   ''Physically, I haven't changed much, but the players around me in Cincinnati
did,'' said Esiason, pointing to the departure of running backs Ickey Woods and
James Brooks and receivers Eddie Brown and Rodney Holman. ''Then the offensive
line started flaking away. The Bengals were more interested in filling the
stadium than filling those holes.''

   Bengals General Manager Mike Brown disagrees.

   ''When things don't go right, players tend to look for reasons beyond
themselves,'' he said.

   Coslet simply said: ''Boomer got the stuffing knocked out of him.''

Reunion of friends

   So now it's Boomer and Bruce, close friends, student and teacher, together
again in a game of professional survival.

   Coslet was the Bengals' offensive coordinator from 1986 through 1989. He
helped turn Esiason into the league's MVP in 1988, and Esiason helped lift
Coslet through the coaching ranks.

   The tandem almost pulled off a victory in Super Bowl XXIII, when the Bengals
lost to the San Francisco 49ers, 20-16.

   But times have changed.

   Coslet is 18-30 in the three seasons as coach of the Jets, including a 4-12
record last season.

   ''There's no question, this could work well for both of us,'' Esiason said,
smiling. ''On the day I was traded, I had the Jets' playbook down in 20 minutes.
We're the architects of this system.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Mike Albans/Associated Press: Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason,
right, and Browning Nagle.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1051 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  September 4, 1993, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. B7

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS TEST GENE THERAPY;
WOMAN IS FIRST OF 20 CYSTIC FIBROSIS PATIENTS TO UNDERGO PROCEDURE

BYLINE: LEE LINDER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   University of Pennsylvania researchers began treating a cystic fibrosis
patient with gene therapy yesterday, a new procedure aimed at finding a cure for
the deadly inherited disease.

   The extraordinary treatment by Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy is one
of two clinical trials approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   The first patient of 20 scheduled for the testing was a 32-year-old south New
Jersey woman who received the gene missing in cystic fibrosis patients. It was
sprayed into her lung with a bronchoscope.

   Dr. James Wilson, institute director, said patients with CF lacked the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene that prevents the body's flow
of salt and water responsible for preventing a dangerous accumulation of mucus
in the lungs.

   The study aims at correcting the defective chloride flow by delivering
therapeutic genes to the outermost cells of a portion of the air passages within
the pulmonary tract.

   ''By introducing normal genes, not in lieu of defective genes but in addition
to defective genes, the cells should regain their ability to transport salt and
water,'' Wilson said.

   ''The clinical trial has been designed to study the safety and effectiveness
of this particular form of gene therapy. Specifically, we will carefully analyze
the toxicity and amount of gene transfer that occurs.

   ''Patients participating in this protocol will not directly benefit from the
treatment because the corrective genes are exposed to a small portion of the
lung. It is hoped the information gained will be useful in designing a
second-phase protocol, which is therapeutic.''

   Wilson praised the courage of the participating patients ''who have committed
themselves wholeheartedly to helping us find a cure for this deadly disease so
that others may have normal lifespans.''

   The patient will be monitored over the next seven to 10 days for gene
transfer levels.

   Previously, similar therapy was conducted by Dr. Ronald Crystal when he was
with the National Institutes of Health. He is now at Cornell University, where
his study is continuing.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1052 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 1; Science Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1126 words

HEADLINE: Personal Health;
The promise and the pitfalls of gene therapy.

BYLINE: By Jane E. Brody

BODY:

   IT is not surprising that gene therapy is getting mixed reviews. Although
hailed by many as the most exciting medical development since the discovery of
antibiotics, it is also a source of concern and even fear among some intelligent
people who know what evil can lurk in the human mind.

   For gene therapy involves a kind of manipulation that in theory can give
doctors and scientists the tools to make changes in the genetic blueprint that
is the physical essence of all living things.

    Frightening images of Dr. Frankenstein and his monster or, more
realistically, the Nazis' attempt to create a master race haunt those who are
concerned about this remarkable new ability to manipulate genes. They worry
about sinister possibilities, like trying to eliminate a predisposition to
homosexuality or to being short or any characteristic viewed as undesirable by
parents or by scientists in control of the technology.

   Even some leaders in the field are apprehensive about the speed with which
gene therapy seems to be developing. They are worried that rapid innovation will
outstrip the pace of safety checks needed if the techniques are to be widely
applied. A Federal regulation is already in place to permit the premature use of
gene therapy in "desperate cases" before the treatment has been adequately
studied for safety and effectiveness.

   Every technological innovation, from antibiotics to atomic power, has
presented the possibility for misuse. Guidelines and safeguards will eventually
have to be established for gene therapy, but for now it is important that the
public understands what it is all about as well as its extraordinary potential
for good, and not just its possible dark side.

The Technique

    Gene therapy is the logical extension of two quantum leaps in modern
genetics: the identification of specific fragments of DNA that dictate
production of particular proteins or that modify the expression of other genes,
and the ability to insert those fragments into disarmed viruses or other
vehicles that can transport them into living beings without the complications of
sexual reproduction and without having to wait a generation to fix a genetic
wrong. Gene therapy involves changes in the somatic, or body, cells, not in the
sperm or egg. Its effects are therefore limited to the person being treated and
cannot be passed on to future generations.

   The concept of supplying living beings with substitute genes grew out of the
study of tumor viruses. These retroviruses, as they are known, can invade normal
cells without killing them. Instead they transform the cells by inserting viral
genes into the cells' genetic material. And, when necessary, the viruses can be
directed to unload their cargo in specific types of cells.

   A variety of biochemical tools are used in gene therapy, and many others are
sure to be developed in the near future. For example, to get a gene into the
brain, gene therapists are using a modified herpes virus that has a predilection
for nervous system tissue. The virus vector has been changed so that it cannot
reproduce but can still infect cells and deliver its therapeutic gene cargo. In
other cases, modified tumor viruses or fatty particles called liposomes are used
as the carrier; for example, to insert genes that can stimulate an immunological
reaction to a cancer.

Therapeutic Uses

    Through gene therapy, a person can be supplied with a healthy, functioning
gene to compensate for a missing or defective one, experimentally cystic
fibrosis, for example, and potentially for sickle-cell anemia. (Three patients
are now receiving experimental cystic fibrosis treatment at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute.) There are 4,000 such genetic disorders, all of which
in theory may be amenable to correction through gene therapy.

   There are also a number of serious disorders that, though not inherited in a
one-gene fashion, run in families, like heart disease, breast and colon cancers,
diabetes and Alzheimer's disease. As more is known about hereditary components
of these disorders, it may be possible to alter their course by introducing
genes that prevent the disorders by modifying the action of the damaging genes.

   Then there are conditions like Parkinson's disease and insulin-dependent
diabetes in which certain organs have lost the ability to produce a needed
substance. Genes that correct these deficiencies might be introduced into the
appropriate tissue.

   Perhaps most exciting is the possibility, already showing some success in
hopeless cancers, of modifying the body's immunological responses through gene
therapy. In the case of cancer, this means overcoming the disguises that protect
cancer cells from immunological rejection.

   Another approach to cancer would be the introduction into tumors of viral
"suicide" genes that render the cells vulnerable to antiviral drugs, a technique
that has proved highly successful in animals. Studies described last spring
showed that a very promising "bystander" effect was at work; neighboring cancer
cells not infected by the suicide gene also became vulnerable to antiviral
therapy.

Limitations Abound

    Practical gene therapy is less than three years old. In September 1990,
doctors at the National Institutes of Health used gene therapy for the first
time to correct an inherited and invariably fatal immunologic disorder in a
4-year-old girl from Cleveland. The treatment worked better than even the
researchers had expected, and the child was able to start school the next year
with a fully functioning immune system.

   But while gene therapy has moved from the theoretical to the practical in a
remarkably short time, it has a long way to go before it can become standard
medical practice. It is now highly complicated and costly, and its application
is largely limited to federally approved experiments. It will be some time
before gene therapy becomes a tool of practicing doctors.

   Meanwhile, researchers are trying to define and limit its risks. One danger
is that inserted genes might activate other harmful genes, like cancer-causing
oncogenes. Fail-safe mechanisms are needed to enable researchers to destroy an
inserted gene that malfunctions or causes other unexpected problems.

   In a survey of 1,000 adults last year for the March of Dimes, Louis Harris &
Associates found that 89 percent approved of using gene therapy to treat genetic
diseases and an equal percentage favored continued research in the field. Almost
as many said they would be willing to have gene therapy performed on themselves
or their children.

   But those who remain skeptical about gene therapy are wise to make their
reservations heard, lest enthusiasm for this extraordinary technology overwhelm
due cautions.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Gene Experiments in the Real World"

    Researchers know which defective gene is responsible for cystic fibrosis.
Healthy forms of the gene direct lung cells to produce a protein necessary for
making normal mucus. In its absence, the lungs produce thick, sticky mucus. In
experiments, healthy copies of the gene are isolated and spliced into cold
viruses that have been altered so they cannot reproduce. Sprayed into the
patient's respiratory tract, the viruses infect lung cells and give them a
healthy copy of the gene so they can make normal mucus.

(Source: Patient Health)

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1993


                             1053 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                          September 1, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: CAREER MARKETPLACE; Pg. R25

LENGTH: 648 words

HEADLINE: HIGH TECH CAREERS HOLD HOT PROSPECTS

BYLINE: SHARON ACHATZ, Copley News Service <

BODY:

   Wednesday, September 1, 1993 HIGH TECH CAREERS HOLD HOT PROSPECTS

   In this age of microchips and test tubes, high-tech careers hold some of  the
hottest job prospects for this decade -- and beyond.

   The spotlight generally falls on the scientists, engineers and technicians
who develop new technology. But job growth also will occur in support  positions
such as salesmen, teachers, technical writers, machinists,  data-entry clerks,
test-tube washers and equipment installers.

   While the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that four of the top five
fastest-growing fields are in the computer industry, the technical tower of
power extends strongly into the fields of science and engineering, as well.

   Jobs that compute

   As the computer revolution continues to make those machines more a part of
our lives, employment opportunities will exponentially expand. Some jobs are
predicted to have great future demand:

   Computer operators work with and maintain computer hardware and  peripherals.

   Computer programmers design software programs that tell the computer what  to
do.

   Computer systems analysts provide advice on how a particular computer  system
can best meet the needs of a specific company.

   In addition, as people start trading vast quantities of text and video with
computers, companies will spring up to help transmit, coordinate and sift
through all that information via networks. Information providers, such as
on-line data bases, will grow as well.

   Computer networks

   The computer world is gradually moving away from large, centralized
mainframe and minicomputer systems toward clusters of more powerful desktop
machines called local area networks.

   Consequently, demand is skyrocketing for the hardware and software products
that link groups of personal computers in an office -- and the professionals
that make such sophisticated networking work.

   Those in the best position to take advantage of the networking boom are
software engineers. But even people without a technical background can find
opportunities. Companies that use local area networks often need a network
administrator to coordinate usage among the many people who rely on its
resources, for example, and workers are needed to handle mechanical tasks such
as installing cables.

   Employed engineers

   Engineering has been one of the most consistently hot fields in the past
decade and should continue as a strong job prospect for the future, simply
because engineering is about the future -- working on new methods to keep
people healthy, productive and living the good life.

   Engineers can be found in and generally are in demand in every industry,  but
there are a few areas that seem focused for a '90s employment explosion.  Among
them:

   Biomedical engineers apply engineering principles to solve medical and
health-related problems.

   Chemical engineers investigate how chemicals can be used for research and
manufacturing.

   Electrical engineers work on the design and production of electrical and
electronic equipment.

   Environmental engineers work to protect resources, animals and people from
exploitation and pollution.

   Industrial safety engineers help industry develop ways to cope with safety
concerns such as asbestos, AIDS, computer glare and electric magnetic fields
from power lines.

   Scientific security

   The '90s' focus on medical and environmental issues will also lead to an
increased demand for scientists to research those areas. Scientists expected  to
be in demand:

   Biologists are called upon for discoveries and developments in a variety of
medical fields, particularly cellular and gene therapy.

   Geologists assess soil and groundwater contamination, as well as aid in the
never-ending search for petroleum and natural gas.

   Chemists work to develop new uses for chemicals, from the development of
food additives and plastics to the prevention of pollution.

   ILLUSTRATION: BW photo by Copley News Service.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1054 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 31, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 5; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Found For Dystrophy in Mice

BYLINE: By TIM HILCHEY

BODY:

   IN what is being called a major step forward in the fight against muscular
dystrophy, researchers have shown that gene therapy prevents muscle destruction
and loss of muscle function in mice that carry the genetic flaws that cause two
forms of the disease.

   By inserting a gene for the protein dystrophin into mouse embryos that lacked
a functioning form of the gene, the researchers, from the Universities of
Michigan, Iowa and Washington, were able to correct the defect and cure the
diseases.

    Although the genetically altered mice produced about 50 times the normal
amount of the protein in their muscles, they suffered no ill effects, the
researchers said. Moreover, the offspring of these transgenic mice, which were
bred with mice that had muscular dystrophy, carried a corrected version of the
gene. The results of the study were reported in the Aug. 19 issue of the journal
Nature.

   "It was wonderful to know where the affected gene was located and its exact
structure," said Dr. Arnold Gale, the medical information officer for the
Muscular Dystrophy Association, which financed and organized the research. "It
was more wonderful to know what protein that gene codes for and what its
structure was.

   "But we've now taken the gene that was discovered and put it into the known
animal model for the disease and corrected the genetic defect. If you can do it
in an animal model, there is every reason to believe you can do it in humans
because the technology transfers across species."

Engineering a Virus

    Researchers note that human trials of such genetic therapy are still well in
the future.

   Dr. Jeffrey S. Chamberlain, an assistant professor of human genetics at the
University of Michigan at Ann Arbor who led the research team, said the next
step would be to engineer a virus or other biological vector that contained the
corrected dystrophin gene developed during the study.

   "If we can do that we should have a virus that can infect those muscles and
take our dystrophin gene into the muscles," Dr. Chamberlain said. "From what
we've seen happen in mice, that should eliminate the muscle disease in
patients."

   Dr. Stephen D. Hauschka, a professor of biochemistry at the University of
Washington, said the researchers had begun to bond miniature versions of the
dystrophin gene with genetic "on switches" that would limit protein production
to the skeletal, cardiac and diaphragm muscles affected by the disease.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common form of the disease, strikes
males almost exclusively. It results from defects in the gene that produces the
protein dystrophin, which is crucial to maintaining the integrity of muscle-cell
membranes. In people who have this form of the disease, no dystrophin is
produced.

   Disease symptoms, which most often begin about age 3, include muscle weakness
and deterioration, respiratory impairment, heart problems, joint stiffening and
spinal curvature. Death usually occurs in the 20's.

Becker Muscular Dystrophy

    Becker muscular dystrophy, a less severe form of the disease, results from
different defects in the same dystrophin gene. The protein is produced, but in
insufficient quantities. The severity of symptoms is related to the amount of
dystrophin produced in the muscle cells.

   People who have Becker muscular dystrophy can live a normal life span, Dr.
Gale said. He added that about 350,000 males worldwide are affected by the two
diseases.

   Dr. Don Wood, the director of science technology for the Muscular Dystrophy
Association, said the study also illustrated the promise of gene therapy as a
general medical technique, adding that the association hoped to be able to treat
other diseases with similar methods.

   Others who collaborated on the study were Dr. John A. Faulkner, Dr. Neil M.
Cole, Stephanie F. Phelps, a research assistant, and Gregory A. Cox, a
postgraduate student, all of the University of Michigan; and Dr. Kevin P.
Campbell and Dr. Kiichiro Matsumura of the University of Iowa.

   In related research, Dr. Peter Law, director of the Cell Therapy Research
Foundation in Memphis, continues work on the injection of immature muscles cells
into children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. This month he announced the
beginning of a clinical trial intended to test the safety of widely distributed
multiple injections of high numbers of the cells, myoblasts, using a 15-year-old
boy, Chris Furlong, as the first subject in the new trial.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993


                             1055 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 30, 1993, Monday, 3 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 444 words

HEADLINE: "Weird science' AIDS therapies being proposed

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Golden microbullets propelled by a special surgical gun
and molecular judo are among the innovative AIDS therapies
described here Sunday by their Texas developers.

   A gun first developed for genetic manipulations in plants is
under development for use in AIDS gene therapy by Dr.Stephen
Johnston, an associate professor at the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School in Dallas.

   ""It's a relatively gentle technique,'' Johnston said.

   Tiny little BB's of gold coated proteins from the human
immunodeficiency virus are propelled by helium glass into 20 layers
of cells.  The gene activates the immune system to begin its
protective activities against HIV, shielding the cells from
infection, he said.

   When Johnston and his colleagues first described the
technique in the scientific journal Nature, ""it seemed like weird
science,'' he said.

   However, funding from the American Foundation for AIDS
Research, which sponsored Sunday's symposium, allowed him to
continue his activities, he said.

   Another experimental genetic vaccine would use a gene within
HIV itself as a saboteur that infiltrates the cell and renders it
safe from infection.  Johnston proposes using the tat gene that
activates HIV.

   ""We would modify the tat gene so that it is inactive,'' he
said.  Then he proposes introducing that inactivated gene into human
cells.  When HIV enters the cell, the inactivated tat gene prevents
it from being activated.

   HIV then cannot turn the cell into a virus factory as it
normally does.  The infection process is stopped by the gene, he
said.

   ""It's a strategy that is being pursued,'' he said.

   Dr. Nancy Chang of Tanox Biosystems in Houston called for
more emphasis on the development of neutralizing antibodies such as
those her firm has developed.  She said use of such antibodies,
which fight the AIDS virus, are being readied for tests in humans.

   Information about such antibodies will be crucial in
development of a vaccine for humans, Chang said.

   Chang has also received AmFAR funding for her research.  Dr.
Mervyn Silverman, president of the national group, said more than
$ 800,000 in research funds have been awarded in the Houston and
Dallas regions.

   Johnston pointed out that the work is necessary because more
diseases such as AIDS could be in the offing.  ""I'm afraid HIV
won't be the worst threat to the future,'' he said.  ""There are
millions of people who could be incubating even more virulent
pathogens (disease-causing organisms) that will strike in the
future. ''

   Work done now with AIDS will only help scientists figure out
how to treat those diseases in the future, he said.


LOAD-DATE: September 3, 1993


                             1056 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     August 29, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: ECONOMY; Pg. 78

LENGTH: 359 words

HEADLINE: Worcester firm a step closer to finding a gene therapy;
EMERGING BUSINESS / FAST TRACK

BODY:

    Genica Pharmaceuticals Corp. of Worcester says it is a step closer to
finding a gene therapy for muscular dystrophy.

   Children's Hospital in Boston last week was granted a patent on therapeutic
and diagnostic use of the dystrophin gene, which can play a crucial role in
causing muscular dystrophy. The hospital, in turn, has licensed worldwide rights
on the patent to Genica. The biotechnology company says it is now seeking a
corporate partner to fund research and development through human trials.

   The patent protects the 1986 discovery of the dystrophin gene by Dr. Louis M.
Kunkel, a Harvard Medical School professor and Genica collaborator. Defects in
the gene are known to cause the two most common forms of muscular dystrophy.
Genica plans to develop a drug that would replace or counteract a defective
dystrophin gene.

   Genica, founded in 1989, develops and markets diagnostics and therapeutics
for neurological disorders. The 55-employee company estimates its 1993 revenue
will be $ 7 million, mostly from diagnostic testing products.

Confidence on the wane

    Entrepreneurs seem to be down in the dumps. Small-business confidence
continued to slide in July, according to a quarterly survey by the National
Federation of Independent Business, a lobbying organization representing more
than 607,000 small firms.

   The group's "optimism index" lost four points between April and July,
dropping to 94. (The index stood at 100 in 1978). The data from more than 2,000
responses was gathered before Congress passed and President Clinton signed a
deficit-reduction plan.

   "The mood on Main Street was souring even before the tax bill was passed,"
said Jack Faris, president of the lobbying group. "Now there will be even less
incentive for small business owners to expand or add jobs," he said, contending
that most small-business owners oppose Clinton's budget package. Fifty-seven
percent gave Clinton a poor rating on his handling of the economy.

   The group also painted a dim hiring outlook. The percentage of small firms
that planned to add workers in the next 90 days fell to 13 percent from 18
percent in the April survey.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1993


                             1057 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                     August 29, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: NEWBORN STAR IN MILKY WAY MAY BE A KEY

BYLINE: Washington Post, Los Angeles Times

BODY:

    Astronomers have found the most distant newborn star ever seen in our
galaxy. The discovery provides what one scientist calls "a possible Rosetta
Stone," like the ancient key to heiroglyphics, that could unlock many secrets of
star formation, the process that has shaped the universe.

   A team from the University of Maryland and the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics reports the finding in Astrophysical Journal Letters.

   The new star is 90,000 light years from the center of the Milky Way, more
than three times farther from the center than our sun. Older theories hold that
it should be difficult for new stars to form because the basic materials from
which stars form are absent.

   "We found the raw material to make a star, the resulting hot star and the gas
ionized by this star, all in the same place," said Stuart Vogel of the
University of Maryland. "The various estimates of this distance agree, and so we
now know that star formation can occur even on the periphery of our galaxy."

   Mass suicide by mice in China

   BEIJING (AP) -- Hundreds of thousands of mice have drowned themselves in
northwest China in a mass suicide possibly triggered by overpopulation, the
Xinhua News Agency reported.

   Herdsmen began finding dead mice in May in the Altay Grassland and nearby
parts of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, the official news agency said.

   The numbers grew quickly, and more than 300,000 dead mice were scooped up at
one location, Xinhua said.

   Xinhhua said experts speculated that overpopulation had triggered a
mysterious disease.

   "Others wonder if this is a premonition of an unprecedented drastic
earthquake," the report said.

   Scum on tea explained

   LONDON (Reuters) -- Scientists have finally answered a question that has
troubled generations of tea-drinkers -- why does scum form on tea?

   The answer is suitably complex.

   In a letter to the science journal Nature, Michael Spiro and Deogratius
Jaganyi of Imperial College in London said they analyzed the scum and found it
was mostly calcium carbonate formed by chemical reactions between hard water and
tea.

   "Addition of acid decreased the amount of scum," they wrote. Lemon reduced
the scum while milk, which is alkaline, made it much worse.

   "We saw no scum on tea infused in distilled water or in distilled water
containing calcium chloride," they wrote. "Scum developed only in water
containing both calcium or magnesium and bicarbonate ions."

   The longer they left a teabag in the cup, the more scum formed, the
researchers found. Scum also formed more quickly if the tea was kept warm.

   Gene therapy for dystrophy

   Gene therapy can cure muscular dystrophy in mice, a finding that suggests it
should also be safe and effective in humans, researchers reported in the journal
Nature.

   The results appear to clear one of the major roadblocks in pursuing new
genetic technology as a cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects one
in every 3,500 boys born in the United States and for which there is currently
no treatment, according to Don Wood, director of science technology at the
Muscular Dystrophy Association.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993


                             1058 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                            August 27, 1993, Friday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 415 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHER WAGES WAR ON DISEASE BACKSTAGE

BYLINE: Steve Stephens; Dispatch Staff Reporter

BODY:


   You won't see Norine Stirpe singing My Way on the Jerry Lewis/Muscular
Dystrophy Association Labor Day Telethon.

   While Lewis is busy raising money for the association, Stirpe, its director
of research development, will be busy spending it.

   ''Researchers are usually more comfortable in the lab than on TV,'' Stirpe
said yesterday during a visit to Columbus.

   She was in town to visit with families served by the association's central
and southern Ohio office and to publicize some promising research on the causes
and possible cures of muscular diseases.

   Stirpe, who has a doctorate in molecular, cellular and developmental biology
from the University of Connecticut, has been with the Muscular Dystrophy
Association for a little more than two years.

   ''Just in that time the number of discoveries has been phenomenal,'' she
said. ''This is a very exciting time. These diseases have been very difficult to
pick apart, to find their causes.''

   In the latest breakthrough, announced earlier this week, association
researchers have discovered a clue about the cause of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, or ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Researchers found that a gene carrying a protein that protects the body from
toxic free radicals is defective in some people with ALS.

   ''This is a disease that has been very mysterious for 100 years, and now
we've found one of the causes,'' Stirpe said. ''This is very important to
develop treatments for ALS.''

   In another breakthrough, scientists found that they could prevent muscle
destruction in mice with muscular dystrophy through gene therapy.

   Although the technique cannot yet be applied to human beings, Stirpe called
the discovery ''a major step forward. This is the step that shows us we're
headed in the right direction.''

   The association spends about $20 million a year to support research
worldwide.

   Kathy Huntzel, patient services coordinator for the association's
Columbus-area office, said patients and their families are becoming excited
about the research breakthroughs.

   ''Patients and their parents used to focus on patient services, things like
wheelchairs and braces,'' Huntzel said. ''You'll provide wheelchairs for the
next 1,000 years if that's all you do.''

   Now, families are expecting treatments and cures, she said, rather than just
coping with the illness.

   Firefighters will collect money for the Muscular Dystrophy Association on
streets and in parking lots around Columbus on Sept. 4.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Stirpe

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             1059 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 26, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: View; Part E; Page 1; Column 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: AROUND TOWN / BEVERLY BEYETTE:  A PLACE WHERE ROVER REIGNS AS KING

BYLINE: By BEVERLY BEYETTE

BODY:

   When Margaret the basset-beagle's owners went on holiday, she didn't go to a
kennel. She went to a bed-and-breakfast, where she and the proprietor snuggled
up in bed, watched TV and shared Ben and Jerry's Rainforest Crunch.

   And Lucky, the Lhasa apso mix, knows that when master's away, he'll still get
his baked potato topped with Dinty Moore beef stew every night.

   Even the four-footed eccentric that must twirl five times to the right and
six times to the left before flopping down to sleep gets his way. Ditto the
Dalmatian that's allergic to all food but peanut butter on Wonder bread.

   That's how it is at All Pets Bed and Breakfast, the hotel arm of the Dirty
Dog grooming parlor near Ojai. It's for those pet owners who just "don't like
the idea of a family member being locked up," explains owner Janelle Aguilar.

   Mind you, she says, "There are very nice kennels and I have absolutely
nothing against kennels. But these are their babies and they want to be sure
they are being pampered and loved and cuddled."

   For this, she calls on her network of 25 pet-sitters. "There are housewives
who want to make some extra money. And retired couples love it. It's like
grandparenting. They have all the fun, but when they get tired of it, they give
the kids back. And they're still free to travel."

   All first-timers stay at Aguilar's house so she can assess their foibles. She
recalls the husky that tried to eat her couch and the "housebroken" Doberman
that soaked every inch of her carpet.

   When Elfie Stuber goes on vacation, Miss Sophie, her mini schnauzer, goes to
the Dirty Dog. Stuber says, "When I used to bring her to the kennel, I had to
drag her in on all fours. Here, she just walks right in."

   Jacqueline Quackenbush also sings Aguilar's praises, even though Fritzie
Quackenbush, a tiny fox terrier-Chihuahua, was Aguilar's only escapee -- just
pushed out a screen and headed for the hills.

   "I was just a basket case, I'll tell you," Quackenbush says. "I thought the
world of that dog. I got her a couple of days after my husband's death, and she
is my dearest friend."

   Luckily, Fritzie was wearing a collar and was picked up and held at the
Humane Society.

   "If there's a way for a pet to have something happen to it while its owner is
away, it'll find it," Aguilar says. "This is their second job in life. You kind
of have to think like an animal."

   Aguilar, who has four dogs and a cat, boasts she can "spot a biter a mile
off." Psychological warfare is another matter. Take Panda, a Shih Tzu who went
on a hunger strike when her owner left for Europe. "It was the last act of
Camille," says Aguilar.

   Finally, she decided to ignore the dog and whipped up some spaghetti, making
loud smacking noises. "She just thought she was going to die before she got some
of that spaghetti."

   Aguilar makes it clear to owners that "if they're a couple of thousand miles
away and the dog turns into Cujo in the middle of the night . . ." well, it's
kennel time.

   The Dirty Dog has boarded potbellied pigs, cats and birds and has had queries
about iguanas. The daily rate: Cats, $8. Dogs, $10-$14, depending on size. Basic
meals and toys included.

   When matching pet and home, Aguilar keeps in mind that some pet owners prefer
a home with children, some care-givers have allergies, some dogs hate air
conditioning.

   And, she adds, "The older dogs and cats really like homes with water beds.
It's easier on their joints."

   City of Hope's Disciples

   Like pilgrims trekking to a holy shrine, they come every two years to Duarte
from cities and towns across America. For many, it is the first visit to this
place called City of Hope.

   But these are the people who make the renowned medical center tick: In the
last two years, their grass-roots efforts raised $57 million.

   They are the 1,200 delegates from 500 support groups who converge on Los
Angeles for the biennial summer convention put on by the medical center.

   They boarded buses in Beverly Hills for the 45-minute journey, excited as
kids heading off to summer camp. There was Bess Plasky, a tireless 78 despite
severely impaired sight. She's been twisting arms for City of Hope for 40 years.
Now she has an added incentive: Her son, Jack, 44, died of complications from
AIDS last summer.

   When Plasky sees people her age frittering away time at playing cards, she
wonders, "How can they do such a thing?" She tells how her dying son said,
"Mother, you can't help me anymore." Then she straightens and says, "But I can
help others."

   There was Karen Thompson, 32, a first-timer from Seattle. She was standing in
for her friend Marco DeSilva, president of the Seattle chapter. DeSilva, 42, was
accidentally shot when he was 15 and is still being treated at City of Hope for
a resulting blood disease.

   There was Ruth Flatte from Seattle. Her Uncle Boris helped found the center
in 1913, when there were two tents for treating TB patients. (Today, 118
buildings sit on 102 acres.) "I used to play on these grounds when I was about
7. We'd eat in a tent with the doctors and nurses." She hadn't been back in 35
years.

   And there was Rochelle Perlow who, with husband Edward, heads a Chicago
support group.

   She lost her father to cancer. Then, eight years ago, at age 50, she was
found to have breast cancer. Despite two recurrences, she remains optimistic.
Through her work with the support group, Perlow believes she is also giving hope
to others. (Ninety percent of center patients have cancers.)

   At mini-lectures, City of Hope doctors and researchers explained their work
in fields ranging from synthetic gene therapy and its possible effect on AIDS to
bone-marrow transplants for improving the lives of breast-cancer patients.

   Delegates picnicked under a tent. Having just seen X-rays of diseased livers
and spleens didn't appear to have spoiled the pilgrims' appetite for cookies and
ice cream.

   Heading home, Cy Plasky, pushing along wife Bess' wheelchair, reflected on
what he'd learned.

   "When we won't be here," he said, "they'll find cures for everything."

GRAPHIC: Drawing, dog in armchair, DAVID EPPEN / For The Times


                             1060 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                 August 25, 1993, WEDNESDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Baxter Intl. Puts Gene Therapy In 1 Unit

BYLINE: Patricia Moore

BODY:


   Baxter International said Tuesday it has gathered its various gene-therapy
ventures into a single business unit, a signal that it intends to expand its
presence in a still-young field.

   In announcing the new business unit, which will operate as part of the
Biotech Group, Baxter noted that future gene technologies could be developed for
treatment of numerous diseases caused by genetic defects and mutations such as
Alzheimer's, Huntington's disease and various forms of cancer.

   Gene therapy is the introduction of genetically altered cells into the human
body as a substitute for a missing element or to attack an aberrant one such as
cancer cells.

   Baxter's major push in gene therapy is the development of a cell that would
be altered to produce factor VIII, a blood-plasma protein needed for coagulation
by hemophiliacs. The cell would be implanted in a body instead of being
injected, the current treatment. Baxter said the implant approach is more
efficient and less costly.

   The company also is working on a way to protect the altered cells from being
rejected by the body's immune system by wrapping them in a membrane "sack."

   Development of both techniques builds on Baxter's existing products for the
treatment of hemophilia, notably purified plasma containing factor VIII and
recombinant factor VIII, a bio-engineered protein. The latter was first isolated
by Genetics Institute with funding by Baxter and later developed by Baxter's
Hyland division. It received Food and Drug Administration approval earlier this
year.

   William Johnston, head of the new unit, said the company is protecting its
considerable investment and "significant" profits from hemophilia products. It
also is gaining certain efficiencies by combining existing and developing gene
therapy projects.

   The unit is attempting to develop a cancer therapy that would combine the
ability of monoclonal antibodies to recognize cancer cells and the capability of
T-cells to destroy them. Baxter is attempting to splice an antibody with a
T-cell receptor to create a T-body that would identify and destroy cancer cells.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993


                             1061 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

               August 25, 1993, Wednesday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS TO JOIN BAXTER DIVISION'S GENE THERAPY UNIT

DATELINE: SANTA ANA

BODY:

   About 20 researchers at the Baxter International division here will be part
of the company's new gene therapy unit aimed at developing new treatments for
cancer, hemophilia and diabetes.

   William Johnston, head of the newly formed unit, said the effort will be
coordinated from Round Lake, Ill., but no researchers will be moved from the
Santa Ana facility, which is home to the company's immunotherapy division.

   The researchers are trying to develop ways to deliver doses of healthy genes
to patients with life-threatening illnesses.


                             1062 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 24, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 3146 words

HEADLINE: ACROSS THE USA: NEWS FROM EVERY STATE

DATELINE: ALABAMA MONTGOMERY

BODY:

    Gov. Folsom appointed Circuit Court Judge Ralph Cook, 49, to the state
Supreme Court, which will keep one African American among the nine justices when
Oscar Adams retires Oct. 31. Cook will seek election to a full six-year term in
'94. . . . State Atty. Gen. Jimmy Evans removed constitutional problems from a
school prayer bill the state ACLU calls "a do-nothing bill." Lawmakers predicted
approval from both houses and signing by Gov. Folsom by the special session's
end today. ALASKA
SITKA - The disabled cruise ship Yorktown Clipper could leave Glacier Bay
National Park today, if the Coast Guard OK's temporary repairs. The ship was
damaged when it rammed a chartered rock Wednesday. Its 134 passengers were
evacuated. . . . JUNEAU - State Labor chief Charles Mahlen says he'll fight a
DUI charge filed against him Sunday. Mahlen's blood-alcohol level was .098; the
legal limit is 0.10. ARIZONA
PHOENIX - Gov. Symington created an office of Employment and Training to help
coordinate widespread job training efforts. A steering committee will oversee
establishment of the office and name a director. . . . TUCSON - Police have
misused department computers to get personal information on citizens, including
phone numbers and addresses to ask women for dates, according to officials and
court documents. ARKANSAS
CLINTON - Roy Aldridge, 69, passenger in a car southbound on U.S. 65, was killed
and driver Opal Aldridge, 65, was injured when a deer - struck by a northbound
car driven by Jack Ciasca, 31 - sailed through the windshield, officials said.
Ciasca wasn't injured. CALIFORNIA
SAN FRANCISCO - Mayor Frank Jordan demanded to know how 11 teens, six of them
awaiting hearings on murder and attempted murder charges, could escape from the
Youth Guidance Center Friday. Six of the escapees - all considered dangerous -
remain at large. . . . LOS ANGELES - An anonymous donor gave $ 7 million to the
University of Southern California School of Medicine to fund gene therapy
research for cancer treatment. . . . SACRAMENTO - A bill limiting salaries of
members of 12 state boards to $ 52,500 is headed to Gov. Wilson. The members
currently make between $ 76,882 and $ 90,860. COLORADO
LOVELAND - A 120-foot stretch of Hwy. 34, six miles west of here, was blanketed
in rocks - up to 20 feet deep - after a rock slide. It will take 2-3 days to
reopen to traffic, authorities said. . . . STERLING - 1,200 marijuana plants
were seized and four people arrested in a sweep of area homes and farms.. . . .
DENVER - Firefighters responding to an alarm found more than 100 cats, three
dogs and a ferret. Jean Winger, 53, the home's resident, was seriously injured
trying to put out the blaze. CONNECTICUT
NEW HAVEN - Mosquito populations will swell in the coastal marshes within 10 to
14 days, following last week's rains and the unusually high tides expected this
week, officials said. The moon will be closer to Earth, causing tides to rise
and flood marshes. DELAWARE
GEORGETOWN - Talbert Roberts and Talbert Roberts Jr. - hired to drain septic
tanks - face sentencing Oct. 1 after pleading guilty to illegally dumping
untreated waste on farm fields. In 147 waste pickups, they went to a treatment
plant three times, prosecutors said. D.C.
A Brinks Inc. armored car security guard, making a pick up at the Capitol Cab
Co. , was fatally shot after being robbed of an undisclosed amount of money,
police said. The driver and the suspect exchanged gunfire. . . . If casino
gambling becomes a reality in the District, it would be done tastefully and be
limited, Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly said. Gambling is just one of five funding
ideas for a new convention center. FLORIDA
TALLAHASSEE - Ex-Florida State University President Bernard Sliger, 68, is back
in the post as interim chief while a search committee seeks a permanent
replacement for Dale Lick, who resigned under pressure Thursday. . . . The state
is proposing setting standards for in-office surgeries - from wart removal to
breast biopsies and more - but some family doctors warn it'll raise health care
costs. Others support the rule, saying it assures proper training. GEORGIA
ATLANTA - Officials hope to begin testing women for chlamydia by Jan. 1 at four
pilot sites in a state health program targeting the USA's No. 1 sexually
transmitted disease. The state will spend $ 341,000 for training and tests; a $
200,000 federal grant is being sought to offer it statewide. . . . The state
parole board adopted Gov. Miller's life-without-parole sentencing policy.
Opponents say the "inhumane" policy will render state prisons unmanageable.
HAWAII
HONOLULU - Students of Hawaiian ancestry are now eligible for tuition wavers or
reductions at the University of Hawaii. The newly enacted law will drop tuition
for 250 Hawaiians and exempt all Mainland Hawaiians from paying non-resident
tuition. IDAHO
COEUR D'ALENE - The state swapped Mica Bay and Windy Bay to the federal
government for $ 2.8 million in timber tracts. Kootenai Co. was leasing the
parks from the state, but fees were getting too expensive. The BLM now assumes
management. . . . BOISE - Two more liquor stores may open by June 30, '94, if
population growth and increased liquor sales continue, officials said. ILLINOIS
SPRINGFIELD - DuPage County State's Atty. Jim Ryan, a Republican, announced his
candidacy for state attorney general. Chicago trial lawyer Al Hofeld, a
Democrat, also is running for the office. Incumbent Roland Burris is running for
governor. INDIANA
INDIANAPOLIS - Only 690,000 people attended this year's state fair, the first
drop in five years, preliminary figures show. In '92, there were 722,218
fairgoers. Rain and heat cut attendance, executive director William Stinson
said. IOWA
DES MOINES - Gov. Branstad rejected a request to use his emergency powers to
suspend betting limits for riverboat casinos. Officials in Davenport, Dubuque
and Clinton wanted the six-month waiver to generate money for flood victims. . .
. Heritage National Healthplan gave the state a $ 3.5 million rebate on a
contract to provide health care to Medicaid recipients in Scott and Black Hawk
counties. KANSAS
TOPEKA - The third annual Governor's Conference on Waste Reduction, Recycling
and Market Development will be held Sept. 9-10 at Kansas State University. . . .
CEDAR VALE - The city will receive a $ 200,000 economic development grant to
allow Cedar Vale Community Hospital to expand its services and retain at least
20 jobs. KENTUCKY
OAKVILLE - Officials are probing a trailer's wiring after a fire killed Amber
Handte, 19 months, and half-brother Joshua Cardwell, 4, and injured parents
Vickie, 31, and Louis Handte, 27. In critical condition: Joshua's twin brother
Justin. LOUISIANA
BATON ROUGE - Gov. Edwards agreed to guarantee $ 115,000 for a program to screen
poor women for cancer, overriding budget officer Raymond Laborde, who cited
budget woes. A $ 3.5 million federal grant has been sought. . . . NEW ORLEANS -
Secretary of State Fox McKeithen says the granting of the state land-based
casino monopoly was a fixed deal and the FBI is looking into it. Harrah's Jazz,
which won the state OK, disputed the charge. MAINE
SCARBOROUGH - Workers finishing their archaeological dig for a 10,000-year-old
wooly mammoth said they have accounted for only 5% of the beast nicknamed
"Hairy-It." Researchers want to know how it ended up in Maine. . . . WATERVILLE
- Lawmakers will consider a bill in '94 allowing businesses of more than 200
workers to shop for the cheapest power companies, ending the monopolies of large
utilities. Central Maine Power Co. said the measure could burden residential
customers. MARYLAND
GREENBELT - A man, 50, walked into an office at Construction Market Data and
killed a woman, then himself, police said. Authorities said the shooting was
apparently over business. A second woman in the office was not hurt.
MASSACHUSETTS
BOSTON - The Massachusetts Lottery will put 1,500 keno gambling machines in bars
beginning Oct. 1. The game is expected to boost the lottery take - $ 2 billion
in '92 - by $ 150 million a year, officials said. . . . LUDLOW - Hampden County
Jail started holding hearings for prisoners by video conference. Officials say
it will save time, money and enhance security. MICHIGAN
LANSING - The Michigan Supreme Court extended until Sept. 3 a stay against GM's
plans to close its Willow Run assembly plant. Local governments asked the court
to keep the plant - which employs 2,500 workers - open, saying the community had
given $ 13.5 million in tax abatements. MINNESOTA
LE SUEUR - A man, 81, lost control of his car and ran over his wife, killing
her. Roy Sohm was preparing to pick up Helen Sohm, 80, at a shopping center when
he mistakenly hit the gas pedal, officials said. . . . ANDOVER - The U.S.
Justice Dept. will decide whether to file charges against two boys, 16, who
burned a cross in the front yard of a family with four biracial children. One
boy apologized to Deborah Knick and her family, saying they were angry over the
death of a dog. MISSISSIPPI
McCOMB - Pike County on Thursday dedicates a memorial to slain lawmen, including
Deputy Sheriff Tommy Daughdrill, killed Aug. 26, '92. His assailant, Frank
Bannock, 16, and retarded, was judged incompetent to stand trial. . . .  CORINTH
- Cassandra Grimes and Penny Meeks, both 18, were held on $ 100,000 bond each
after being charged in the fatal beating of Grimes' mother, Patricia Lambert,
38. She was found Thursday in what police suspect was a staged traffic accident.
MISSOURI
INDEPENDENCE - The Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints is
negotiating with Columbia Hospital Corp. of Fort Worth, Texas, for the possible
sale of Independence Regional Health Center, officials said. Cited: rising
health-care costs. MONTANA
BUTTE - Toni Sullivan, 24, has been charged with attempted murder for reportedly
leaving her newborn baby in a garbage can. The infant, discovered by a resident
when he took the garbage out, is in stable condition. NEBRASKA
PIERCE - Services are today for Mitch Ziemer, 10, who was stabbed to death in a
city park restroom. Arrested was Richard Barnes, 23, who had been free on bond
pending trial on charges of sexually molesting another child. . . . LINCOLN -
Foes of the state's mandatory helmet law plan two protest rides Saturday. One
begins at Waco and ends at the state Capitol. The other starts at Alliance and
ends at Scottsbluff. NEVADA
LAS VEGAS - Robert McCulloch, 45, who is wheelchair-bound, faces attempted
murder charges for reportedly stabbing Gary Brockway, an acquaintance, because
he was upset over the way Brockway was driving. NEW HAMPSHIRE
NEWPORT - Four sheep allowed to graze at the 110-acre Newport landfill will be
slaughtered this fall and studied by University of New Hampshire scientists to
see if the animals ingested any contaminants. Some residents say ash at the dump
is toxic. NEW JERSEY
ROCKAWAY - Gov. Florio outlined initiatives to preserve the Highlands, 1.1
million acres covering five northern counties, and the source of water for about
4 million residents. . . . NEW BRUNSWICK - Robert Marinozzi, 26, finished his
4,200-mile cross-country trip - started June 5 - in a battery-powered
wheelchair. Despite attempts to raise money for multiple sclerosis research, he
was $ 6,000 in debt. NEW MEXICO
ALBUQUERQUE - A lawsuit accuses a Catholic priest of sexually abusing four
children in the '60s and '70s. The suit says the Rev. Ron Roth, now in Illinois,
sodomized three boys and a girl while pastor of Tucumcari's St. Anne's church
and Albuquerque's St. Therese's church. Roth was not available for comment. . .
. DEMING - A state police officer shot and killed a man in a stolen
tractor-trailer rig after the man led police on 55-mile chase, officials said.
Names were withheld. NEW YORK
NEW YORK - The United Way of New York City - facing an $ 8.2 million shortage -
has warned many of the 400 agencies it helps that funding this year could be 17%
leaner than in '92, The New York Times reported. . . . Authorities offered a $
10,000 reward for information leading to arrests in a string of 23 tollbooth
robberies on area bridges. . . . NEDROW - Federal crews began what is expected
to be a two-week search for drums of chemical waste, believed to be buried in a
dump on the Onondaga Indian Nation. NORTH CAROLINA
GOLDSBORO - Airman Douglas Terek, 24, whose wife Michelle's body was found
dismembered in their refrigerator - was in critical condition after shooting
himself as officers tried to arrest him, police said. Charges weren't filed
immediately. NORTH DAKOTA
BISMARCK - Businessman David Vanderscoff, 49, will seek the Republican
endorsement to oppose U.S. Sen. Conrad in the '94 election. He formally
announces his candidacy today. OHIO
TOLEDO - The booster club Downtown Rooters failed to collect 18,668 signatures
needed to let voters decide Nov. 2 whether to put a science and industry museum
in the Portside Festival Marketplace, an abandoned mall. Organizers now will aim
for May '94. . . . WAVERLY - Semi-trailer maker Fruehauf closed an assembly
plant, forcing 261 people out of work. It had been idle since June 5 due to a
labor dispute. The plant opened in '75. OKLAHOMA
OKLAHOMA CITY - Thousands of Southwestern Bell customers had trouble making
calls for several hours because of a Bell hardware problem, firm officials said.
500,000 access lines were affected, including 911 lines. OREGON
EUGENE - Environmentalist Wendell Wood, who had led the battle to save Northwest
forests, will now focus his efforts on saving Klamath Lake, which he says is
"dying." He'll open a field office in Chiloquin this fall to get started.
PENNSYLVANIA
PHILADELPHIA - Rail shipments of nuclear fuel through the city could begin next
month. Some city officials have safety concerns despite assurances by
Philadelphia Electric Co., which plans to move 200 tons of nuclear fuel from the
Shoreham plant on Long Island to the Limerick plant near here. RHODE ISLAND
JOHNSTON - Officials vote today on a tobacco-free schools policy affecting
students and staff. Penalties include detention and counseling for students and
suspension for staff. Unions and other foes say it's too harsh. SOUTH CAROLINA
CHARLESTON - Scientists began gathering samples from the harbor and its
tributaries for one of the state's largest water quality studies. Results from
the $ 1 million project will be used for a computer model of water flow and help
map future development. SOUTH DAKOTA
WINNER - A tougher curfew should go into effect Sept. 6 unless it is referred to
a public vote. The curfew - 10: 30 p.m.-6 a.m. school days and midnight-6 a.m.
on non-school days - applies to those 18 and younger. . . . WATERTOWN - A
possible outbreak of botulism may be responsible for 1,000 duck deaths in the
Mud Lake wetland area. Officials have been picking up dead and sick ducks to
keep the disease from spreading. TENNESSEE
COLUMBIA - General Electric Co. workers have sent about 5,900 letters to
federal, state and local officials, trying to keep 454 jobs from going to Brazil
if the plant, which makes rotary compressors, is sold to Tecumseh Products Co.,
The Daily Herald reported. TEXAS
ODESSA - A proposed 500-bed jail that was to be the state's first privately run
regional facility was quashed by Ector County commissioners. Questions about
financing and legal liability killed the $ 10 million project. . . . SAN ANTONIO
- It took jurors less than one hour to convict Charles McDonald, 53, in the
slaying of ex-wife Carolyn DeWitt, 49. She was abducted and her throat was
slashed. He'll be sentenced to life. UTAH
SALT LAKE CITY - Earthquake monitoring in remote areas of the state will halt if
a long-term source of money isn't found by Sept. 1, officials said. Since '62,
14,000 minor-to-large quakes have been detected in the state. . . . . . . Maria
Hernandez, 22, and Alfredo Vargas, 23, accused of killing their 11-month-old
girl, face murder charges at their Nov. 16 trial. An autopsy showed the child
was severely beaten over several weeks. VERMONT
MOUNT HOLLY - A new trail up the back of Okemo Mountain will help hikers avoid
busy roads and ski trails and keep to the woods, parks officials say. The
2.9-mile "primitive footpath" can be completed round-trip in 4 hours. . . . FAIR
HAVEN - Sheila Winchell, 17, was killed when she was hit by a freight train
while camping in New York state. She was wearing headphones and did not hear the
train's whistle, police said. VIRGINIA
RICHMOND - Businessman J.B. Fuqua, 75, who was raised on a tobacco farm in
Prince Edward County, said he will give $ 10 million to the private school,
Prince Edward Academy. The 600-student academy will be renamed Fuqua School. . .
. ROANOKE - City Council voted against taking over Roanoke Gas Co.'s natural gas
operations. The city had been considering whether to exercise a takeover clause
in an expiring franchise agreement. Citizen calls to the mayor's office ran
150-1 against the acquisition. WASHINGTON
YAKIMA - A boy, 14, pleaded guilty to murdering a family of four, officials
said. Joel Ramos will serve at least 68 years for killing Michael and Lynn
Skelton, both 34, and their sons, ages 12 and 6. He was hoping to impress
members of a gang, officials said.  . . . OLYMPIA - The state has withdrawn the
$ 3.3 million a year that was spent to bury poor people, officials said. The
money would be better spent on the living, officials said. WEST VIRGINIA
KEYSER - 7-Eleven store clerk Karen Jeffrey, 33, was fatally shot during a
robbery, police said. Jeffrey's body was found by a customer. Police have no
suspects. The store did not have surveillance cameras because of a low-crime
history, officials said. Police didn't disclose how much money the robber got
away with. WISCONSIN
MILWAUKEE - The partially clothed body of a young woman was found wrapped in
carpet and dumped in a garage. She appeared to suffer a gunshot wound, but too
badly beaten to tell, police said. A boy was questioned but no arrests were
made. . . . Members of the Latin Student Union at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee want school officials to rename a southside high school
after Cesar Chavez, the California farm-labor organizer. Cited: It would foster
self-esteem among Hispanic students. WYOMING
LANDER - Gen. Norman Schwartzkopf will be among the celebrities to visit the
50th annual One-Shot Antelope Hunt on Sept. 18. Four governors and TV actor
Jamison Parker will join him in the event, in which competitors get one shot to
kill an antelope. . . . CHEYENNE - Secretary of State Kathy Karpan said she will
likely recommend that a proposal to hike grazing fees on state lands be tabled.
The plan to boost the fee to $ 3.67 per animal unit a month from $ 2.50 would be
too hard on the ranching industry, she said.


                             1063 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 322 words

HEADLINE: Equity Issues This Week

BODY:

   The following equity offerings are expected this week:

   Agco Corp., Norcross, Ga., 1.5 million common shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   A-Plus Communications Inc., Nashville, an initial public offering of 3.3
million common shares. Prudential Securities.

    Fortune Petroleum Corp., Agoura Hills, Calif., 1.35 million units, each
representing one common share and one five-year warrant. H. J. Meyers.

   Grow Biz International Inc., Golden Valley, Minn., an initial public offering
of 1.6 million common shares. Dain Bosworth.

   Gymboree Corp., 3.5 million common shares. Goldman, Sachs.

   IRT Property Co., Atlanta, $74 million of convertible subordinated debentures
due in 2003. Merrill Lynch.

   IRT Property Co., Atlanta, 4 million common shares. Merrill Lynch.

   Marine Harvest International Inc., Woodbridge, N.J., 5 million commmon
shares. Smith Barney Shearson.

   Neurex Corp., Menlo Park, Calif., an initial public offering of 3 million
shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Oxigene, an initial public offering of 1.5 million units, each consisting of
one share and one warrant. RAS Securities.

   Performance Food Group Co., Nashville, an initial public offering of 2.07
million common shares. Robinson Humphrey.

   Pimco Commercial Mortgage Securities Trust Inc., an initial public offering
of 10 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.

   Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc., Tarrytown, N.Y., 2.6 million common shares.
Dillon, Read.

   River Oaks Furniture Inc., an initial public offering of 1.5 million common
shares. J. C. Bradford.

   Scientific Games Holdings Corp., Alpharetta, Ga., an initial public offering
of 2.5 million common shares. Robinson Humphrey.

   Somatogen Inc., 1.6 million shares $25 convertible exchangeable preferred.
Lehman Brothers.

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., Cambridge, Mass., an initial public offering of
2.5 million common shares. Lehman Brothers.


   Source: MCM CorporateWatch.

   Ratings: Moody's/ Standard & Poor's.

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1993


                             1064 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     August 23, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F1

LENGTH: 1727 words

HEADLINE: Looking for a Cure;
Amid Biotech Financing Slump, Funding Becomes a Full-Time Job

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Daniel Southerland, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   "What does Wall Street want?" demanded Tom Stagnaro recently, frustrated over
his biotechnology company's difficulties raising capital.

   Stagnaro is president and chief executive of Univax Biologics Inc. of
Rockville, one of dozens of firms in the area seeking to use cutting-edge
genetic or other technologies to create new drugs and health products.

   By almost every scientific and technical measure, Univax is a success. It
commands a pilot manufacturing plant, joint development agreements with several
larger companies and a team of 130 employees who are perhaps a year away from
marketing a drug.

   Now Stagnaro believes he needs to raise up to $ 50 million in the next 12
months. That reserve of funds would enable him to hire a sales force and launch
expensive clinical tests of several products.

   But Wall Street is reluctant to pump in that kind of money, and Stagnaro is
one of many local biotech executives facing an uphill fight to keep his company
on track.

   Investors who once flocked to buy biotechnology company stocks have been
burned over the past 1 1/2 years by disappointing tests of new drugs by several
leading biotechnology firms. Small and medium-size biomedical and life sciences
companies, including more than 100 in Maryland's emerging biotech industry, are
feeling the fallout.

   Then there is the Clinton factor. Although thereare widespread indications
that President Clinton's health care proposals are unlikely to directly damage
biotech, uncertainty over the plan hurts biotech stocks, according to the
investment publication Medical Technology Stock Letter, based in Berkeley,
Calif.

   Several larger biotech stocks and major drug company stocks have regained
some market value recently based on new product developments and hints that no
mandatory health care price controls are to be included in the Clinton health
care plan. But this news has had little effect in Maryland.

   Local biotech executives, such as Stagnaro, are hoping that once the Clinton
administration puts its plan on the table, it will give their financially
strapped industry a status separate from the much more profitable large
pharmaceutical companies.

   Maryland has identified biotechnology and information technology as the areas
that hold the greatest promise for the state's economic growth. Stagnaro has
benefited from state programs designed to assist the start-up of technology
companies.

   But it takes 10 to 12 years, and expenditures of as much as $ 200 million, to
research a new drug, develop it and bring it to market.  Meanwhile, most biotech
companies have no sales. Most still are doing research and development, which
"burns" cash.

   More than 10 percent of the country's 1,200 biotechnology or life sciences
companies are concentrated from Northern Virginia to Baltimore, many of them,
like Univax, along the Interstate 270 corridor and others near I-95 and
Baltimore. At this stage most are relatively small-scale operations.

   Maryland firms developing biotech-based drugs can draw talent from some of
the country's leading medical and scientific research institutes, such as the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda and Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions.

   Based on the number of its biotechnology companies, the Washington area,
ranks just behind three more established biotech regions -- the San Francisco
Bay, New York Tri-State and Boston areas -- according to specialists at the
accounting firm of Ernst & Young.

   A high-risk and sometimes high-return industry, biotechnology enjoyed an
investment boom from 1980 to 1984, when more than 400 new companies came into
existence nationwide. Initial public offerings (IPOs) of biotech stocks reached
a peak in 1991. But the young industry's product development and regulatory
approvals came more slowly than many expected, and returns on investments did
not materialize as many had hoped.Richard van den Broek, an analyst at
Oppenheimer & Co., said that Univax appears to be a "solid" company undergoing
growing pains.

   But Wall Street investors, he said, have become "much more selective and much
more discerning" because they suffered earlier from unrealistic expectations, a
lack of diligence and the "hyping" of products by some biotech executives.Van
den Broek said that until the Clinton plan is made public, possibly next month,
biotech analysts will continue to feel uncertain about its impact.

   Stagnaro argues that biotech should appeal to the Clinton administration,
because biotech drugs and vaccines can help to cut health care costs. By
attacking life-threatening diseases, he contends, new biotech therapies will
reduce the average hospital stay and cut the frequency of usage of many
medications.

   He said the administration could end the current uncertainty affecting the
industry by establishing guidelines on what products are cost-effective.

   Ten biotech companies in the Washington-Baltimore corridor probably have "big
company potential" and Univax is one of them, according to Charles Newhall, a
general partner with venture capital firm New Enterprise Associates.Wayne T.
Hockmeyer, chairman and chief executive of MedImmune Inc. in Gaithersburg, one
of Maryland's best-funded biotech firms, said that the only thing really missing
in the state is the growth of one or two notable successes among emerging
biotech firms. He acknowledged, however, that companies a few years behind
MedImmune in development were having trouble raising capital.

   James Barrett, president and chief executive at Genetic Therapy Inc., another
well-financed firm in Gaithersburg, said that it would be wrong to blame
reluctant venture capitalists for the funding problems of Maryland biotech
firms.

   Venture capitalists, known as VCs, invest in a promising young company in
hopes of selling out at a big profit when the firm succeeds. The VCs receive
stock that gives them part ownership, a place on the board and, quite often, a
deciding voice in who will run the company.

   "Venture capitalists are people that entrepreneurs love to hate," Barrett
said. "But the truth is that the VC money goes where the opportunities are. ...
If the ideas and the people are exciting and the proprietary issues are right,
the VCs will fund them."Wall Street's disenchantment, many small or medium-size
biotech companies such as Univax increasingly are looking to rely on
partnerships with big pharmaceutical firms. The big firms invest in the small
ones and provide a ready-made sales force in return for access to research
results, full or part ownership of the smaller firms, and a big chunk of
profits.

   Such partnerships can be critical because many Maryland firms have reached
the stage where their "burn rate" can only increase. Stagnaro's company burns
about $ 1.5 million a month, with revenue and profits several years away.

   Stagnaro, 50, had more than 25 years experience as an executive in charge of
health care sales and marketing before he decided in 1989 to take on the job of
chief executive of Univax, which then had six employees."I wanted to prove to
myself that I could build a successful, independent biotechnology company,"
Stagnaro said. "And if I could ever put my name around one of those products
that meets unmet medical needs, that would be tremendous."

   Under Stagnaro's leadership, Univax has grown in less than five years into a
much larger company developing vaccines and antibody-based drugs to treat or
prevent infectious diseases where current treatments are ineffective or
nonexistent.

   In contrast with more narrowly focused firms, Stagnaro's company is
developing not just one product but a wide range of vaccines and antibodies.

   Univax has yet to market one of its drugs, but with Food and Drug
Administration approval it is testing four of them on human beings. One product,
WinRho SD, to treat a severe blood disorder that afflicts some AIDS patients,
has reached the final hurdle. It is awaiting FDA approval for a marketing
license.In a report two months ago, Prudential Securities Inc. said that Univax
had "an especially promising" long-term outlook and could achieve "substantial
profitability" by 1996.

   But rapidly growing Univax has had to battle constantly to raise cash, and
must reach outside the state for much of its funding. Stagnaro got his first
seed money of $ 750,000 from Charter Ventures, a venture capital firm in Palo
Alto, Calif., which later lent the company another $ 750,000.

   In 1992, Univax did well in its first foray into the public markets. The
company raised $ 44 million in an initial public offering (IPO) of stock. But in
March, Univax had to withdraw a filing for a second public offering of 2.5
million shares because of a general decline in biotechnology stocks. Stagnaro
explained that uncertainty had forced down the price of Univax's stock to "an
unacceptable level."

   The company had cash reserves of $ 30 million, so it decided it could afford
to wait. But the market did not improve.

   Univax stock has been trading in the $ 7.87 1/2 to $ 8.50 range. It actually
dropped 50 cents a share when a joint development and marketing agreement with
Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, Mass. -- Univax's biggest partnership to date -- was
announced two weeks ago.

   "I called my bankers and asked them, 'What's going on?' " Stagnaro said. "All
they could tell me was that there is continued uncertainty" in the biotech
sector.

   Univax now has cash reserves of more than $ 21 million with $ 5 million more
coming from the equity investment by Genzyme.

   With an expected burn rate of about $ 14.5 million a year between now and
1996, when it might become profitable, the company has enough money to last for
more than a year. But in the world of biotech, where it can take up to 12 years
to develop a drug and bring it to market, a year is not a long time.

   Many investment groups will no longer invest in a biotech firm unless it has
two years' worth of cash reserves, Stagnaro said.

   The chief executive said he is trying to arrange a private placement of
stock, and is looking for more partnerships with larger firms. He said he even
would consider selling the company if necessary to keep research and development
going.

   Stagnaro said he spends 60 percent of his time trying to raise money.

   "My job is to beg for money," he told employees at a bimonthly meeting. "Your
job is to develop the products."


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, TOM STAGNARO OF ROCKVILLE-BASED UNIVAX WANTS TO RAISE $50
MILLION TO HELP MARKET NEW PRODUCTS. BUT FUNDING PROBLEMS MAY MAKE THAT
IMPOSSIBLE, HE SAYS.; PHOTO, TOM ALLEN; CHART, JOHN ANDERSON

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1065 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                       Copyright 1993 Boston Herald Inc.
                              All Rights Reserved
                               The Boston Herald

                             August 22, 1993 Sunday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 459 words

BYLINE: KAREN KUTZ

BODY:

   Genetic breakthrough may slow HIV spread

   A breakthrough in genetic engineering could dramatically reduce the ability
of HIV to infect healthy cells, according to a report in the current issue of
the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

   Dr. Wayne Marasco, who led the research at Boston's Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, said the new technology has broad therapeutic ramifications for
cancer, AIDS and other infectious diseases.

   Should further laboratory experiments in healthy and infected human blood
cells prove successful, "we would apply possibly within one or two years" for a
small trial in patients, said Marasco.

   "Gene therapy in AIDS has a role. It is at its very infant stage, but it is
very exciting technology with a bright future."

   As with all genetic engineering, however, it remains uncertain whether what
has been observed in the lab - a 1,000-fold reduction in the ability of the AIDS
virus to infect healthy cells - will work in the human body.

   The technology is promising, researchers agreed, because under ordinary
conditions, the antibodies that fight viruses can't get inside a cell, where
viruses are manufactured. Instead, they target receptors on the cell's surface.

   Consequently, the molecular sharpshooting achieved by traditional
monoclonal-antibody therapy - often touted in the media as the potential "magic
bullet" for cancer - can't be used to alter events occurring inside a cell.

   The breakthrough technology involves putting a gene directly into a cell
that, in turn, produces a portion of an antibody protein inside the cell. The
antibody recognizes HIV while it is using the cell's DNA to grow and binds to a
spot on the virus that is crucial for its subsequent infection capabilities,
thereby greatly reducing its ability to infect new cells.

   The process also protected the infected cells from being killed by the virus,
and the genetically altered antibodies released in the cell had no adverse
effect on healthy cells.

   "This is a novel concept that could be used for a lot of things, because it
raises the prospect of intracellular targeting using monoclonal antibody-like
properties," said Dr. Norman Letvin, chairman of the division of immunology at
Harvard's New England Primate Research Center, whose own basic research involves
work on the development of an AIDS vaccine.

   "Therapy is a long way off, but at least theoretically it raises the
possibility of using this mechanism to reduce production of the virus," he said.

   "It will be done, but not tomorrow," he added. "You need to have a safe way
of getting the new gene of interest into all the cells you want to see it made
in, and you need similarily to be able to regulate its expression in the live
host.

   "This is a very complex order of business," said Letvin.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2007


                             1066 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    August 22, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2510 words

HEADLINE: TRACKING A KILLER DISEASE;
Gene researcher finds problem, hunts for cure

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

   NEW ORLEANS -- Melvin Joseph starts and stops his way through
a sentence as he rocks on a lumpy couch in his cramped, hot living
room.

   Once a star student at Louisiana State University here,
Joseph clutches his hands to his chest to maintain his balance as
he tries to describe his life.  His eyes plead for understanding as
he struggles to carry on the conversation he punctuates with the
nonsense sentence, ""I'll make you laugh. ''

   Isiah Edwards isn't laughing.  Joseph, his nephew, has
spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 -- a disease that has devastated
three generations of Edwards' family.  It killed Edwards' mother,
his aunt, his brothers and sisters.  Now his nephews are dying.

   He fears the disease will wipe out entire branches of his
family before a cure is found.

   In Houston, Dr. Huda Zoghbi is working against that
eventuality.

   The associate professor at Baylor College of Medicine has
spent the last eight years looking for the dominant gene that
causes this form of ataxia.  Last April, the effort paid off.  She
located the gene on the short arm of chromosome 6

   Now she's on the track of a treatment.

   Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 usually appears in adulthood,
attacking and destroying the nerves in the brain and spinal cord,
resulting in loss of muscle control.  Symptoms may begin with no
more than a cough, but the disease soon affects gait, strength,
talking, swallowing and, finally, breathing.

   Many victims choke to death because they're too weak to cough
up the fluid that fills their lungs.  Generally, they die within 10
years of the first symptoms.

   The disease is caused by an abnormality in a single gene, and
any person who has that abnormal gene will get the disease.  They
face a 50-50 chance of passing it on.

   The ones who don't inherit the abnormal gene are spared, as
are their children.  But they must watch helplessly as their
relatives slowly die.

   Huda Zoghbi wanted to be a doctor, but she never planned to
be researcher or to work in Houston.

   In 1976, however, when she began medical school at American
University, Lebanon was crumbling all around her.  She spent the
first year in the school's basement, eating, sleeping and studying
underground while the bombs exploded outside.

   That summer, her parents sent her and a younger brother to
the United States for a respite.

   By summer's end, the Beirut airport was closed and they could
not return home.

   Zoghbi, a protected 20-year-old who had never been away from
home, faced the daunting task of finding a medical school that
would accept her in midstream.

   She was finally admitted to Meharry Medical School in
Nashville, six weeks late.  A top student there, she went to Baylor
as a resident in 1980 and has been there ever since.

   It was while in a fellowship studying pediatric neurology
that she found her life's work -- the gene chase.

   She credits Dr. Arthur Beaudet, already an established
scientist, with giving her that push.  As a pediatric neurologist at
Baylor, she was challenged by the problems presented by her young
patients.  But she found it discouraging to give their parents a
diagnosis with no hope.

   Beaudet told her that a career in molecular biology -- the
search for genes -- would make her part of the solution.

   To start her off in 1985, he sent her to interview a family
who lived near Montgomery, Texas -- outside of town, down
dirt-covered tracks and in homes without running water or plumbing.

   As her car kicked up dusty clouds, she said she could barely
make out the wheelchairs and walkers that told her she was in the
right place.

   The family she found was poor and proud, suspicious of
strangers.  But she talked her way past their screen doors into the
shabby parlors, where she found the troubling history of a family
whose members had been dying for years without anyone knowing why,
or caring.

   Zoghbi convinced them she did care, and they rolled up their
sleeves and gave blood samples.  In their blood cells, she hoped to
find the unforgiving code that programmed them for death.

   Eventually, it might provide a life-saving solution.

   One member of that widespread, fragmented family is slight,
dark-eyed Brenda Allen, 39.  Each of her five brothers and sisters
was hit as well.  They can trace the disease back to their
great-great-grandfather.

   But it wasn't until the seventh grade that she learned her
mother's stumbling and falling were disturbing signals of an
inevitable end.

   Even then, no one told Allen she was in danger of developing
ataxia, and that if she did, she could pass it on to her two boys.

   One of the boys died in an accident, but the other recently
graduated from high school.  Told later of the danger, Allen elected
not to have any more children.

   Her symptoms started four years ago and she now has to use a
walker.  She remains optimistic: ""Even if the doctors don't find a
cure, God will. ''

    During the late 1980s, Zoghbi searched for more families.  But
Isiah Edwards found Zoghbi himself and insisted she come to New
Orleans' Gentilly section, where ataxia had cut a swath through his
family for generations.

   ""We came out of slavery with it,'' he said.

   He was an adult before he realized that the disease that had
killed his grandmother, mother and aunt was hereditary.  ""We were
counseled in the family that we might get it,'' he said.  But no one
realized the risk of passing it on to their children.

   ""This is the worst thing that could happen to a family,'' he
said.  ""You see a person slowly deteriorate. ''

   That feeling of futility is what has kept Dr. Larry Schut, a
Minnesota neurologist, on the track of the gene for 35 years.

   Schut's family has been plagued with this form of ataxia for at
least nine generations, tracing it back to ancestors in the
Netherlands in the 1700s.

   Schut and his uncle, Dr. John Schut, had dedicated their
professional lives to the search.  Eventually, ataxia killed John.

   But when Larry Schut's father was a young man, a doctor in
Minnesota advised members of the family to delay their childbearing
until they knew they would not develop the disease.  It was the only
hope he could give them.

   Although some took the chance and had children, ""the disease
has just about died out of our generation.  We have squeezed the
gene out of our family,'' Schut said.

   For the past few years, Schut has concentrated on collecting
blood samples for the research done by Zoghbi and her
collaborators.

   He drew blood at family reunions, in motels, at hospitals, in
the backseats of cars and in parks.  ""They were there with their
arms bare, anxious to help,'' he said.

   ""It was like being a sleuth looking for a little clue,'' he
said.

   In the lab, Zoghbi was looking for even tinier clues in the
DNA of blood samples.

   Zoghbi's small team -- herself, Alanna McCall, Tom Kwiatkowski, Sandro Banfi
and Antonio Servadio -- knew from a 1974
finding in Japan approximately where the gene was, on chromosome 6

   The Japanese had studied a small family with this form of
ataxia and had found that where the disease appeared, they also
detected a certain variation of a protein found on the surface of
white blood cells, called the HLA complex.  When children inherited
a certain HLA type from their parents, they also inherited the
defective gene.

   The HLA complex gene had already been located on the sixth
chromosome.

   That finding narrowed the search to only one of 23 chromosome
pairs -- the basis for human heredity upon which the estimated
50,000 to 100,000 human genes range.

   Somewhere in one of those genes lurked an abnormality, hidden
among billions of proteins found on a strand of deoxyribonucleic
acid, or DNA, often referred to as ""the building blocks of life. ''

   It would be virtually impossible to search an entire
chromosome to find a single gene without some other clues, said
Frank Kwiatowski, a graduate student in Zoghbi's lab.

   So, scientists had to look for ""linkages,'' genes or known
markers in the DNA that are passed with the defective gene from one
generation to the next.  If the two traits caused by the genes are
passed at the same time, then it means they are fairly close to one
another on the chromosome.

   Painstakingly, using special enzymes that cut the DNA at
known spots along its length, they subdivide the material, always
looking for smaller pieces that still contain the defective gene.

   In 1988, he and Alanna McCall, a research associate in the
lab, isolated specially designed clones of pieces of chromosome 6
and mapped where they were located.

   A major tool was the PCR -- polymerase chain reaction --
which enabled them to obtain many copies of specific portions of
the DNA they wanted to study.  ""We would not be here without PCR,''
said McCall.

   Slowly, they identified new markers, closer and closer to
each other on the chromosome.  These markers literally ""bracketed''
the gene.  As new markers were discovered, they were zeroing in on
the target.

   By June of 1992, ""we were halfway there,'' said McCall.  By
this time, they had split the task of ""walking'' the chromosome
with a team in Minnesota.

   In 1989, Zoghbi and Dr. Harry Orr at the University of
Minnesota in Minneapolis had decided to collaborate, feeling it
would be more efficient.

   A new method for cloning larger pieces of DNA -- called yeast
artificial chromosomes or YAC -- decreased the work involved as the
scientists worked with identified pieces of the DNA that overlapped
to determine where the gene was on the chromosome.  By using YAC,
they knew they were working with contiguous or touching pieces of
DNA.

   On the weekend of April 11, Zoghbi's group was working with
one YAC for a piece of the chromosome and Orr's group was working
with another.  The two pieces overlapped just a bit in the middle.

   And that's where the gene was.

   The key was the genetic defect itself.  Other Baylor
scientists had found that there was an abnormal number of repeats
in the strings of chemicals called nucleotides that are the
building blocks of DNA.

   In this case, one sequence -- cytosine, adenosine, guanine
(C-A-G)-- was repeated -- almost as though the DNA had stuttered
when it was being assembled.

   The two groups made the finding on the same weekend.  A fax
describing Orr's discovery was sitting on Zoghbi's desk when she
came in on April 12.

   ""Mass confusion ensued,'' said Kwiatkowski.

   It was clear that there was an abnormality in the gene, a
finding they checked against samples taken from other patients.

   In one generation of people with the disease, they found the
abnormal sequence repeated 40 times.  In a child of the next
generation, they found 81.  That child -- a distant relative of
Brenda Allen -- had developed symptoms of the ataxia at age 4. She
was the youngest known victim and died at age 10.

   The number of repeats is crucial, Zoghbi said.  People with 19
to 36 repeats have no symptoms.  Between 40 and 50 repeats, the
disease is mild.  At 59, it hits harder and at earlier ages.

   Typically, the disease becomes worse as it marches down
through generations.  The first group hit in a family might not show
symptoms until their 70s.  But their children who have the disease
are hit in their 60s and so forth.

   The 4-year-old's 81 repeats was the largest number seen so
far.

   At first, the scientists had to confirm that the repeats
occurred in everyone who had the disease.  Then, Orr determined the
exact sequence of the repeat and Zoghbi's group worked on
transcribing the gene.

   They wrote the paper about the gene within two weeks of the
discovery -- a necessity if they wanted to get credit for being the
first to find it.

   ""No one wanted to go home.  It didn't matter if we ate,''
Zoghbi said.  ""It was a feverish two weeks. ''

   Many of the people in Zoghbi's lab had little or no contact
with the patients who have the disease they are researching so
intensely.

   But Zoghbi knows them well.  One woman from the Texas family
asked her for a prenatal test to determine if the child she carried
had the ataxia.  At the time, Zoghbi only had information about
markers known to be extremely close to the gene.  The test had a 1
percent chance of being wrong.

   While she pondered the ethics of offering a test that could
prove erroneous, they found the gene.

   On the Friday before Mother's Day, Zoghbi was able to tell
the woman that her child did not have the gene.

   ""For me, that was a highlight,'' she said.

   Since the paper was published in the July issue of Nature
Genetics, Zoghbi and her group have continued their research,
trying to find out where on the chromosome the gene stops and
starts and what's wrong with the protein the gene makes.

   If they find the protein abnormality, they hope to design a
treatment and, ultimately, a cure.

   Despite the activity, Zoghbi made time during the first week
to call the families who had helped her.  It was, she said, a
priority.

   What the finding will mean to the families remains a question.

   Right now, doctors can test their unborn children and tell
the parents-to-be if the babies are affected.  Those that are could
be aborted.

   The ultimate solution would be gene therapy -- replacing the
abnormal gene with a normal one, with all the ethical questions
that raises.

   Whatever is found, it will probably be too late for Melvin
Joseph.  Already, his grasp is weak and his body appears worn out.

   Isiah Edwards knows his nephew will soon be bedridden.  When
that happens, Edwards will take him to his home in Gulfport, Miss.

   Until then, he'll keep making frequent trips to the New Orleans
suburb to check on him.

   When Joseph thinks about the progress being made and his
prospects for the future, he is bemused.

   ""I don't think it's going to help me because -- well, it's
too hard to help me. ''

   But then his face brightens and an unrelated thought flits
across his mind.

   ""I'll make you laugh,'' he says.



   DNA: the body's blueprint

   The genetic alphabet has only four letters -- A, T, G and C

   They are the initials of the four chemicals bases for the
lattice known as DNA -- deoxyribonucleic acid.  Those four chemicals
-- adenine, thymine, guanine and cytosine -- are attached to sugar
and phosphate molecules.

   DNA is usually a double-stranded molecule with the strands
paired by bases -- adenine to thymine and guanine to cytosine.  Each
couple -- A-T and G-C -- forms a base pair, the unit of measurement
along the genome.  There are an estimated 3 billion base pairs in
the human genome -- the blueprint for life's functions.

   These double-strands on a sugar-phosphate matrix make up the
famous double helix.

   But it is sequences of three bases on a single strand of DNA
that transmit the messages to produce amino acids -- the building
block of protein.  These sequences program the activity of the cell
itself.

   If one base in such a sequence is changed, an abnormal
protein may be produced, causing a deadly genetic disease.


GRAPHIC: Photos: 1. Melvin Joseph, 32, and his brother Carl (color, b/ w, p. 18,
3-star edition); 2.Dr. Huda Zoghbi in her office at Baylor College of Medicine
(color, 3-star edition, b/w, p.18); Graphs: 3. DNA: the body's blueprint (b/w,
p. 18) (TEXT); 4. Six generations of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (b/w, p. 18)
(BAR GRAPH); 1. Bryan Berteaux/Special to the Chronicle, 2.Ben DeSoto/
Chronicle, 3-4. Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1993


                             1067 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                 August 19, 1993, THURSDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 213 words

HEADLINE: Gene Cures Muscular Dystrophy in Mice

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:


   Scientists have created an artificial gene that shows for the first time that
muscular dystrophy can be cured with gene therapy in experimental animal
research.

   The finding - announced Wednesday by the Muscular Dystrophy Association -
paves the way for gene therapy experiments in humans and the possibility of a
cure for people with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscular dystrophy,
said Don Wood, MDA scientific director.

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy - the most common form, striking children by ages
3 to 4 - is caused by defects in a gene that makes the vital muscle protein,
dystrophin. Becker muscular dystrophy is caused by less serious defects of the
same gene. Both affect about 350,000 males worldwide.

   In the research, doctors constructed a "minigene" by hooking key components
of a healthy dystrophin gene and pieces of other genes. The gene was capable of
making dystrophin in mice with a defective gene, curing their disease.

   "(This) tells us that a gene therapy for this disease is indeed possible.
This also allows us now to mobilize and target resources," said Wood. He says
human experiments could begin in two to three years.

   The research was conducted at the University of Michigan, University of Iowa
and University of Washington.

GRAPHIC: Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1993


                             1068 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 19, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

HEADLINE: GAINS MADE AGAINST MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Gene therapy can cure muscular dystrophy in mice, a finding that suggests it
should also be safe and effective in humans, researchers reported Wednesday.

   The results appear to clear one of the major roadblocks in pursuing new
genetic technology as a cure for Duchenne muscular dystrophy, which affects 1 in
every 3,500 boys born in the United States and for which there currently is no
treatment.

   "This finding removes all doubt that gene therapy is the avenue of choice for
treating Duchenne muscular dystrophy," said Don Wood, director of science
technology at the Muscular Dystrophy Assn.

   The disease, characterized by progressive muscle weakening and death in the
patient's early 20s, is caused by defects in a protein called dystrophin.
Researchers had feared that the therapy was not possible because the gene for a
functional dystrophin is far too large to be manipulated for gene therapy.

   But scientists from three universities said that they had developed a
"mini-gene," less than 1% the size of the dystrophin gene, that is completely
effective in animals.

   The report, presented at a news conference in Las Vegas and published today
in the journal Nature, "is a significant step forward," said Dr. Helen M. Blau
of the Stanford University School of Medicine. "Gene replacement . . . is the
strategy for the near future."

   Researchers cautioned that the approach to gene therapy used in the mice
involves treating a fertilized egg and for that reason would not be applicable
to humans. New techniques will have to be developed for inserting the gene into
human cells, they said.

   But the demonstration that the mini-gene works should substantially
accelerate the development of such vectors, said geneticist Jeffrey Chamberlain
of the University of Michigan, the primary author of the report.

   The defective gene that causes Duchenne muscular dystrophy was discovered in
1986. The next year, researchers identified dystrophin as the protein for which
the gene is a blueprint. Researchers have subsequently found that a related,
less common disorder called Becker muscular dystrophy is caused by a less severe
mutation in the same gene, and experts believe that the new findings will apply
to this disease as well.

   The dystrophin gene is located on the X, or female, chromosome, one of the
two sex chromosomes. The gene is carried and transmitted by women, but usually
develops only in males.

   Scientists were astonished to discover that the dystrophin gene accounts for
1.5% of the X chromosome, making it "by far the largest gene ever identified --
much too large to manipulate in laboratories," Chamberlain said. The actual part
of the gene that serves as a blueprint for dystrophin is much smaller, amounting
to about 0.6% of the total gene. But the blueprint is in segments that are
interspersed throughout the remainder of the gene.

   Chamberlain's team, which includes researchers at the universities of
Washington and Iowa, isolated these segments and pieced them together to form
the mini-gene. They attached another genetic fragment from a different gene so
that the dystrophin would be produced only in muscle cells, where it is needed.

   They tested the new gene in a mouse strain called mdx, which also has a
defect in its dystrophin gene and develops a disease very much like human
muscular dystrophy. Employing commonly used techniques, they removed newly
fertilized eggs from mdx mice, placed them in a petri dish and inserted several
copies of the new gene into each with a slender needle.

   The eggs were placed back in the mothers and allowed to grow to maturity.
Healthy dystrophin was produced in many of the mice, rendering them completely
healthy and showing none of the symptoms of muscular dystrophy.

   In particular, the team studied the effects of the treatment on muscles of
the diaphragm, which control breathing and is most severely affected in the
mouse model. They found that the diaphragm muscles in the treated mice were as
strong as those in mice from a strain that does not develop muscular dystrophy.
This is important, Blau said, because failure of the diaphragm and lungs is the
most common cause of death in Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   Before this study, researchers were also concerned that the treated cells
might make too much dystrophin, thereby producing deleterious side effects. The
team found, in fact, that many of the treated cells produced as much as 50 times
the normal quantity of dystrophin, but that this extra protein had no adverse
effects. That was "a major surprise," Blau said.

   Chamberlain cautioned: "This is not a method we would apply to humans. It is
too crude and can cause damage to embryos." Not only is it extremely difficult
to identify and retrieve a fertilized egg before it starts dividing, he said,
but it is possible for the needle to damage the nucleus of the egg.

   The most likely method of gene delivery in humans would be in a virus.
Altered cold viruses, for example, can be used to deliver the gene to lung
cells, while other viruses can get it to muscles in the limbs and heart.


                             1069 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   August 19, 1993, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A12, HEALTH ROUNDUP

LENGTH: 155 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

BYLINE: FROM WIRE DISPATCHES

BODY:


   Scientists have prevented a condition resembling muscular dystrophy in mice
by using a gene treatment, a step that boosts the prospects of using gene
therapy to treat human patients, researchers say.

   The work shows that an inserted gene can make muscle work normally and that
even an over-active gene will cause no harm, researchers said.

   But the study doesn't answer other major questions about gene therapy for
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common childhood muscular dystrophy.

   The mouse work is presented in today's issue of the journal Nature by Jeffrey
Chamberlain, an assistant professor of human genetics at the University of
Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor, with scientists there and at the
universities of Iowa and Washington.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association, which helped finance the work and will
hold its fund-raising telethon Labor Day weekend, called the research a landmark
study.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1070 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                     August 19, 1993 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY THERAPY ENCOURAGING

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have prevented a condition resembling muscular dystrophy in mice
by using a gene treatment, a step that boosts the prospects of using gene
therapy to treat human patients, researchers say.

   The work shows that an inserted gene can make muscle work normally and that
even an over-active gene will cause no harm, researchers said.

   But the study doesn't answer other major questions about gene therapy for
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common childhood muscular dystrophy.

   The disease strikes about once in every 3,500 male births. It weakens and
destroys muscles, usually beginning around ages 3 or 4. Few patients survive
beyond their mid-20s.

   Duchenne arises from defects in a gene that is supposed to tell muscle cells
how to make a protein called dystrophin.

   The mouse work is presented in today's issue of the journal Nature by Jeffrey
Chamberlain, an assistant professor of human genetics at the University of
Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor, with scientists there and at the
universities of Iowa and Washington.

   They worked with a strain of mouse that lacks a working dystrophin gene.  The
mouse doesn't develop Duchenne as a human would, but it does show a severe
Duchenne-like wasting of a diaphragm muscle and abnormalities in other muscles.
Researchers injected a miniature version of a working dystrophin gene into
fertilized mouse eggs. Later, they found that mice that had taken up the gene
had normal diaphragm muscles and other muscles.

   Tests showed the diaphragm muscle worked normally, said Chamberlain, who
noted that weakness in respiratory muscles is often lethal to Duchenne patients.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association, which helped finance the work and will
hold its fund-raising telethon Labor Day weekend, called the research a landmark
study.

   Helen Blau, professor of molecular pharmacology at the Stanford University
School of Medicine who has studied gene therapy for Duchenne, also called the
work a significant step. But she said the applicability to humans is still a
major question, because mice don't get true Duchenne and because the
experiment's gene-delivery technique wouldn't apply to human patients.

   The mice showed no side effects even though their muscles had about 50 times
the normal amount of dystrophin, researchers said.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1993


                             1071 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1993 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                         August 19, 1993, Metro Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: High-tech rules weighed;
 Board to hear suggestions on gene-altered organisms

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

BODY:

    While moviegoers have been absorbed with genetically engineered dinosaurs
this summer, Minnesota regulators have continued to struggle with the technology
that is behind the sci-fi re-creation of Jurassic-era monsters.

    Today the Environmental Quality Board (EQB) will consider recommendations to
amend the state's controversial rules for releases of genetically engineered
organisms.

    No one envisions releases of T. Rexes or veliciraptors in Minnesota, but
outdoor experiments with gene-altered crops have continued in the state this
summer.  And the nation's first retail sales of genetically manipulated foods
are expected to start in the Midwest this fall.

    The recommendations are expected to clear up some of the controversy and
confusion that have surrounded Minnesota's regulations for several years.  Among
other changes, the state would trust federal monitoring of some major
applications of the technology, including human gene therapy.  It also would
exempt bioengineered vaccines for humans and animals from key requirements of
the rules.

    Rules that the EQB adopted last year make Minnesota the strictest state in
the nation in regulating outdoor releases of gene-altered plants, foods and
medicines.  Under a legislative mandate to establish state regulations, the EQB
said anyone taking such items outdoors would need a permit, which would involve
environmental studies and other requirements.

    Many scientists and companies that are using new biotechnology to develop
food and medical products have sharply criticized the rules, saying that federal
scrutiny of the technology is adequate and that additional state regulation
would scare business away from Minnesota and discourage scientific advances.
Proponents of the rules have insisted that there are serious gaps in the federal
regulation of the technology, especially when it comes to bio engineered fish.
State rules are needed in order to protect Minnesota's environment, they have
argued.

    This year, farm-region legislators pushed bills that would have rolled back
the state regulations, arguing that Minnesota is in danger of losing crop
production to other states. Many Minnesota farmers grow crops such as potatoes
under contracts with companies that expect to switch to bioengineered varieties
in this decade. Minnesota's rules wouldn't prohibit companies from growing those
crops in the state.  In fact, several companies have tested bioengineered crops
in Minnesota.  This summer, four companies obtained permits to conduct outdoor
tests of corn, soybeans and alfalfa at 10 different sites, said Neville Wilson
of the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.  But securing the necessary permits
could cost a company $ 15,000 or more, and farmers fear that some companies will
turn to growers in other states when they are ready to produce the crops.

    The legislation died in April, with both sides vowing to come back better
prepared next session.

    Recommendations that the EQB is to consider today are expected to defuse
some of the debate and set a framework for further discussion of the state's
approach to the technology.

    The report comes from an advisory committee the EQB established last year
whose members included scientists, a farmer, representatives of industries using
the technology and regulators from the state departments of health and natural
resources.  The report deals with two major issues left unclear in the rules.

    The first is whether the state's rules should be applied to commercial sales
of bioengineered products.

    The first foods of the new technology, tomatoes with their genes manipulated
to inhibit rotting, are expected to be sold in grocery stores in late October.

    Other new food crops also are on the way to consumers.  Michigan-based
Asgrow Seed Co. is getting ready to sell squash seeds next year that have been
genetically altered so that the plants resist a virus.  Currently, growers spray
plants with pesticides or mineral oils to try to control aphids that spread the
virus.

    Would stores in Minnesota need permits to sell the tomatoes or the squash?
Could consumers carry the vegetables into Minnesota from another state? Under
current regulations, they might.

    Calgene Fresh Inc., the company marketing the "Flavr Savr" tomato, has
targeted the Midwest for its first sales, but spokesman Stephan Benoit wouldn't
say Wednesday whether Minnesota will be among the states.

    The company is awaiting final approval from the federal Food and Drug
Administration for selling the tomatoes.  Once that is granted, Calgene may ask
the EQB to exempt its tomato from Minnesota's permit requirements, Benoit said.

    The report by the EQB's committee says that the law requiring a permit for
every release is too rigid.  The Legislature should amend it to allow more
flexibility so that the EQB could exempt products from the permit requirements,
if federal regulators found them to be safe, the report says.  In addition, the
EQB should evaluate federal scrutiny of genetically engineered organisms and set
up exemptions from state regulation in cases where federal monitoring is
adequate, the committee recommends.

    The second issue the committee addressed is the use of bioengineering in
human and animal medical therapy.

    At its simplest level, the issue involves giving vaccines that contain
genetically engineered organisms. Such vaccines have been used for several years
for treating ailments such as diabetes in humans, as well as a swine disease.
Genetically engineered vaccines for humans and domestic animals are regulated by
federal agencies and should be exempt from Minnesota's permit requirements, the
committee recommends.  If the vaccines are used for wild animals, the Department
of Natural Resources should regulate it, the committee says.

    On a much more complex level, the medical-therapy issue can involve genetic
transformations that fundamentally change people or animals in ways that can be
passed on from generation to generation.  Medical science is nowhere near ready
to create "transgenic" humans, the report says, and there are a host of social
and ethical issues that need to be considered before that could happen, so the
EQB doesn't need to regulate that area now.

    But transgenic animals are being created for research and other purposes.
They should be covered by the state rules, the report recommends.

    Some of the recommendations will require action by the Legislature.  But the
EQB could adopt others and amend its rules today, said John Hynes, an EQB staff
member who worked with the committee.


LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1993


                             1072 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        August 19, 1993 Thursday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A16

LENGTH: 514 words

HEADLINE: GENE BATTLES MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY;
TREATMENT STOPS DISEASE IN MICE

BYLINE: By MALCOLM RITTER AP science writer

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Scientists have prevented a condition resembling muscular dystrophy in mice
by using a gene treatment, a step that boosts the prospects of using gene
therapy to treat human patients, researchers said.

   The work shows that an inserted gene can make muscles work normally and that
even an over-active gene will not cause harm, researchers said.

   But the study doesn't answer other major questions about gene therapy for
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common childhood form.

   The disease strikes about once in every 3,500 male births. It weakens and
destroys muscles, usually beginning around ages 3 or 4. Few patients survive
beyond their mid-20s.

   Duchenne arises from defects in a gene that is supposed to tell muscle cells
how to make a protein called dystrophin.

   The mouse work is presented in today's issue of the journal Nature by Jeffrey
Chamberlain, an assistant professor of human genetics at the University of
Michigan Medical School in Ann Arbor, Mich., with scientists there and at the
universities of Iowa and Washington.

   They worked with a strain of mouse that lacks a working dystrophin gene.  The
mouse doesn't develop Duchenne like a human, but it does show a severe
Duchenne-like wasting of a diaphragm muscle and abnormalities in other muscles.
Researchers injected a miniature version of a working dystrophin gene into
fertilized mouse eggs. Later, they found that mice that had taken the gene had
completely normal diaphragm and other muscles.

   Tests showed the diaphragm muscle worked normally, said Chamberlain, who
noted that weakness in respiratory muscles is often lethal to Duchenne patients.

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association, which helped finance the work and will
hold its fund-raising telethon Labor Day weekend, called the research a landmark
study.

   Helen Blau, professor of molecular pharmacology at the Stanford University
School of Medicine who has studied gene therapy for Duchenne, also called the
work a significant step. But she said the applicability to humans is still a
major question, because mice don't get true Duchenne and because the
experiment's gene-delivery technique wouldn't apply to human patients.

   The mice showed no side effects even though their muscles had about 50 times
the normal amount of dystrophin, researchers said.

   Blau said that would be encouraging for gene therapy if it applies to humans,
because scientists cannot yet regulate how much protein results from inserted
genes.

   But Kay Davies of John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford, England, said the
problem in gene therapy is producing too little protein, rather than too much.
She said she didn't regard the paper as a major advance in the context of gene
therapy.

   The study doesn't address the major question of how to get the dystrophin
gene into patients' muscle cells.

   Viruses are the major candidates to act as a shuttle. But scientists would
have to create a working gene only about half as long as the one used in the new
study to be able to use viruses, Chamberlain said. "I think we can do that," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 1993


                             1073 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 19, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 786 words

HEADLINE: Artificial gene offers hope of cure for MD

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Scientists have created an artificial gene that, for the first time, shows
muscular dystrophy can be cured with gene therapy in experimental animal
research.

   The finding - announced Wednesday by Muscular Dystrophy Association officials
- paves the way for experiments in humans and the possibility of a cure, says
Don Wood, MDA scientific director.

   MD is caused by defects in a gene that makes the vital muscle protein
dystrophin.

   The research offers hope for patients with:

   Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common. It strikes children by ages 3
to 4, causes muscle weakness, wasting and death by the 20s.

   Becker muscular dystrophy, caused by less serious defects of the same gene.

   Both affect about 350,000 males worldwide; girls rarely get the disease.

   In the research, in today's Nature, doctors constructed a "mini-gene" by
hooking key components of a healthy dystrophin gene and pieces of other genes.
The gene was capable of making dystrophin in mice with a defective gene, curing
their disease.

   This "tells us that a gene therapy for this disease is indeed possible. This
also allows us now to mobilize and target resources," says Wood.

   He says human experiments could begin in 2-3 years.

   The research was conducted at the University of Michigan, University of Iowa
and University of Washington.

   Says MDA's Arnold Gale: Treatment isn't "around the corner. But this is a
very important next step."


                             1074 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    August 19, 1993, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FIRST SECTION; PAGE A9

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Is Found to Correct Muscular Dystrophy in Mice

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Boyce Rensberger, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Mice that had been genetically altered to develop a form of muscular
dystrophy turned out normal if their cells also carried a miniature, artificial
version of the gene that was originally defective, scientists reported
yesterday.

   The researchers said their experiment was a major advance toward the goal of
treating human muscular dystrophy through gene therapy. The Muscular Dystrophy
Association said the results "have proven that gene therapy can prevent muscle
destruction and preserve muscle function in muscular dystrophy." But both groups
acknowledged that the method used to deliver the new gene in the mice cannot be
applied to humans.

   Instead, they said, the main value of the research is in showing that a small
version of the normally huge gene appears adequate to correct the defect. The
problem of delivering the corrective gene into all the muscle cells of a person
with the disease, however, remains formidible, scientists said.

   The research was done at the Universities of Michigan, Iowa and Washington
and was presented yesterday at a meeting of the association in Las Vegas. The
scientists, led by Jeffrey S. Chamberlain of Michigan, are publishing their
results in today's issue of the journal Nature.

   For the experiment, the scientists started with a special breed of mouse that
carries a deliberately damaged version of the gene for a protein called
dystrophin. Muscular dystrophy, which affects about 350,000 males worldwide, is
known to result from damage to this gene; without proper dystrophin molecules,
muscle cells grow weak and waste away. In the mouse, the disease differs
somewhat from that in humans.

   Researchers had long assumed that the human disease could be prevented or
treated if an intact version of the dystrophin gene could be placed inside each
of the body's billions of muscle cells. But the task of delivering genes to all
the cells seemed overwhelming, especially because the gene was much too large to
fit inside the most obvious, but still hypothetical, delivery vehicle -- a virus
that would naturally infect muscle cells and do what viruses normally do, which
is to insert their own genes into cells.

   To solve the size problem, the scientists synthesized a version of the gene
lacking large segments of nonsense coding -- or excess chemical units -- that
interrupt the gene on strands of DNA. In normal cells, these segments are
naturally deleted before the gene's message is put into action. The researchers
converted a gene that was an unmanageable 2 1/2 million units long to one that
was a convenient 20,000 units long.

   But because there is no known way to put the minigene into each muscle cell
of a mouse with the disease, Chamberlain's group tested its gene another way.
The scientists inserted it into the few cells of the very early embryo of a
normal mouse.

   When the mouse matured, it was bred with a mouse from the defective breed.
Among the progeny were mice that inherited both the damaged dystrophin gene and
the artificial minigene. These mice had normal muscles.

   Helen Blau, a Stanford University scientist who has studied the prospects of
gene therapy for muscular dystrophy, said the new work was significant, but she
emphasized that the mouse disease is not the same as the human disease, and
inserting the corrective gene into each of countless human muscle cells remains
a major obstacle.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1075 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    August 12, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Sports; Part C; Page 7; Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 237 words

HEADLINE: BASEBALL / DAILY REPORT;
DODGERS;
STRAWBERRY MUST MAKE A CHOICE

BYLINE: By MARYANN HUDSON

BODY:

   Darryl Strawberry, sidelined since June 18 to strengthen his surgically
repaired back, said he needs to decide in the next three weeks whether to play
with the Dodgers in September or wait until November and play winter ball in
Phoenix. Rosters can be expanded to 40 players on Sept. 1. "I've got to test my
back sometime this year, but as good as it's feeling, I don't know if I want to
rush it," Strawberry said.

   When the team is home, Strawberry does his rehabilitation therapy at Dodger
Stadium and usually leaves when the game starts. "It's frustrating sitting on
the bench knowing you could be out there playing but you can't," Strawberry
said. "If you are (sidelined) for a short time, that's one thing, but when you
are out like I am, it's tough to sit there."

   *

   For the past six years, Orel and Jamie Hershiser have helped raise more than
$1 million to help find a cure for Cystic Fibrosis through an annual fashion
show that began in their back yard.

   "It's been exciting to be involved with the charity because during the last
five years they have discovered the gene and they have started gene therapy with
human beings already and they have pretty much conquered the disease in the test
tube," Hershiser said.

   This year's event is Saturday at the Sheraton Universal Hotel in Universal
City, and 20 Dodgers are scheduled to attend. Cost is $65. For information, call
(818) 964-3603. MARYANN HUDSON


                             1076 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                    August 10, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE C1

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: A Swifter FDA Boosts Biotech Industry;
Panel's Review of Genentech Product Gives Hope to Beleaguered Drug Firms

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Daniel Southerland, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel yesterday recommended approval
of a new drug for the treatment of cystic fibrosis, a deadly genetic disease
afflicting some 30,000 Americans.

   The recommendation should boost morale in the emerging biotechnology
industry, according to industry analysts.

   Biotech stocks have been hit hard by disappointing results from clinical
trials and by uncertainty surrounding President Clinton's plans for health care
reform.  The independent FDA advisory panel found that clinical trials of
Genentech Inc.'s new drug, Pulmozyme, justify marketing of the drug for cystic
fibrosis patients more than 5 years old.

   The FDA must still give final approval, but the agency almost always follows
the recommendations of such panels.

   It was the second good-news development for biotech in less than three weeks.
Last month, the FDA approved the use of Betaseron, a new genetically engineered
drug for multiple sclerosis that appears to significantly decrease attacks
suffered by those with that chronic disease.

   Genentech's genetically engineered product is the first drug therapy for
cystic fibrosis to appear in nearly three decades.

   San Francisco-based Genentech, with annual sales of more than $ 540 million,
is the nation's second-largest biotechnology company, and is 62 percent-owned by
Roche Holding AG of Switzerland.  Genentech stock closed yesterday at $ 42.62
1/2, down $ 1.50.

   Some analysts estimate that Pulmozyme could generate from $ 50 million to $
100 million in new revenue in 1994.

   Jim McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter, an investment
news letter in Berkeley, Calif., said the drug's first-year earnings could come
to $ 200 million.

   "The drug would have very quick penetration, because the patient market is
easy to identify," said McCamant. "But until you get other possible uses for the
drug, it won't grow beyond that market."

   So far Genentech has not set a price for the drug. McCamant said that at "the
high end," analysts speculate that the price tag could come to $ 10,000 per
patient per year. Cystic fibrosis, a hereditary disorder, is the most common
fatal genetic disease in Caucasians. Persons afflicted with the disease suffer
from thick secretions accumulating in their lungs, causing impaired breathing
and progressive degeneration of the lungs. The disease usually first strikes
children, and the median survival age is about 29 years.

   Clinical trials involving 968 patients across the country showed that
Pulmozyme, the brand name for dornase alfa, reduced the rate of respiratory
infection among those in the test group and improved the functioning of their
lungs. Experts on the FDA panel said, however, that the long-term effects of the
drug are still unknown and that this requires further study.

   The approval came very quickly by FDA standards. Many executives and patient
activists consider the FDA to be a slow-moving bureaucracy when it comes to
reviewing and approving new drugs.

   In many cases, biotech firms have had to take as long as 10 years to develop
a new drug, run trials and gain FDA approval.

   In just five years, however, Genentech has transformed Pulmozyme from an idea
in the mind of Steven Shak, Genentech's director of pulmonary research, into a
drug that has made a strong showing in clinical trials.  Trials began in May
1990, and the advisory panel acted within four months of Genentech's application
for approval.

   Linda I. Miller, an analyst with Paine Webber Inc., a New York brokerage
firm, said the biotechnology industry should be encouraged by how quickly the
FDA moved to review the drug.

   "This shows that if the FDA wants to get something done, it can move quite
quickly," Miller said.

   Both Genentech and the FDA declined to comment on when the drug might come on
the market. The drug's manufacturing process also requires FDA approval. But
Robert J. Beall, executive vice president of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, a
private group in Bethesda, said it could be marketed as soon as the end of this
year.

   G. Kirk Raab, Genentech's president and chief executive, said rapid progress
of the drug toward market would not have occurred without "intense
collaboration" between the company, the FDA and the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation
as well as medical centers and patients across the country.

   FDA Commissioner David Kessler, a pediatrician who has treated cystic
fibrosis patients, said the FDA is committed to "expediting" the review of drugs
for all life-threatening diseases as long as the review is thorough.

   Beall said that eventually, the greatest hope for cystic fibrosis patients
may be in gene therapy treatment.

   Genentech is collaborating with a local start-up company, GenVec in
Montgomery County, in developing a gene therapy treatment.

   Pulmozyme, which is inhaled, helps thin secretions in patients' airways so
they can breathe more easily.

   "It's a good breakthrough," said Jim O'Neill, a George Mason University
student who was diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at birth and received the drug in
clinical trials. "I feel less congested and it's slowed down the progression of
the disease."

   Staff writer Sandra Sugawara contributed to this report.



GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION, LOOKING FOR A SHOT IN THE ARM (DATA FROM CHART WAS
UNAVAILABLE.), TOBEY; CHART

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1077 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  August 9, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS;
Ms. Stampfer, Dr. Weitzman

BODY:

   Sharon Gail Stampfer, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Morris Stampfer of New
Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr. Matthew D. Weitzman, a son of Prof.
and Mrs. David Weitzman of Cardiff, Wales. Rabbi Melvin Sirner officiated at the
Hyatt Regency Hotel in Greenwich, Conn. Rabbi Theodore Stampfer, the bride's
grandfather, took part in the ceremony.

   The bride, 23, graduated from Barnard College and was until recently an
administrative assistant at the American Institute of Architects in Washington.
She and her husband plan to enroll at the University of Pennsylvania next month,
where she will study for a master's degree in architecture and he is to be a
postdoctoral fellow at the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

    The bride's father is a cardiologist in New Rochelle. Her mother, Deborah L.
Stampfer, is the chairwoman of the mathematics department at the Byram Hills
High School in Armonk, N.Y.

   Dr. Weitzman, 28, was until recently a postdoctoral fellow in gene therapy at
the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. He graduated from the
University of Leeds in England and received a Ph.D. in molecular virology from
Oxford Polytechnic in England. His mother, Avis Weitzman, is the director of the
Cardiff United Synagogue preschool. His father is a college curriculum
consultant.


LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1993


                             1078 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       August 2, 1993 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIVING; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: FARMING IS BUZZING IN WOOSTER

BYLINE: BY DEBBI SNOOK

BODY:

   It might be an illusion, but the grass seems greener, the corn taller and the
cows bigger at the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center in Wooster.

   Maybe that's because this research arm of Ohio State University, 90 minutes
south of Cleveland, is in the business of farming new ideas for better plants
and animals. After visiting a few labs, you can almost swear you've seen things
grow.

   Because it is taxpayer-funded, the 2,100-acre center is open to the public.
On any day, visitors can walk the paths or drive the roads that traverse the
hilly grounds.

   You can stop at the turkey research unit and watch thousands of the big white
birds strut through a vale. Or catch the automated, 1 p.m. cow milking.  Or take
in one of several significant growing areas.

   One section hosts thousands of shrubs, each plant labeled and another has
trees that are not pruned, so their shading capabilities can be scientifically
measured. The rose garden exists just for pleasure. Among the 1,500 plants are
teas, rugosas, mosses, damasks, bourbons and climbers.

   In May, some 450 blooming crabapple trees set the landscape aglow.

   More in-depth tours of the center are available for groups of 10 or more
during the week, by appointment. They usually start with a video which traces
the center's founding in 1881 as part of OSU's Columbus campus. It moved to
Wooster in 1892.

   Today it includes the Agricultural Technical Institute, a two-year college,
as well as more than 400 research projects. Tours can be tailored for an
overview as well as a specific stop to one or more of the labs.

   What to choose? How about entymology where bees are a big topic? Ohio ranks
among the top five states in beekeeping. Since bees are natural pollinators,
affecting every third bite of food we eat, the center is experimenting with new
ways to lure them further into crop fields.

   It is also studying the invasion of mites that has wiped out large portions
of the country's bee population. And it is mapping the northward movement of
Africanized or so-called "killer bees" that escaped from a South American lab in
1957.

   Expect rational calm on the subject from professor James Tew, who says the
Africanized bees have been breeding with regular bees. If and when they get
here, "they may be aggressive and they may not be," he says.

   Over in biotechnology, corn, wheat and soybean seeds are being injected with
new genes to develop hardier strains. As test tubes of seeds swirl mechanically
in growing solution, biotechnologist John Finer addresses the protests over gene
therapy in food by admitting new allergies could be created. "You have to take
the products through enough trials" before they're safe, he says.

   Peter Fynn in bio-systems proudly shows off a greenhouse where a computer
controls the flow of water and nutrients to plants, and then recycles them.
Without waste, growers will be better able to comply with new, stringent
environmental rules about what they're allowed to flush away.

   And at the USDA Soft Wheat Lab, Patrick Finney shows how new wheat strains
are analyzed for chemical and baking properties. Cookies here are numbered,
weighed and measured before being tasted. And Finney is personally sold on the
extra nutritional value of soaked and sprouted wheat berries. "Throw them in
your stir-fry," he says with glee. "Put them in your stew."

   The sad part about touring the center is in knowing that its funding has been
cut severely. State appropriations dropped 6% in the 1992 budget and 19.5% in
1993. More than one of the staffers admitted many research topics are being
dictated by funding-rich industry rather than by the scientists.

   But in one greenhouse there's a collection of taxus (yew) plants that are
being monitored for their production of taxol, a chemical seen as a potential
cancer fighter.

   "We're not getting funding for the study," says Fynn. "We just think it's
important."

   Where to find it OARDC is located on Ohio 83 in Wooster. To arrange a tour,
call 1-263-3780.

COLUMN: DIVERSIONS

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1993


                             1079 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             August 1, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: FOREIGN NEWS; Section C; Page 6

LENGTH: 631 words

HEADLINE: WORLD IN BRIEF Engineered cells said to cure rare cancer

BODY:

   Doctors in Milan, Italy, have cured a woman with a rare form of cancer by
injecting her with genetically engineered white blood cells, researchers said
Saturday. The researchers said it was the first successful treatment of its
kind, and the results, if confirmed, could lead to vaccines against a specific
kind of cancer.

   Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of Scientific Research at San Raffaele
Hospital cautioned that the treatment's success will have little immediate
benefit for most cancer patients. "For the more common forms of tumors we will
still need years, but this technique gives new, valid hopes," he said in
announcing his team's results at a news conference in Milan. The patient
suffered from a lymphoma believed to be caused by the Epstein-Barr virus, which
causes the more common condition called chronic fatigue syndrome.

   The treatment worked because the woman's cancer was one of the few caused by
a virus, institute officials said. Researchers, particularly in the United
States, have been looking at gene therapy to fight cancer, with mixed results.

   EUROPE

   MAJOR WOES BRING MINOR NUMBERS: After 14 years in power, Britain's
Conservative Party has driven into a deep political rut, and political analysts
said that Prime Minister John Major faced a substantial challenge in trying to
steer the government and his own fortunes back on track. On Thursday the party
suffered a stinging defeat in a race for a vacant seat in Parliament, losing by
a 2-1 ratio in a district it had held without problems for 83 years. The loss
was widely interpreted as a rejection of Major's leadership by the middle class
of southern England, the very voters who have been the backbone of Tory support
since Margaret Thatcher brought the party to power in 1979. A new opinion survey
released Friday reinforced the impression that Mr. Major is facing a political
crisis. Only 11 percent of the voters surveyed nationwide at the end of last
week said they believed that Major was a capable leader, down from 47 percent at
the time of the last general election 15 months ago, according to MORI, a public
opinion research firm in London.

   PRINCE'S YACHT CRASHES DURING RACE: The husband of Britain's Queen Elizabeth
II crashed his yacht into another vessel Saturday in a race on the opening day
of the annual Cowes yachting regatta. Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, was
at the helm of Yeoman XXVIII when it hit Magazine II on the finishing line,
regatta spokeswoman Sue Hardwicke said. The duke "was on the port tack and was
clearly in the wrong," she said. Prince Edward, the royal couple's youngest
child, was with his father on board the 38-foot Yeoman, which suffered
superficial damage, Ms. Hardwicke said. Magazine II was more badly damaged, she
said. Yeoman came in eighth in the race at Cowes off the southern coast of
England. At Cowes last year, Edward ran a yacht onto rocks, ripping a spinnaker.

   AFRICA

   TRIBAL CORONATION: Ronald Muwenda Mutebi was crowned as 36th king of the
Baganda ethnic group in a ceremony witnessed by thousands of jubilant royalists.
The coronation outside Uganda's capital, Kampala, came 27 years after the four
tribal monarchies in this East African nation were abolished by then-President
Milton Obote. King Mutebi will formally be known as Kabaka (King) Ronald Muwenda
Mutebi II, but he will have no executive powers according to a law passed July
15. He succeeds his father, Frederick Mutesa II, who was ousted by Mr. Obote in
1966 and died in exile in Britain.

   ASIA

   THREE-SIDED WAR ESCALATES: Russian planes drove back 200 Islamic rebels
trying to cross into Tajikistan from Afghanistan, but a guerrilla commander
threatened to use newly acquired anti-aircraft missiles in coming
confrontations.

   From our news services

GRAPHIC: Photo: A hot, dark day in Cairo Firefighters hose blazing tires in a
dump in Cairo, Egypt, on Saturday. Residents and firefighters suffered from
smoke inhalation. Reports said a cigarette caused the fire. / Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 1993


                             1080 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 1, 1993, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: RARE CANCER CURED WITH GENES

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   Doctors have cured a woman with a rare form of cancer by injecting her with
genetically engineered white blood cells, researchers said yesterday.

   The researchers said it was the first successful treatment of its kind, and
the results, if confirmed, could lead to vaccines against a specific kind of
cancer.

   Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of Scientific Research at San Raffaele
Hospital cautioned that the treatment's success will have little immediate
benefit for most cancer patients.

   ''For the more common forms of tumors we will still need years, but this
technique gives new, valid hopes,'' he said in announcing his team's results at
a news conference in Milan.

   The patient suffered from a lymphoma believed to be caused by Epstein-Barr
virus, which causes the more common condition called chronic fatigue syndrome.

   The treatment worked because the woman's cancer was one of the few caused by
a virus, institute officials said.

   Researchers, particularly in the United States, have been looking at gene
therapy to fight cancer, with mixed results.

   The woman developed the tumor in her lymph glands after a bone-marrow
transplant. The disease is rare and most often strikes patients who undergo
transplants.

   Two weeks ago, doctors injected her with lymphocyte T cells drawn from her
brother. Two genes were inserted into the cells, a so-called ''suicide gene''
and a ''marker gene,'' Bordignon explained.

   The lymphocytes attacked and killed the cancer cells. Before they could go on
to attack healthy cells, the ''suicide genes'' were activated by a drug injected
into the patient and they destroyed the lymphocytes. The ''marker genes''
allowed doctors to keep track of the lymphocytes' progress.

   Lymphocytes are cells formed in lymphatic tissue that are important in the
formation of antibodies and the body's defenses against infection.

   The patient's high fever dropped to normal and tests showed her tumors had
disappeared, the researchers said.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1081 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       August 1, 1993 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 6A

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC CANCER CURE CLAIMED ;
RARE FORM OF LYMPHOMA RESPONDS TO SPECIAL TREATMENT

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: MILAN, ITALY

BODY:

   Doctors have cured a woman with a rare form of cancer by injecting her with
genetically engineered white blood cells, researchers said yesterday.

   The researchers said it was the first successful treatment of its kind.

   Dr. Claudio Bordignon of the Institute of Scientific Research at San Raffaele
Hospital cautioned that the treatment's success will have little immediate
benefit for most cancer patients.

   "For the more common forms of tumors we will still need years, but this
technique gives new, valid hopes," he said in announcing his team's results at a
news conference in Milan.

   The patient suffered from a lymphoma believed to be caused by the
Epstein-Barr virus, which causes the more common condition called chronic
fatigue syndrome.

   The treatment worked because the woman's cancer was one of the few caused by
a virus, institute officials said.

   Researchers, particularly in the United States, have been looking at gene
therapy to fight cancer with mixed results.

   The woman developed the tumor in her lymph glands after a bone-marrow
transplant. The disease is rare and most often strikes patients who undergo
transplants, the researchers said.

   She could not be treated with conventional therapies and her prognosis was
extremely poor, so doctors decided to try the gene therapy, Bordignon said.

   Two weeks ago, doctors injected her with lymphocyte T cells drawn from her
brother. Two genes were inserted into the cells, a so-called "suicide gene" and
a "marker gene," Bordignon explained.

   The lymphocytes attacked and killed the cancer cells. Before they could go on
to attack healthy cells, the "suicide genes" were activated by a drug injected
into the patient and they destroyed the lymphocytes. The "marker genes" allowed
doctors to keep track of the lymphocytes' progress.

   Other gene therapy research in the fight against cancer involves removing
tumor cells, inserting genes that produce disease-fighting proteins and then
putting the cells back into the patients' bodies.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1993


                             1082 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   July 29, 1993, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: THE SEARCH FOR A 'GAY GENE'

COLUMN: COMMENTARY COLUMN

BYLINE: Daniel S. Greenberg

BODY:


   In a mini-drama of science run amok, the gay gene is becoming entrenched as a
laboratory version of the Loch Ness monster: reportedly glimpsed, eternally
elusive, but beyond proof that it isn't there.  OK. Jurassic Park is a better
story. But for a public bedazzled by the accomplishments and hallucinations of
science, the quest for a gene responsible for homosexuality has its attractions.
The gene saga comes free, via an enthusiastic press that mines the professional
science journals for brow-slapping reports from the frontiers of research. For
those who hate a good story to end, uncountable chapters of search tales are yet
to come.  And for the scientists in this line of research, the gay gene is
shaping up as an open draw on the U.S. Treasury.  The latest big news,
reverberating in science circles and excitedly echoed in the popular media, is
that researchers are closing in on a region of the X chromosome where - they
think it possible - resides a gene that may exert "significant influence" on
male sexual orientation.  Please note: they haven't found the gene. With
requisite candor, they concede that they cannot be sure it's there, and even if
it is, they speculate its influence may vary; also other genes may be involved
in sexual orientation. The findings, reported in the prestigious journal
Science, are derived from research on DNA in blood samples drawn from male
homosexuals and their blood relatives. Females are considered likely to be under
different genetic influences. We can be sure that research on that possibility
is limbering up, if not already under way.  Since the science establishment
loudly equates its freedom of choice in the lab with the survival of civilized
society and intellectual freedom, an untutored public tends to meek acceptance
of any nonsense decked out as scientific inquiry. But the quest for the gay gene
raises serious and disturbing questions about the prevalence of good sense in a
scientific enterprise that has been given the sweet combination of taxpayers'
money and operational independence.  When the leaders of science routinely douse
Congress with sorrowful tales of promising, disease-fighting research going
undone for lack of money, the quest for the gay gene does invite wonder. Note
that the lament at the National Institutes of Health, the federal bankroll for
medical science, is that funds are sufficient for about only one out of four
research proposals that are deemed meritorious.  The money shortage translates
into no-go for thousands of scientists proposing research related to cancer and
heart disease, by far the nation's leading killers, as well as for research on
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases and on down a long list of dreadful
ailments.  Given the austere facts of contemporary medical-research economics,
one cannot help wondering about the urgency of identifying the gay gene, if such
exists. Gay activists are deluding themselves if they think that homophobia will
wilt away if homosexuality is shown to be decreed by nature.  Suppose that the
gene exists and is located. What next? We can be certain that a seminar circuit
occupying many assorted experts will thrive on the innumerable ethical questions
that can be raised or invented concerning sexual behavior and genetic destiny.
Will embryos be screened for homosexuality? Will job seekers be screened for
sexual orientation? Will the health industry offer gene therapy for persons
unhappy with their sexual orientation?  The authors of the report in Science
clearly saw that they are playing with social fire, for they stated in their
article: "We believe that it would be fundamentally unethical to use such
information to try to assess or alter a person's current or future orientation,
either heterosexual or homosexual." With rare exceptions, unfortunately, the
history of science and technology shows that what can be done will be done. The
prospects of gene therapy and gene modification have been reported just around
the corner for many years, and with the gobs of money now commanded by gene
researchers, no doubt they will someday arrive.  Before this goes any further,
the managers of science should be required to take time out from pleading
poverty and provide an explanation of why scarce money and talent are pursuing a
gay gene.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1993


                             1083 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     July 27, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 913 words

HEADLINE: Clues to human development float in nature's gene pool

BYLINE: Tim Friend

DATELINE: BAR HARBOR, Maine

BODY:

    One glance at the early embryos of creatures as diverse as fish, birds, cows
and humans reveals that something remarkably similar is going on in the origin
and development of life.

   First illustrated in the early 1800s by embryologist Karl Ernst von Baer,
these very young embryos share nearly identical characteristics of primordial
fish-like tails, gill-slit and large, round eyes. And ever since von Baer's
intriguing drawings, scientists from Charles Darwin to today's geneticists have
been attempting to explain why.

   Now we know that at each level of existence, from the physical
characteristics observed in the young embryos to the proteins that make up their
cells to the genes that make the proteins, there are striking similarities
across species in both appearance and function.

   And what's become clear with the modern scientists' ability to examine life's
genetic code, is that like the basic notes on a musical scale, nature uses the
same genetic "notes" to create the simple compositions, such as yeast, or the
more complex genetic symphonies we call humans.

   "It's absolutely amazing that same set of proteins and genes is used in
everything from a single-celled organism to a human," says Mark Boguski of the
National Center for Biotechnology Information, National Library of Medicine,
Bethesda, Md.

   "Nature has taken these archetypes, an ancestral set of molecules, and
learned to use them over and over again for many functions."

   Today's scientists call this phenomenon of similarity at the genetic level
the conservation of genes. That means that the genes used in nature to make the
wings of a fly are the same or nearly identical to the ones necessary for making
the arms and legs of a human being, says genetic research pioneer Dr. Victor
McKusick, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md.

   "The idea that there are similarities between man and different species goes
back to Darwinism but it wasn't framed in terms of genes because they didn't yet
know about genetics," says McKusick.

   "Now when you look at a sequence of a gene and find a particular part that is
conserved you know that it is a critical part and basic to human development."

   Boguski says that one of the most rapidly growing fields is the comparison of
the genetic coding of one species to that of others. If there is a match in the
coding of a yeast gene with a new gene found in humans, that means the gene
probably has an important job in nature and, when mutated in humans, causes
disease.

   For example, after the gene responsible for 75% of cystic fibrosis cases was
found, its coding was compared with coding in yeast, fruit flies and mice for
which the most genetic information exists, says yeast expert Philip Hieter of
Johns Hopkins.

   Researchers discovered that a segment of the gene was identical to a segment
in yeast that acted as a cellular pump. This finding allowed them to study the
cystic fibrosis gene more closely and they learned it, too, acted as a pump in
the cells of the lung. Its mutation causes the buildup of lung secretions, a
hallmark of the disease. This discovery is leading to possible gene therapy for
cystic fibrosis within a year or two.

   Boguski explains these comparisons have become possible with the development
of computerized gene libraries. Whenever a scientist discovers a new gene, its
sequence or coding is entered into the library.

   "Now we can trace these ancestral genetic relationships that have developed
over three billion years in a matter of seconds on a computer," says Boguski.

   As more and more genes from humans and different species are mapped,
sequenced and logged into computer gene libraries, researchers are rapidly
discovering a wide array of genes that are critical to human development or
cause disease.

   Boguski estimates there are about 1,000 to 3,000 genes that are shared across
species - the primordial "notes" on the evolutionary "scales."

   Some of the most dramatic examples are homeobox genes and RAS genes. Homeobox
genes control anatomic development. Ras genes regulate growth and development.

   To demonstrate the similarity of genes across species, Dr. William McGinnis
and a team of researchers at Yale University in 1990 took a human homeobox gene
and inserted it into the embryo of a fruit fly. They discovered that the human
gene carried out the basic function of development of the fly's head. Other
researchers have created mutations in homeobox genes that caused flies to
develop two sets of wings, grow legs from their head and to create flies with no
head and two rear ends.

   While it may seem strange, the experiments have provided insight into basic
human development and human birth defects.

   RAS genes have been found in yeast, worms, mice and people. Its discovery has
aided the understanding of how tumors develop.

   Says Hieter, "Human genetics, mouse genetics, fly genetics and yeast genetics
are all coming together and these evolutionary comparison are very powerful. The
similarities to me are so awesome it is hard to put into words."

    Stages of development 1 Karl Ernst von Baer found in 1828 that early
vertebrate embryos were virtually indistinguishable, Initially, all vertebrates
have the same type of skin, fish-like tails and gill slits.

    2 As the embryos develop, differences between birds, reptiles, mammals and
fishes begin to appear.

    3 In the latter stages of development, distinguishing features of the
species begin to become apparent.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, USA TODAY, Source: After Romanes, 1901 (Illustration)


                             1084 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     July 27, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 266 words

HEADLINE: Turning a mouse into a mimic

BODY:

    For the past 60 years in a remote but popular vacation spot in Maine, the
Jackson Laboratory has been breeding mice for laboratory research conducted
throughout the world.

   Whenever a scientist discovers a new gene, such as the gene for cystic
fibrosis, researchers at the Jackson Laboratory use the gene to genetically
engineer mice to mimic the human disease. Having such animal models allows
scientists to study symptoms and treatments in a more controlled and predictable
manner.

   Dr. Kenneth Paigen, director of the Jackson Laboratory, announced Monday that
the lab will now become a clearinghouse for new genetically-engineered mice.
Paigen says about $ 1.5 million was awarded to the lab for its new role by the
American Cancer Society, the March of Dimes, the American Heart Association, the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Multiple Sclerosis Society.

   About 50 new genetically engineered mouse models for human diseases have been
developed here in the last few years. One of the most recently engineered mice
carries a human gene called p53, implicated in about half of all human cancers.
Most importantly, the mouse is used to study colon cancer and some forms of
breast cancer.

   The laboratory also is hosting this week its 34th annual Short Course in
Medical and Experimental Mammalian Genetics. The course is unique in that it is
open to students as well as established scientists.

   Highlights include presentations of the male sex gene, the latest progress in
gene therapy and a Wednesday evening seminar on dinosaur DNA hosted by Harvard's
Stephen J. Gould.


                             1085 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                   July 26, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 195 words

HEADLINE: New Instrument Allows Earlier View of Fetus

BODY:


   A new instrument is allowing doctors to view human fetuses so tiny that they
would look like a blur on a traditional ultrasound test.

   The fetoscope can be used as early as 10 weeks into pregnancy to diagnose
abnormalities and obtain a precise picture of the anatomy of the fetus, said its
developer, Dr. Ruben Quintero.

   He has used the technique on about 60 women so far, with an 85 percent
success rate and no side effects except minor cramping in women who chose to
have local, instead of general, anesthesia.

   With ultrasound, the standard way for physicians to look at a fetus to check
for physical defects, many deformities don't show up until 18 weeks or so, said
Quintero, an obstetrician at Wayne State University's Hutzel Hospital in
Detroit.

   The fetoscope, about 1/50th of an inch in diameter, can be inserted into the
woman's abdomen through a needle no larger than those used to draw blood, he
said.

   Currently, the technique is most useful for detecting genetic disorders that
are marked by fetal deformities such as a cleft lip, he said.

   But in the near future, Quintero said, fetoscopy could be used for gene
therapy and fetal surgery.

GRAPHIC: Medical Tribune News Service

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1993


                             1086 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

HEADLINE: Republicanism Can Be Cured!

BYLINE: By Daniel Mendelsohn;  Daniel Mendelsohn is a writer.

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J.

BODY:

   The startling discovery that affiliation with the Republican Party is
genetically determined, announced by scientists in the current issue of the
journal Nurture, threatens to overshadow the announcement by Government
scientists that there might be a gene for homosexuality in men.

   Reports of the gene that codes for political conservatism, discovered after a
long study of quintuplets in Orange County, Calif., has sent shock waves through
the medical, political and golfing communities.

    Psychologists and psychoanalysts have long believed that Republicans'
unnatural and frequently unconstitutional tendencies result from unhealthy
family life -- a remarkably high percentage of Republicans had authoritarian,
domineering fathers and emotionally distant mothers who didn't teach them how to
be kind and gentle. But biologists have long suspected that conservatism is
inherited. "After all," said one author of the Nurture article, "It's quite
common for a Republican to have a brother or sister who is a Republican."

   The finding has been greeted with relief by parents and friends of
Republicans, who have tended to blame themselves for the political views of
otherwise lovable people -- their children, friends and unindicted
co-conspirators.

   One mother, a longtime Democrat, clasped her hands in ecstasy on hearing of
the findings. "I just knew it was genetic," she said, seated beside her two
sons, both avowed Republicans. "I just knew nobody would actually choose that
life style!" When asked what the Republican life style was, she said, "Well, you
can just tell from watching TV, like at the convention in Houston: loud outfits,
big shellacked hairdos, people harassing women reporters -- you know."

   Both sons said they had suspected their Republicanism from an early age but
did not confirm it until they were in college, when they became convinced it
wasn't just a phase they were going through.

   Despite the near-certainty of the medical community about Republicanism's
genetic origins, troubling issues remain. The Nurture article offered no
response to the suggestion that the startlingly high incidence of Republicanism
among siblings could result from the fact that they share not only genes but
also psychological and emotional attitudes, being the products of the same
parents and family dynamics.

   And it remains to be explained why so many avowed Democrats are known to vote
Republican occasionally -- or at least to fantasize about doing so. Polls show
that three out of five adult Democrats admit to having had a Republican
experience. In well-adjusted people, however, this experimentation rarely
outlasts adolescence.

   Surprisingly, some Republican activists hail the findings as a step forward
rather than as an invitation to more conservophobia. They argue that since
Republicans didn't "choose" their unwholesome life style any more than someone
"chooses" to have a ski-jump nose, they shouldn't be denied civil rights to
which normal people are entitled.

   Other Republicans, recalling 19th century scientific studies that "proved"
the mental inferiority of blacks, find the frenzied search for the biological
cause of Republicanism pointless, if not downright sinister.

   But for most real Americans, the discovery opens a window on a brighter
tomorrow. In a few years, gene therapy could eradicate Republicanism altogether.

   If conservatism is not the result of sheer orneriness (as many suspect) but
is something Republicans can't help and probably even don't like, there's no
reason why we shouldn't tolerate Republicans in the military or even high
elected office -- provided they don't flaunt their political beliefs.

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1993


                             1087 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      July 25, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1987 words

HEADLINE: IT'S SO UTTERLY EVIL, CRAFTY -- EVER-CHANGING AND SLITHERING AWAY

BYLINE: By BARBARA CARTON, Boston Globe

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:

    Here, in an unmarked brick building just off Kenmore Square, is a laboratory
where researchers handle HIV, the deadly virus that causes AIDS, so concentrated
that it can be 1,000 times as potent as that found in the blood of AIDS
patients.

   There are no windows. The rooms are kept at a constant negative air pressure,
so that any virus escaping into the air will be immediately filtered out at .22
microns before the air flows into the busy streets.

   The floor of the lab curves into the walls, eliminating any seams where the
virus might hide.

   A small radio is usually kept tuned to sports talk. It cannot be removed --
unless it is decontaminated, then burned to ashes. No janitors enter or exit.
Even notes taken inside have to be faxed out.

   This unnatural world is the biological theater of war in which Dr. Jerome
Groopman, an internationally known AIDS researcher, has assembled his armaments
to do battle against one of the 20th century's great scourges.

   He is one of thousands of AIDS researchers, slaving, like the others, in the
relative anonymity of a scientific netherworld, praying for answers.

   Groopman is 41, but his hair is nearly white. It has been 13 years since he
saw his first AIDS patient, and in the intervening time, he has watched many
die. Anguished patients still call him at home, often several times a night.

   As a doctor, Groopman has the medical tools to ease the diarrhea, night
sweats, swollen glands, fatigue. He can treat the thrush, the purplish-red
lesions, and manage 100 other complications.

   But HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus, is a crafty opponent, cunning and
elusive. Despite years of his -- and others' -- work, it continues to evade
attempts at a vaccine, or a cure. In Groopman's battle against the disease, his
adversary -- lurking in plastic test tubes that contain the thickish yellow
slurry of concentrated HIV -- is still winning.

   "It's horrific," he says simply, of the infectious disease epidemic that
consumes his life.

   "I probably have seen more death than most people outside of those in
Cambodia, or concentration camps, or Nagasaki."

   Groopman has examined his enemy intimately, in detail. Its physical structure
is imprinted on his mind: the fatty membrane studded with protein spikes, the
p24 viral core, the snake of RNA.

   He knows the deepest crevices of the body, where it hides, silently, in the
dark, often for years . . . waiting . . . waiting. He understands that it hunts
like a smart bomb, wired with 9,213 bits of genetic information, programmed to
destroy.

   But knowledge about his labile, ever-changing enemy doesn't, so far, allow
him to overpower it.

   "There is a tremendous spectrum of strains," he says, "and a tremendous
capacity to mutate and slither away."

   Over the years, he has built a bigger and bigger research laboratory, aimed
at stalking the virus and unraveling its vicious mysteries.

   But he also has a human laboratory, in which patients' wracked bodies are the
vials and their blood the experimental solution. At any given time, he may have
a dozen clinical studies under way, aimed at testing new treatments for
complications of AIDS, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, or cancer of the lymph nodes,
as well as advanced AIDS and early HIV infection.

   He also knows the epidemic continues to gallop along.

   The World Health Organization is reporting that 14 million people have been
infected with the virus since the start of the epidemic, most through
heterosexual intercourse. By the year 2000, the total number worldwide is
expected to rise to a staggering 40 million, including growing numbers of women
and children.

   More than 2 million infected adults have gone on to the final stage of the
disease, AIDS, and most of them are dead. In some countries, as many as 80
percent of hospital beds are occupied by AIDS patients, and there is a growing
debate over how to manage, and pay for, their care.

   "This," says Groopman, "is a race against time."

   Groopman -- who is chief of hematology/oncology at Deaconess Hospital and the
Recanati associate professor at Harvard Medical School -- does not remember the
name of his first AIDS patient.

   There have been so many.

   Maybe it was Michael?

   It was 1980.

   He was blond, Groopman remembers, a homeless gay teen-ager living on the
streets, and he suffered from a constellation of perplexing symptoms.

   For starters, he had a rare pneumonia he shouldn't have had -- pneumocystis
carinii, generally seen only in cancer patients, or the severely malnourished,
or in those taking immune-suppressant drugs for, say, an organ transplant.

   "There was a lot of discussion and questioning and hypothesis," Groopman
recalls. Of course, no one called it AIDS at the time.

   This virus killed so exquisitely.

   It ravaged the heart, the brain, the skin, the liver, the lungs.

   It was bloodthirsty, parasitic, driven to destroy tissue and organs in its
path.

   It could be slowed.

   But it could not be stopped.

   Since then, Groopman has been working to halt AIDS' inexorable march.

   Groopman spends much of his time here, at his laboratory headquarters, where
53 researchers work amid the constant whoosh of overhead air being carefully
filtered. His is not one of the nation's largest research machines, but it is
substantial.

   Here is his $ 100,000 automated gene sequencer, which can map out a new gene
in three weeks instead of the usual year or two.

   And behind double-locked doors is the special containment area, where
researchers work with the concentrated HIV.

   All it takes is one exposure . . .

   Everything that touches the virus -- the tissue plates, the plasticware, the
gloves -- is decontaminated in a steam autoclave at 260 degrees, then
incinerated.

   The worst incident happened several years ago. A medical student tried to
stuff too many pipettes into a container, snapping one off about half an inch
from the live virus, slashing her finger in the process.

   Right away -- plunge the finger in 70 percent alcohol for 10 minutes.

   Hurry.

   Bleed it.

   Squeeze the virus out.

   She was OK . . . that time.

   On this recent morning, Groopman has come to the lab for an update from his
troops.

   As is true for any army, they are trained to different tactical capabilities.

   You have the gene jocks and the membrane guys. Each is assigned to tackle the
virus from a different angle: genetic, developmental, structural, cellular.

   They are predominantly young and foreign -- from Israel, Pakistan, Italy,
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Korea, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Greece, India, China,
Britain, Japan. In the distinct minority are Americans, about one-fifth of the
laboratory's fighting force.

   It's easy, working at the bench, to shut out everything except that single
cell, the cold of the microscope pressing against the eye socket as your
white-lit circle of vision comes into focus.

   There it is.

   You can't see the virus.

   But you can see the infected cells.

   They look so beautiful, so translucent -- a cluster of the tiniest pearls.
Malevolently beautiful.

   AIDS is about as bad as it gets.

   There are so many different ideas about how the virus causes AIDS that one
British researcher has likened the confusion to a group of blind men who
encounter an elephant and attempt to identify it by pressing and poking at
various body parts.

   It is so crafty. So utterly evil.

   Newspapers talk of "cures," but Groopman knows that up to now there have been
no cures for viral diseases.

   "In order to have a cure in the classic sense," he says, "you'd have to
figure out how to purge this virus out of the brain, the bone marrow, the
spleen, everything. Everything. And that is not, right now, medically
approachable."

   He sighs.

   Preventative vaccines against the virus are also very difficult. "People
would want a vaccine that's significantly protective," he says, "and I don't see
it, probably, even at the 30 percent level. I don't think it's very likely."

   In the end, the best odds are on prevention to block transmission, and on a
chronic treatment that would manage the disease the way insulin manages
diabetes.

   Gene therapy might control the virus by rendering cells resistant to it.
"That could start to amount to something within two years," Groopman says. "We
are mobilizing a tremendous amount of technology to try to achieve that."

   Groopman is also optimistic that the next five years will bring new
medications to ease patients' suffering and extend their lives by up to 15
years.

   As he speaks, the deaths climb.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1993


                             1088 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     July 25, 1993, Sunday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 357 words

HEADLINE: Cats with genetic illness help to protect children

BYLINE: JOSEPH B. VERRENGIA; Scripps Howard News Service

DATELINE: FORT COLLINS, Colo.

BODY:

   FORT COLLINS, Colo. -- An everyday gray and white tabby cat
that researchers discovered catching mice in an upstate New York
barn is the ""breeding queen'' for a unique colony of research
kittens that develop rare and devastating metabolism diseases.

   ""Jewels,'' who lives in a ""kitty condo'' at a Colorado
State University research center, is estimated to be about 9 years
old.  She and scores of her offspring carry the genetic flaws for a
group of disorders that leave the body unable to digest fats and
carbohydrates.

   In humans, extreme cases of these illnesses, including forms
of Nieman-Pick disease and mucopolysaccharidoses, kill a small
number of infants and children every year as their parents and
physician watch helplessly.

   MPS patients lose enzyme function following digestion.

   Nieman-Pick patients can't process cholesterol.

   With only a few very experimental treatments available, these
unprocessed substances accumulate in cells of the central nervous
system, vital organs and glands to intolerably toxic levels.

   The cells bloat and fail, resulting in progressive physical
deformities and tremors and the erosion of patients' motor skills.

   Soon the children also lose their budding speech and
problem-solving abilities.  Within a year or two they are dead.

   CSU pathologists don't have to inoculate the cats with these
diseases; the felines naturally develop them.

   Researchers are examining the cats' metabolisms, as well as
conducting an arduous search for the flaws in genes that trigger
the biochemical failure that allows what should be the body's
nutrients to build up to toxic levels.

   In separate studies, they are testing special diets,
bone-marrow transplants and gene therapies that would wipe out the
misfiring cell functions and medically reset the balance in the
body's energy system.

   Until researchers at Cornell University discovered the barn
cat in the late 1980s and shipped her to CSU, pathologists had no
sophisticated mammal model and medical progress languished, they
said.

   In humans, as many as one person in 200 is a carrier for
these metabolic diseases.


LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1993


                             1089 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            July 21, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 1190 words

HEADLINE: TINY TOOL OPENS NEW WORLDS

BYLINE: GINA KOLATA, New York Times News Service <

BODY:

   Wednesday, July 21, 1993 TINY TOOL OPENS NEW WORLDS

   Summary

   Tiny tool opens new worlds in diagnosis, treatment of ailments in embryos
and fetuses

   The human embryo is just six weeks old, about a half-inch long and shaped
like a comma, its arms and legs still blunt buds.

   An embryo as early as this one would show as just a blur using ultrasound.
But now, Dr. Ruben Quintero, an obstetrician at Wayne State University's  Hutzel
Hospital in Detroit, inserts a tiny viewing scope into the woman's  abdomen
through a hollow needle.

   With the device he developed, Quintero examines the embryo as closely as if
he had opened the woman's womb.

   ``It was impressive,'' says Quintero, describing the experience of seeing a
living 6-week embryo, an exploration into previously inaccessible territory.

   He and other fetal-medicine experts expect that embryofetoscopy -- or
``transabdominal thin-gauge embryofetoscopy,'' as the method is formally  called
-- is poised to become an invaluable tool in diagnosing abnormalities  of
embryos and fetuses early in pregnancy and in treating or even doing  surgery on
them.

   The embryo stage of development lasts up to about 10 weeks, while the fetal
stage follows until birth.

   ``This is a new technique that fills in a gap in prenatal diagnosis,''
Quintero said. ``There is no other way that you detect defects in the embryo  or
fetus at an early stage. And since there are many diseases that manifest
themselves externally, this will enable us to make diagnoses that we've never
been able to do before.''

   Dr. E. Albert Reece, chairman of the department of obstetrics, gynecology
and reproductive medicine at the Temple University School of Medicine, said  the
new technique ``opens a whole new world, a whole new frontier that we  never had
before.''

   ``It's just unbelievable,'' Reece said. ``You can make a diagnosis much  more
rapidly early in pregnancy and with a high degree of confidence.''

   So far, the method is being used just by Quintero and Reece in the United
States and by Dr. Yves Dumez of Port Royal Hospital in Paris. But many others
are looking on with interest, planning to start using embryofetoscopy
themselves.

   The idea of embryofetoscopy is not new, Reece said. Since the 1970s,  doctors
have been able to view the second- or third-trimester fetus by  inserting a
comparatively huge needle with a viewing device through a woman's  abdomen and
into the amniotic sac. But this old method was risky, Reece said.  It was used,
for example, to take fetal blood samples when a fetus was at risk of an
inherited anemia or when doctors felt they could save a fetus' life by  doing a
blood transfusion.

   The viewing scopes were borrowed from rheumatology, where they were used in
operations on the joints of adults. Because of the scopes' relatively large
size, that meant the procedure itself could be done only when the pregnancy  was
well enough advanced to be able to withstand the insult of such a large  device
making a hole in the amniotic membrane. And even then, the method often caused
miscarriages by rupturing the membrane.

   The new scope was initially designed for use in cardiology, where it is  used
to see inside blood vessels. The scopes are as large as 0.7 millimeters  in
diameter -- ``thinner than a thin strand of spaghetti,'' Quintero said --  and
the hollow needles that carry them into the womb are 18-gauge needles,  slightly
larger than needles used to draw blood.

   Initially, the new scope was inserted through the vagina and into a small
pocket that forms early in pregnancy between the inner and outer fetal
membranes. The researchers then tried the technique in the abdomen, reasoning
that that was less risky to the pregnancy. With the vaginal route, Reece
explained, the scope must pass through an area that contains bacteria and is
very difficult to disinfect.

   Reece said that he had done about a dozen abdominal embryofetoscopies;
Quintero said that he had done about 60. Both have used the method to diagnose
abnormalities during the first trimester of pregnancy, when ultrasound would
have been uninformative or inconclusive. In most cases, the embryos and  fetuses
were at high risk of genetic defects, often because the women had  already had
pregnancies complicated by particular disorders. Since the genes  for the
disorders have not been isolated, the usual methods of prenatal  diagnosis --
chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis -- could not detect  the
abnormalities.

   Quintero told of one diagnosis he had made. The woman had previously had a
child with Meckel-Gruber syndrome. Infants born with this condition have an
encephalocele -- a fluid-filled bulge behind the head -- as well as an extra
finger, and kidneys and lungs that cannot function. The babies die within
minutes of birth.

   In the woman's previous pregnancy, the disorder was diagnosed by ultrasound
at 19 weeks, the earliest that the deformities show up clearly on an  ultrasound
scan. When the woman became pregnant again, she knew she had a 25  percent
chance of having another child with the disorder. An ultrasound at 11  weeks
showed only that the yolk sac was a little swollen, Quintero said. But  with
embryofetoscopy, the doctors could see the fluid-filled bulge and the  extra
finger.

   The disorder ``was very, very easy to diagnose,'' he said. In fact, he
added, ``we could have done it easily at nine weeks.'' The woman chose not to
continue with her pregnancy.

   Dr. Mark Evans, professor of obstetrics at Wayne State, said he and  Quintero
had examined an eight-week embryo whose heart had stopped beating.  With the
scope, the doctors found that it had had a neural-tube defect, a  malformation
of the spinal cord. This meant that the woman was at  greater-than-normal risk
of having a baby with a neural-tube defect if she  became pregnant again. But
without the scope, no one would have known.

   ``This would never have been picked up otherwise,'' Evans said.

   Quintero said he had also been able to reassure some women that their
embryos or fetuses were perfectly normal, even though there might have been
suspicious shadows on ultrasound or a frightening genetic history.

   ``This is a tremendous difference from a year ago, when we could not offer
women anything,'' to make diagnoses so early, Quintero said.

   The next step will be to use embryofetoscopy to deliver treatment, medical
experts said. They could, for example, cut amniotic bands, which are
constrictions of the amniotic membrane that deform fetuses. Or, in the future,
they may be able to deliver gene therapy.

   Dr. Eugene Pergament, director of reproductive genetics at Northwestern
University in Chicago, said his group is trying to begin an embryofetoscopy
program.

   ``This kind of effort has its own momentum,'' he said. The technology has
become so good that ``if the fetus had a sign on it, you could read the
letters,'' he said. ``The optics are just unbelievable.''

   Fetal surgery and fetal therapy in the first trimester is now definitely on
the horizon, Pergament said. For now, he added, ``it's a bit of who's going to
be the first one to do it.''

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo

   Graphic  TINY CAMERA ON THE EARLY FETUS

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1090 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 1993 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                          July 20, 1993, Metro Edition

SECTION: Marketplace; Tony Carideo; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 1434 words

HEADLINE: 'U' scientists are testing an artificial liver; rights are licensed to
Cellex

BYLINE: Tony Carideo; Staff Writer

BODY:

    Now this could be big.

    A group of University of Minnesota scientists is in the final stage of
animal testing of an artificial liver, a device that, if it works on humans,
could be a major breakthrough in medical therapy.

    The device appears to represent a significant improvement over an artificial
liver that has been used on three patients by doctors at Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center in Los Angeles, as well as some other technologies under development.

    The university's team, headed by physician and surgeon Frank Cerra, and
Wei-Shou Hu, an associate professor of chemical engineering, has licensed rights
to develop and market the device to Cellex Biosciences Inc., Coon Rapids.

    Cellex plans to announce today that it is spinning off the venture as a
privately held subsidiary called Regenerex, and that it has launched an effort
to raise $ 3 million to $ 4 million in private financing.

    Richard Sakowicz, Cellex's president and chief operating officer, said the
financing would fund the first stage of a two-part animal study that will
precede human testing. Cerra said he hoped to be ready for the first human
trials in a year.

    Cellex and the university aren't the only organizations in the race to
produce an artificial liver.  Advanced Tissue Sciences Inc., Genetic Therapy
Inc., Somatix Therapy Corp., Alin Foundation Clinic, W.R. Grace & Co. and
Systemix Inc. are working on research projects. Vanderbilt, Rutgers, Baylor and
Harvard also are pursuing projects.

    Some of them are trying to regenerate the liver, while others are pursuing
the route taken by Cedars-Sinai and Cellex and the university. That process
involves marrying cell culturing techniques with hollow-fiber technologies.

    "With the interdisciplinary approach we've taken at the university, we have
been able to catch up with the other groups working on this and also to
demonstrate higher level liver functions in animals," said Bruce Amiot, research
and development director for Cellex's artificial liver project. "None of the
groups so far has published similar data."

    The prize is a big one.  The human liver removes toxins from the blood, aids
digestion and creates clotting factors to stop bleeding. When the liver fails,
toxins accumulate, causing brain swelling, coma and death.

    A safe and effective artificial liver could revolutionize the treatment of a
condition that kills roughly 30,000 people a year in the United States. And it
would represent a major new business for the company that brings it to market.

    Sakowicz, who said Cellex will retain an equity stake in the new company,
estimated that the U.S. market for the $ 50,000 machine that operates the
artificial liver would be $ 300 million to $ 500 million a year.

    "The quest for an artificial liver has lasted 30 years," said Cerra, who has
specialized in conditions associated with liver failure.  "Researchers have
tried linking humans to baboons, humans to humans, using extraction resins and
running blood over charcoal. Nothing has worked."

    Doctors at Cedars-Sinai announced last May that they had kept a woman alive
for 14 hours using an artificial liver and have since used the device on two
others.  However, Amiot said that the Cedars machine is considerably more
complex than the product under development at the university, because it
involves separating a person's blood.

    Cerra said he envisions the device as a "bridge" technology, meant to help
patients with a failing liver who simply need time to allow the organ to mend
itself.

    It would also help patients who are waiting for a liver transplant, Cerra
said. "At any one time there are 10,000 patients waiting for a liver
transplant," he added.

    Cerra and Hu began developing the technology about three years ago. The
university's device uses a cylinder of hollow-fiber membranes filled with
cultured liver cells from laboratory rats, which appear to perform the same
functions as human liver cells.  The artificial liver, used externally, is
employed in much the same way as a kidney dialysis machine.

    So far they have tested a prototype of the device on groups of rabbits and
dogs, which have been kept alive without their own livers.


   Listening to business

    The Minnesota Department of Revenue just reached a major compromise on one
of those technical - but important - tax issues that have cost Minnesota
businesses plenty over the past few years. To its credit, the department has
leaned in favor of business.

    The issue involves the purchase of maintenance agreements on custom software
- the kind of stuff that runs the computer systems of hundreds of Minnesota
businesses, large and small.

    In earlier proposed sales tax rules on software purchases, the state said
fees associated with these maintenance contracts - which include service calls
and "bug fixes" and may include updated software packages and enhancements -
were fully taxable.

    For bigger companies, those taxes would have run well into six figures.

    There's no question that the issue caught the attention of Minnesota
businesses.  After the department issued its proposed rules late last year, 84
companies asked for a hearing.

    When the issue came before Administrative Law Judge Howard Kaibel Jr., 60
people showed up and the testimony lasted more than five hours. The list of
companies expressing concern read like a Who's Who of Minnesota businesses - 3M,
Dayton Hudson Corp., Honeywell, General Mills, Northern States Power, Cray
Research, Pillsbury, First Bank System, Cargill and United HealthCare Corp., to
name a few.

    In negotiations after the hearing, the state agreed to tax only 20 percent
of the value of maintenance agreements, and to exempt 80 percent.

    "This is a very clear area where the law has not kept up with the
technology," said Dale Busacker, a state tax expert at the accounting firm of
Ernst & Young, which led the effort to modify the state's position. "With this
compromise the Revenue Department has done the right thing. In working with
business on this, the state has tried to understand business in resolving a
difficult question."


   Shelly's going public

    Sheldon Jacobs, who owns Shelly's Woodroast, will soon be following in the
footsteps of his older brother, Minneapolis financier Irwin Jacobs. He plans to
sell stock in his St. Louis Park-based restaurant and patented wood-roasting
cooking system.

    The younger Jacobs' wood-burning oven is his restaurant's trademark. He has
also vigorously defended that trademark and the term "wood roasted" in court.

    Jacobs recently entered into an agreement with Grand Casinos Inc. to offer
selected menu items at its new casino in Gulfport, Miss. He's also taken
delivery on four other ovens - which cost $ 15,000 to $ 25,000 each - which
he'll try to lease to smaller restaurants.

    The computer-controlled slow-roasting ovens are Jacobs' modern method of
replicating the turn-of-the-century cooking technique featured in his
"Northwoods" lodge restaurants.

    Jacobs last week began meetings with investment bankers in an effort to put
together a $ 5 million initial public offering to build four Shelly's Woodroast
restaurants in the next two years.

    Jacobs said he plans to build one more unit in the Twin Cities, and that
other markets on his list include St. Louis, Chicago, Washington, D.C, and San
Francisco.

    "I'd like to drop a lodge right in the middle of Beverly Hills," he said.
On second thought, the Los Angeles upscale suburb of Brentwood might be a better
place.

    On the legal front, Jacobs has sued Restaurants Unlimited, of Seattle, which
owns Palomino Euro-Metro Bistro and Kincaid's Steak Chop & Fish House in
Minneapolis and Bloomington, respectively, over the use of the term "wood
roasted." Jacobs so far has won an injunction against the chain and settled a
second lawsuit with Kenny Rogers Roasters Wood Roasted Chicken, which has
changed its name to Kenny Rogers Roasters Chicken Roasted Over Wood (say that in
a single breath).


   People we know

    Larry Dorn, a broker-dealer from Fergus Falls, Minn., who recently was named
one of this year's top 10 brokers by Registered Representative magazine, will be
off to the Big Apple on occasion as the newest trustee of the Securities
Industry Association.

    Dorn, whose firm manages about $ 65 million in mostly tax-free municipal
bonds, will be hobnobbing with heavyweights from all the big Wall Street firms.
Congratulations.


LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1993


                             1091 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 16, 1993, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: STUDY STRONGLY LINKS GENETICS, HOMOSEXUALITY

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Federal researchers say they have uncovered the strongest evidence yet that
homosexuality is genetic in origin.

   Studies in 40 families in which two brothers are gay suggest that much male
homosexuality may have its roots in a gene located in a small region of the X
chromosome, the sex-linked chromosome that men inherit from their mothers,
according to a report published today in the journal Science.

   The researchers, led by molecular geneticist Dean H. Hamer of the National
Cancer Institute, are racing to identify the specific gene from among the 100 or
more genes located in that region.

   Although the isolation of the gene is likely to lead to the first molecular
understanding of how homosexuality develops, the discovery may have a broad
impact in the study of general behavior.

   "This is the first time that we have a window on human behavior and the genes
that affect it," said Dr. Elliot Gershon, chief of the clinical neurogenetics
branch at the National Institute of Mental Health. "It's a major breakthrough in
behavioral genetics. . . . (No other known genes) are tied to behavior in a
normally functioning brain."

   "The idea that behavioral traits can be traced to a specific gene is
something that has only been theoretical up to this point," said sociologist
Pepper Schwartz of the University of Washington. "The whole nature of what we
understand to be human behavior will have to be re-evaluated" to understand the
genetic links, she said.

   But Gershon and others, including Hamer, caution that the study needs to be
replicated for credibility. In recent years, other researchers have reported
similar genetic links to such mental disorders as schizophrenia and manic
depression, only to have the link disappear when more data was compiled or the
original data was reanalyzed.

   "There is almost no finding that would be convincing by itself in this
field," Gershon said. Nonetheless, "I think it will be replicated."

   At least three previous studies have linked homosexuality to physiological
and genetic differences. Dr. Simon LeVay, then of the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, reported in 1991 that he found subtle structural differences between the
brains of gay and straight males.

   Two other studies of twins, one in males and one in females, have also shown
a genetic link to homosexuality but those findings were less direct. In both
cases, the researchers found that if one member of a pair of identical twins is
homosexual, the second member is also likely to be gay.

   Such studies suggest that there is a gene for homosexuality but give no
indication where it may be found among the estimated 100,000 genes that make up
the human genome.

   "We knew there was a genetic influence somewhere, but we didn't know where,"
said Dr. Richard C. Pillard, a psychiatrist at Boston University and a co-author
of the two studies of twins. "Now Hamer has come along and found an area on the
X chromosome where he thinks there is an actual gene. His was the next logical
step."

   Hamer and his colleagues got their first hint about where to look for the
gene from their interviews with gay males at AIDS clinics at the National
Institutes of Health and elsewhere in the Washington area.

   Although they occasionally observed gay fathers and sons in the same family,
most familial links were to relatives on the gay male's maternal side of the
family. They found that the incidence of homosexuality among maternal uncles and
sons of maternal aunts was four times that of the general population.

   This type of inheritance through the mother led them to look at the X
chromosome, which is contributed to children only by the mother. Several
well-known traits, such as color blindness and male-pattern baldness, are
carried by the X chromosome, as are diseases such as Duchenne's muscular
dystrophy, hemophilia and fragile X syndrome, the leading cause of mental
retardation.

   The team recruited 40 pairs of brothers who are homosexual and studied
genetic markers on their X chromosomes. In this technique, which is widely used
for tracking the cause of genetic diseases, the researchers obtained blood from
the subjects and examined their X chromosomes. They looked for specific genetic
markers that are transmitted along with the trait in question -- in this case,
homosexuality -- and that were not present in heterosexual males in the
families.

   In 33 of the 40 pairs, they found markers in a small region of the X
chromosome, indicating that the proposed gene is located in that region.

   Hamer was not disappointed that the markers were not found in all the
families. "Given the intricacies of human behavior, it is not surprising that a
single genetic (region) fails to account for all the variation seen in the study
group," he said. "What is remarkable is that we can account for at least some of
the inherited variability with a fair degree of statistical confidence."

   Once the gene is located, researchers have many crucial questions that must
be answered: What does the gene do? How does the gene in homosexual men differ
from that in heterosexuals? Does the gene invariably lead to homosexuality or
are there heterosexual males who carry it? What is the gene's effect in women,
particularly those who have a copy of it on each of their X chromosomes?

   The answers to those questions, experts agree, will provide valuable insights
into the general mechanisms by which genes influence behavior.

   Meanwhile, gay and lesbian groups were generally happy about the new report.
"The NIH study . . . shows that homosexuality is a naturally occurring and
common variation among humans -- a fact that gay and lesbian people have known
all along," said Peri Jude Radecic of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.

   But Mitzi Henderson, president of Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays,
cautioned that the results could be a "two-edged sword." She and others fear
that the religious right will campaign for gene therapy or similar measures to
"cure" gay people of their "abnormal behavior."

   "Studies of human sexuality are not conducted in political and social
vacuums," Radecic said. "The results must therefore be used in the most ethical
ways, and precautions must be taken to ensure that the studies are not used
against any individuals or groups."

   The discovery could also have a major impact on laws prohibiting same-sex
sexual contact, which is prohibited in 40 states, said Dr. Richard Green, a UCLA
psychiatrist who is a lawyer. One of the key constitutional limitations on such
discrimination, he said, is that it cannot be based on immutable traits, such as
skin color.

   The discovery that homosexuality is linked to a specific gene and thus
immutable could lead to the courts overturning those laws, as well as
eliminating housing and job discrimination based on sexual orientation, he said.


                             1092 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1409 words

HEADLINE: Report Suggests Homosexuality Is Linked to Genes

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   Ushering the politically explosive study of the origins of sexual orientation
into a new and perhaps more scientifically rigorous phase, researchers report
that they have linked male homosexuality to a small region of one human
chromosome.

   The results have yet to be confirmed by other laboratories, and the
chromosomal region implicated, if it holds up under further scrutiny, is almost
surely just a single chapter in the intricate story of sexual orientation and
behavior. Nevertheless, scientists said the work suggests that one or several
genes located on the bottom half of the sausage-shaped X chromosome may play a
role in predisposing some men toward homosexuality. (The researchers have begun
a similar study looking at the chromosomes of lesbians.)

    The findings, which appear today in the journal Science, indicate that
sexual orientation often is at least partly inborn, rather than being solely a
matter of choice. But researchers warn against overinterpreting the work, or in
taking it to mean anything as simplistic as that the "gay gene" had been found.

   The researchers emphasized that they do not yet have a gene isolated, but
merely know the rough location of where the gene or genes may sit amid the vast
welter of human DNA. Until they have the gene proper, scientists said they had
no way of knowing how it contributes to sexual orientation, how many people
carry it, or how often carriers are likely to become gay as a result of bearing
the gene.

   And even when they do have this gene on the X chromosome pinpointed,
scientists said they will continue to search for other genes on other
chromosomes that may be involved in sexual orientation.

   "Sexual orientation is too complex to be determined by a single gene," said
Dr. Dean H. Hamer of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., the lead
author on the new report. "The main value of this work is that it opens a window
into understanding how genes, the brain and the environment interact to mold
human behavior."

   In the new work, the scientists studied the genetic material from 40 pairs of
gay brothers and found that in 33 of the pairs, the brothers had identical
pieces of the end tip of the X chromosome. Under ordinary circumstances ruled by
chance alone, only half of the pairs should have shared that chromosomal
neighborhood in common, a region designated Xq28. The odds of Dr. Hamer's
results turning up randomly are less than half a percent, indicating that the
chromosomal tip likely harbors a genetic sequence linked to the onset of the
brothers' homosexuality.

Passed Through Maternal Line

    In men, the X chromosome pairs with the Y chromosome to form the so-called
sex chromosomes, the final set of the 23 pairs of chromosomes found in all cells
of the human body. A man's X chromosome is always inherited from the mother, who
bestows on her son a reshuffled version of one of her two copies of the X
chromosome. The latest results indicate that the newly reported genetic factor
is passed through the maternal line, a curious twist given that in the past
psychiatry has held women at least partly responsible for fostering their sons'
homosexuality.

   The gene could work by directly influencing sexual proclivity, perhaps by
shaping parts of the brain that orchestrate sexual behavior. Or it might affect
temperament in a way that predisposes a boy toward homosexuality. At the moment,
researchers said, all scenarios are mere speculation.

   Despite the cautionary notes, the latest study is likely to add fuel to the
debate over gay rights in the military and civilian realms.

   If homosexuality is shown to be largely inborn, a number of legal experts
say, then policies that in any way discriminate against homosexuals are likely
to be shot down in the courts.

   "We think this study is very important," said Gregory J. King, a spokesman
for the Human Rights Campaign Fund in Washington, the largest national lesbian
and gay lobbying group. "Fundamentally it increases our understanding of the
origins of sexual orientation, and at the same time we believe it will help
increase public support for lesbian and gay rights."

   Not all gay rights leaders have a sanguine view of the work. Some denounce it
as yet another attempt to draw a reductionist and implacable line between
homosexuality and heterosexuality, while others see in it the dangers of
attempts to "fix" homosexuality, perhaps through gene therapy.

   "I don't think it's an interesting study," said Darrell Yates Rist,
co-founder of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation. "Intellectually,
what do we gain by finding out there's a homosexual gene? Nothing, except an
attempt to identify those people who have it and then open them up to all sorts
of experimentation to change them."

   The study appears in the same journal that two years ago unleashed a furious
debate when it published a report asserting to have found an anatomical
difference between the brains of gay and straight men. Other recent reports have
also weighed in on the possible biological basis of homosexuality in both men
and women, and all have been subjected to volleys of scientific and political
attack.

   Other attempts to make a genetic link to behavior, like alcoholism, manic
depression and schizophrenia, have thus far all been disappointing. By contrast,
today's study is considered to be impressive science even by many who denounced
the previous studies.

'Merits Being Followed Up'

    "It's a good piece of work," said Dr. Anne Fausto-Sterling of Brown
University, a geneticist who has been one of the most outspoken critics of the
genetic studies of human behavior. "Hamer is appropriately cautious about the
meanings you can glean from it, and he admits that there may be more than one
path to the endpoint of homosexuality."

   Dr. Eric Lander of the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in
Cambridge, Mass., said, "From a geneticist's point of view, if you strip away
the nonscientific considerations, it's an interesting finding that merits being
followed up in a larger sample."

   Dr. Simon LeVay, chairman of the Institute of Gay and Lesbian Studies in West
Hollywood, Calif., who did the 1991 study comparing gay and heterosexual brains,
was considerably more ecstatic in his appraisal of the latest report.

   "For so long people have been thinking there is some genetic element for
sexual orientation and this is by far and away the most direct evidence there
has been," Dr. LeVay said. "It's the most important scientific finding ever made
in sexual orientation."

   In the latest experiments, the researchers began by taking the family
histories of 114 men who identified themselves as homosexual. Much to their
surprise, the researchers discovered a higher than expected number of gay men
among the men's maternal uncles and male cousins who were the sons of their
mothers' sisters. The ratio was far higher than for men in the general
population, suggesting a gene or genes that is passed through the maternal line
and thus through the X chromosome.

   The scientists then focused on gay brothers, on the assumption that if two
boys in a family are homosexual, they were more likely to be so for genetic
reasons than were those homosexual men without gay brothers. Using a well-known
genetic technique called linkage mapping, they scrutinized the X chromosome in
the brothers and other relatives by the application of DNA markers, tiny bits of
genetic material that can distinguish between chromosomes from different people.
The researchers found that more than three-quarters of the brothers had
inherited identical DNA markers on the Xq28 region of the chromosome.

   "I was surprised at how easy this was to detect," Dr. Hamer said. "Part of
that ease was because we were working with the X chromosome," the most
extensively studied chromosome in the human genetic blueprint. So far the study
has been limited to men who said they were gay, eliminating the ambiguity that
would come from considering the genes of men who called themselves heterosexual.

   Nonetheless, the region is about four million bases, or DNA building blocks
long, and hence holds hundreds of genes, meaning the scientists have much work
ahead of them to sort out which gene or genes is relevant. The researchers are
also trying to perform a similar linkage study on lesbian sisters, but so far
they have not managed to find a chromosomal region that is consistently passed
along in families.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Dean H. Hamer of the National Cancer Institute, who is the
lead author of a new report linking male homosexuality to a small region of a
chromosome. (Marty Katz for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1993


                             1093 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                             July 13, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Section A; Page 18

LENGTH: 1105 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS TO THE EDITOR Protest shouldn't interfere with proud tradition
of road race

BODY:

   I am writing in response to a gay-rights activist's statement published in a
news article about the Peachtree Road Race. Fuming about the runners'
indifference to her cause, she was quoted as saying, "I just can't believe that
these people who feel that they're so special don't care about anyone else."

   As one of the 45,000 runners in the Peachtree, I can say that on race day I
was slightly apprehensive of how the announced protests would affect the
runners, spectators and thousands of wonderful volunteers from the Atlanta Track
Club. Personally, I have put in many hours of training, which, at times, has
been a struggle. And there are 44,999 other stories.

   We appreciate the spectators who got up early to cheer everyone on, the
volunteers who got little if any sleep the night before, not to mention during
months of preparation and effort to make sure that things go smoothly. It's a
day to celebrate the coming together of all the preparations as well as
"personal" victories. And that gay-rights activist spits in the collective face
of everyone involved in the Peachtree Road Race with her statement.

   Why does she feel that she is so special that an event such as the Peachtree
Road Race should drop all that it has stood for for the past 24 years and cater
to her political protest? What exactly did she expect?

   STEPHANI J. GUILE, Norcross

   Not in our neighborhood

   This weekend, the stadium-impacted communities have added a new twist to the
business of Olympic development - it's called Payneville. This newly erected
tent city is a clear indication that these communities are no longer willing to
conform to politics as usual.

   The neighborhoods have sent a message to their leaders that if they won't
take the appropriate measures to meet our demands, then we will. The message is
clear: We want our neighborhoods back, and we won't be bought out with a few hot
dogs and some free soda pop.

   We are not asking for favors. We are demanding justice.

   PHILIP J. D'AMICO, Atlanta

   Experts aplenty

   Remember the killer tree theory? Industry and automobiles are not causing air
pollution, Ronald Reagan said. It's tree pollen. He got this from John McKetta,
an elderly engineer who for years worked closely with Texas oil companies.

   In a recent column on pesticides, Joseph Perkins suggests that "natural" food
is actually more dangerous than food exposed to man-made chemicals because
organically grown plants produce their own cancer- causing pesticides to ward
off insects. This theory comes from Bruce Ames, a chemist with the American
Council on Science and Health, an impressive-sounding organization that is
actually a front for the chemical industry.

   One can find theories and individuals with great-sounding credentials to
support almost any position. To judge their worth, one should ask who is paying
for them.

   JOAN O. KING, Sautee

   Saving the forests

   Regarding the recent editorial titled "Clinton owl plan laudable":

   President Clinton has suggested a painful proposal, to both loggers and
environmentalists, that tries to address the problem. But as you say, it cannot
be hailed as a "bold new approach to a problem." Now, instead of running out of
public timber in 10 years, we will run out in 40 years.

   Both the original depletion of these ancient forests and the new proposal
don't change the fact that logging these natural resources must someday end.
Therefore, isn't it more responsible to try to preserve these unique and
beautiful places for our children and our grandchildren?

   RENE VOSS

   ReneVoss is national forest issues leader for the Sierra Club's Georgia
chapter.

   Well-represented

   I was in Washington, D.C., recently observing our government in action and
speaking to my representatives about legislation that I believed was important.
I am not a paid lobbyist, but a private citizen who paid my own expenses for
this opportunity.

   I was generally pleased with the response of my representative, John Lewis,
and the aides of our senators, but I was most pleased by my meeting with Cynthia
McKinney, representative of the 11th District.

   Ms. McKinney granted my request for a meeting, knowing that I did not live in
her district, because she was interested in the same legislation. I found her to
be gracious, informed and articulate. Her grasp of international affairs and
their effect on the United States was amazing for a first-term member.

   I came away from that meeting feeling very proud that Georgia has a woman of
her caliber in the House.

   MARY R. YOUNG, Atlanta

   Two solutions in one

   Here's an idea that might help solve a couple of our national problems.
President Clinton says we need to train our out-of-work labor force for new
jobs. At the same time, many communities are facing military base closings.

   Some of the best vocational training available has always come through
military schools. Why not convert some of the closed bases to campuses, bring in
military vocational teachers, transfer unemployed people to dormitories on those
bases, and teach them skills? Military schools already teach thousands of useful
skills, from welding and construction to computer programming and aerospace
maintenance. Why not use those proven programs to aid our civilian unemployed?

   This idea would allow the government to invest in the future at relatively
low cost, would help the unemployed and would help the economies of cities
facing base closures.

   RONALD E. LITTON, Lilburn

   Nature easily fooled

   Regarding Lillian Hall's recent op-ed piece on Jurassic Park and her
conclusion that it's "not nice to fool Mother Nature." Our whole lifestyle is
unnatural. Every time we immunize our children against disease, practice birth
control, take an antibiotic or have surgery, we are fooling Mother Nature.
Nature's interest is in the survival of the species, not in the survival of any
individual.

   Gene therapy is no different than any other kind of medicine. Its purpose is
to allow the survival of a less-than-perfect individual that nature would have
eliminated.

   DAWN WILLIS, Decatur

   Why racism persists

   After reading Cynthia Tucker's column titled "Race, color still matter too
much in America," I am not surprised that the politics of racism persists. As
long as black liberals assert that blacks are more fit to hold office on the
basis of their skin color rather than the strength of their ideas, we will not
see an end to racism. Those who promote these ideas are more interested in
exacting some odd kind of "justice" against one race on behalf of another, as
opposed to creating a society like Dr. Martin Luther King envisioned.

   JOEL PILGER, Dunwoody

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1993


                             1094 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                       July 13, 1993 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. 6E

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: EMBRYOSCOPY'S NEW VIEW ;
ALLOWS EXAMINATION OF FETUS AT SIX WEEKS

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   The human embryo was just 6 weeks old, about half an inch long and shaped
like a comma, its arms and legs still blunt buds. On ultrasound, it would be
just a blur.

   But an obstetrician using an experimental technique inserted a minute viewing
scope into the woman's abdomen, through a needle the size of one used to draw
blood. He examined the embryo as closely as if he had opened the woman's womb.

   Dr. Ruben Quintero an obstetrician at Wayne State University's Hutzel
Hospital, is a man given to understatement. "It was impressive," he said to
describe his experience of seeing a 6-week embryo in the uterus, an exploration
into previously inaccessible territory.

   But he and other fetal-medicine experts expect that embryoscopy, as the
method is called, is poised to become an invaluable new tool in diagnosing
abnormalities of embryos and fetuses early in pregnancy and in treating or even
doing surgery on them.

   "Embryoscopy opens a whole new world, a whole new frontier that we never had
before," said Dr. E. Albert Reece, chairman of the department of obstetrics,
gynecology and reproductive medicine at the Temple University School of
Medicine. "It's just unbelievable. You can make a diagnosis much more rapidly
early in pregnancy and with a high degree of confidence."

   So far, the method is being used just by Quintero and Reece in the United
States and by Dr. Yves Dumez of Port Royal Hospital in Paris. But many others
are looking on with interest.

   Dr. Eugene Pergament, director of reproductive genetics at Northwestern
University in Chicago, said his group is trying to begin an embryoscopy program.
"This kind of effort has its own momentum," he said. The technology has become
so good that "if the fetus had a sign on it, you could read the letters," he
said. "The optics are just unbelievable."

   But the technology could get ahead of us, warned Dr. Kevin Muise, assistant
professor of reproductive biology at Case Western Reserve University's medical
school.

   "With any of these new things you have to wait and see," he said. "We become
enamored with gimmicks. ... I hope this proves itself before we start using it."

   Muise said the technique would be more useful in an 8- to 12-week-old fetus.
"It would be sort of hard pressed to find a defect at six weeks. Not much is
well formed at that point."

   The idea of embryoscopy is not new, Reece said. Since the 1970s, doctors have
been able to view the second-or third-trimester fetus by inserting a
comparatively huge needle with a viewing device through a woman's abdomen and
into the amniotic sac. But this old method of fetoscopy was risky, Reece said.
It was used, for example, to take fetal blood samples when a fetus was at risk
of an inherited anemia or when doctors felt they could save a fetus's life by
doing a blood transfusion.

   The scopes were as large as 0.17 millimeters in diameter and the needles that
carried them into the womb were 3 millimeters. That meant the procedure could be
done only when the pregnancy was well enough advanced to be able to withstand
the insult of such a large device.Even then, the method was risky, often causing
miscarriages by rupturing the amniotic membrane.

   The new embryoscope was developed for use in cardiology, where it is used to
see inside blood vessels. About two years ago, Reece, who, with Quintero, was
then at Yale University School of Medicine, asked various instrument
manufacturers if they had viewing scopes small enough and suitable for looking
at a fetus in the first trimester.

   Reece began testing several on women who had normal pregnancies but had
decided to have abortions and who agreed to let the investigators view their
embryos first. Only now, after establishing the safety of the method, is he
starting to offer it to women whose fetuses are at high risk of having serious
disorders.

   Reece said he had done about a dozen abdominal embryoscopies; Quintero said
he had done about 60. Both have used the method to diagnose abnormalities during
the first trimester of pregnancy, when ultrasound would have been uninformative
or inconclusive. In most cases, the embryos and fetuses were at high risk of
genetic defects, often because the women had already had pregnancies complicated
by particular disorders.Quintero said he had also been able to reassure some
women that their embryos or fetuses were perfectly normal, even though there
might have been suspicious shadows on ultrasound or a frightening genetic
history.

   "This is a tremendous difference from a year ago when we could not offer
women anything," to make diagnoses so early, Quintero said.

   The next step will be to use embryoscopy to deliver treatment, medical
experts said. They could, for example, cut amniotic bands, which are
constrictions of the amniotic membrane that deform fetuses. Or, in the future,
they may be able to deliver gene therapy.

   Fetal surgery and fetal therapy in the first trimester is now definitely on
the horizon, Pergament said. For now, he added, "it's a bit of who's going to be
the first one to do it."

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1993


                             1095 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 11, 1993, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Column 2; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: WATCHING AND WAITING;
 INFANT TO FINALLY GO HOME, BUT SUCCESS OF GENE THERAPY UNCERTAIN

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   On occasion, when hospital nurses are not looking, Crystal Emery and Leonard
Gobea slip off the surgical gloves and mask they are required to wear when they
cradle their infant son and steal a kiss on the baby's forehead, or gently
stroke his tender skin.

   "Sometimes," Gobea said wistfully the other day, "you wonder if he really
knows your touch. When we get him home, will he recognize us?"

   Monday, the parents hope to get their answer. Andrew Gobea, the dark-haired
baby boy who made medical history May 15 by becoming the first newborn ever to
undergo gene therapy, is scheduled to go home -- less than two months after the
landmark experiment but at least four months before doctors will know if it has
worked.

   Doctors at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles say the baby, who was born with an
immune system that did not work, is ready to be released because he is
responding exceptionally well to drugs that give him immunity by delivering a
crucial enzyme that his body fails to manufacture.

   "He has done as well as we could have possibly expected," Dr. Carl Lenarsky
said. "He is growing and developing, and the very good news is that he is
developing signs of immune function, probably because of this medicine. We think
it is really too early to see evidence of immune function from the gene
transplant."

   The gray-eyed baby with the hands that his dad says are destined to make him
a baseball player has indeed grown considerably since his birth May 11. He was 6
pounds, 12 ounces then; he now weighs 9 pounds, 4 ounces. He has strong legs and
arms, his parents say, and has demonstrated a distinct affinity for a big blue
plastic bunny that squeaks when you squeeze it.

   For Andrew, the impending release means he will no longer have to live in a
"bubble" -- a sterile isolation unit on the fourth floor of Childrens Hospital.
For his parents, who come from the Imperial Valley, it will mean a break from
cafeteria food and a seemingly eternal stay at the Hollywood Travelodge and a
chance, finally, at a life with their son.

   Said Emery: "We just want to raise him like a normal baby."

   Complete normalcy, however, will not come right away. For at least the next
four months, while doctors continue to monitor the strength of his immune
system, Andrew's parents will not be able to take the baby to malls or
restaurants or other crowded places where he might be exposed to infection.

   "His immune system is certainly not normal," Lenarsky said. "But we feel that
there is enough of an immune system there to remove him from the bubble."

   Andrew suffers from a rare genetic disorder called ADA deficiency, in which
he fails to manufacture the enzyme adenosine deaminase, which enables the immune
system to fight infection. Three years ago, Emery and Gobea lost an infant
daughter to the same disease. When prenatal testing revealed that Andrew, too,
would be afflicted, doctors at Childrens Hospital decided to attempt the gene
therapy.

   The historic experiment employed a novel technique: the use of blood from
Andrew's own umbilical cord. The blood was drawn as soon as Andrew was born.
That night, laboratory technicians began the intricate process of altering the
blood to include genes that, doctors hope, will insert themselves into Andrew's
stem cells, the parent cells of all other blood cells.

   On May 15, in an emotional procedure, Dr. Donald Kohn, a gene therapy expert
at Childrens and USC, infused the genetically altered blood into Andrew. If, as
doctors hope, the stem cells give rise to other cells that manufacture the
correct enzyme, Andrew will be cured.

   Although tests reveal that Andrew is now manufacturing lymphocytes that are
crucial to the functioning of his immune system, Kohn and his colleagues cannot
say if the new genes are expressing themselves. In the meantime, Andrew will
make weekly visits to a doctor in San Diego County, and monthly visits to
Childrens; blood drawn during those visits will later be tested for evidence of
the gene.

   At the same time, Kohn is monitoring the progress of another gene therapy
baby in Northern California. Several days after Andrew's birth, the same
experiment was performed on Zachary Riggins by San Francisco doctors who
collaborated with Kohn. Zachary, who is also responding well to drug therapy,
went home July 2.

   The other day, his mother sent Emery and Gobea a letter and a small, engraved
gold pin. "Andrew and Zachary," it read. "Gene Therapy, 1993."

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, Leonard Gobea cradles his 2-month-old son, Andrew, as the
boy's mother, Crystal Emery, looks on.  MARSHA T. GORMAN / Los Angeles Times;
Photo, (A2) Heading Home as a Family: The baby who made medical history by
becoming the first newborn to undergo gene therapy is scheduled to go home.
Doctors say Andrew Gobea is ready to be released to his parents, Leonard Gobea
and Crystal Emery, above, but they will continue to monitor him.  MARSHA T.
GORMAN / Los Angeles Times


                             1096 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    July 10, 1993, Saturday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Wrap-up; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: "Mail-order docs' no more

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE; Staff

BODY:

   IT was 50 years ago this coming Monday, with World War II
raging and the nation still recovering from the Great Depression,
that would-be doctors took up their classes in the old Sears
Roebuck warehouse that served as the first home of Baylor College
of Medicine.  Dr. William T. Butler, the school's current president,
likes to joke that the physicians the school produced then were
called ""mail-order docs. ''

   Baylor had moved its school from Dallas, enticed by the
offers from first the M.D. Anderson Foundation and then the movers
and shakers in Houston. It was the city's first move toward
establishing itself as a leader in health care and scientific
research.

   In 1944, Baylor graduated 16 new doctors, and 13 of them were
in military uniform.  The years since have seen the school rise to
national and international stature, bolstered by the talents of
many such as Drs.  Russell J. Blattner, Hebbel E. Hoff and Peter
Kellaway.  In 1948, Dr. Michael E. DeBakey joined the school as
chairman of surgery, bringing a new focus to its work.  He is now
the school's chancellor, positioning the institution for an entry
into the next century.

   Today, the name Baylor is recognized around the world.

   Dignitaries and leaders of many nations seek Baylor doctors for
their care.  From gene therapy to heart-lung transplants to public
health, its physicians are among the nation's leaders.

   But on a recent spring evening, the school continued in the
tradition of what it does best.  It graduated a new host of
physicians to go out and take care of the world's sick.  Happy
birthday, Baylor.


TYPE: Editorial Opinion

NOTES: Ruth SoRelle, medical writer.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1993


                             1097 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JULY 9, 1993, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. B8; OBITUARIES

LENGTH: 312 words

HEADLINE: Nicolas Sidjakov

BODY:

    Nicolas Sidjakov, a San Francisco designer and illustrator for more than 40
years, died at the University of California Medical Center on June 20 of cancer.
He was 68.

   Mr. Sidjakov, who won many awards for his work, was a founder, manager and
creative director of the San Francisco packaging and design firm of Sidjakov,
Berman and Gomez, which opened its doors in 1981 and was sold six years later.

   During Mr. Sidjakov's time at the company, it became one of the largest and
most prestigious design firms in the country, with a large international
clientele.

   The company won scores of awards from the San Francisco and New York Art
Directors clubs, as well as numerous Clios and industry awards.

   Mr. Sidjakov's many personal awards included the American Institute of
Graphic Arts award for his illustrations in ''The Friendly Beasts,'' the
Caldecott Medal for illustrating the children's book, ''Baboushka and the Three
Kings,'' and the New York Times award for his pictures in ''The Emperor and the
Drummer Boy.'' He also designed the popular ''Artists' and Writers' Cookbook.''

   He was born in Riga, Latvia, and graduated from the French Lyceum in Riga. He
began his professional career in Germany, then moved to Paris, where he studied
at the Academie des Beaux Arts from 1946 to 1948. While living in Paris, he
designed a magazine and did promotional work for the French film industry.

   In 1956, he moved to the San Francisco Bay Area, where he established himself
as a top designer and illustrator.

   Mr. Sidjakov is survived by his wife, Diane; a daughter, Stephanie, and two
sons by a previous marriage, Gregory and Nicolas. The family prefers memorial
donations to the Gene Therapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, 94143-0112, or the American Cancer
Society.



                             1098 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JULY 9, 1993, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 534 words

HEADLINE: New Gene Therapy Technique Could Help Body Fight Disease

BYLINE: Charles Petit, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:

    In a new illustration of the promise of gene therapy, scientists at the
University of California at San Francisco say they have used a simple, one-step
method to put new genes in most of the cells in fully grown animals.

   It is working so well that the scientists now believe it may be relatively
easy to inject into people billions of copies of new genes that will find their
way into muscle, bone, marrow, the immune system, the digestive system, the
lungs and nearly every other organ. Once in place, the genes order tissues to
secrete new disease- fighting products or to mask effects of faulty genes.

   ''For the first time, one can take a gene, really any gene, and administer
and express it everywhere, really in every tissue of the body,'' said Dr. Robert
Debs of the UCSF Cancer Research Institute, leader of the team.

   Many kinds of cancer, AIDS, most inherited diseases such as hemophilia, and
even some infectious diseases could, in principle, be treated if new genetic
instructions could be distributed throughout a person's tissues.

   The researchers believe it will be possible to tailor the genes so they go
into action in some tissues but not in others.

   Preliminary tests on people, to try to reverse the effects of the genetic,
lung-destroying disease cystic fibrosis, could start as soon as next year. The
potential list of medical benefits is almost limitless, the scientists say.

   The rapid pace of discovery comes as guidelines for proper use of ability to
manipulate genes are still largely nonexistent. ''There are obvious ethical
implications, which we are only starting to explore,'' Debs said.  For one, it
is not known whether the method would alter a person's germ cells -- sperm and
eggs -- passing the new genes on to children.

   The group is publishing its new results in today's issue of the journal
Science. Co-authors are Ning Zhu and Yong Liu at the Cancer Research Institute
and Denny Liggitt of the University of Washington Medical School in Seattle.

   The method relies on tiny liquid bubbles of fatlike material, called
liposomes, filled with specially designed molecules of DNA, the material in the
genes that carries the encoded instructions for life and that make every species
unique.

   Injected into the bloodstream, the liposomes spread throughout the body and
gradually merge into the chemically similar outer membranes of living cells,
depositing their cargoes of specially designed genes inside the cells. The genes
do not merge with the chromosomes, the structures inside cell nuclei that carry
most natural genes, but they do make their way to the nuclei, where they have
remained active for at least six months.

   The report being published today focuses on research with mice, but Debs said
in an interview that he and colleagues at other institutions have also
demonstrated it in rats, goats, sheep and monkeys. So far, they have seen no
side effects.

   In tests on mice, the technique delivered new genes into 70 percent or more
of cells in lungs, bone marrow, mammary glands, spleen and lymph nodes.  Equally
important, the new genes went into action, ordering the cells to begin
manufacturing substances not encoded in their natural genes.


                             1099 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 9, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: A way to help healthy genes fight disease

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Scientists have found a way to deliver genes into the body that may be the
most reliable method yet for gene therapy.

   They use man-made fat spheres, called liposomes, as tiny storage drums.
Researchers load healthy genes into the drums, then inject the drums into the
blood, where they travel to selected tissues to take over work of defective
genes.

   Liposomes can travel almost anywhere in the body, says Dr. Robert Debs,
University of California San Francisco. In his experiments in mice, reported in
today's Science, liposomes carried marker genes to a wide range of tissues,
including the lining of the lung, bone marrow cells and T lymphocytes.

   "Getting genes into T lymphocytes is critical because these cells fight
cancer and infectious diseases, such as HIV," Debs says. The researchers also
delivered a healthy cystic fibrosis gene to the lungs of mice so successfully
that a human gene therapy trial is planned at the University of North Carolina
in 1994.


                             1100 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      July 8, 1993, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 3; Column 3; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: NOBEL LAUREATE SEEN AS NIH CHIEF;
SCIENCE: SOME VIEW CLINTON ADMINISTRATION'S CHOICE OF UC SAN FRANCISCO
RESEARCHER HAROLD VARMUS AS AN ATTEMPT TO BOLSTER THE HEALTH AGENCY'S
REPUTATION.

BYLINE: By THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   A Nobel Prize-winning microbiologist at UC San Francisco, Dr. Harold E.
Varmus, is expected to be named the new director of the National Institutes of
Health, Clinton Administration sources said Wednesday.

   Officially, Varmus and one other candidate are undergoing final vetting for
the position, but sources in Washington said that Varmus has been offered the
job and has accepted.

   Varmus was the co-winner of the 1989 Nobel Prize for medicine and physiology
with Dr. J. Michael Bishop of UC San Francisco for the discovery of oncogenes,
genes that cause cancer.

   He will be the first Nobel laureate to be named head of the prestigious NIH,
where most of the government's health and biological research is conducted, and
arguably the best-known scientist ever to hold the post.

   Most previous NIH directors, such as Dr. Bernadine Healy, who resigned from
the post effective June 30, have been noted more for their administrative
abilities than for their scientific prowess. The appointment of Varmus is viewed
by some as an attempt to re-establish NIH as a scientifically solid institution
and free it from the political imbroglios that dogged it during the Reagan and
Bush years.

   The change in direction reflects the Clinton Administration's break with
precedent by consulting widely within the scientific community during its search
for a director. "That allowed people who understand the scientific community to
find the right person, which has certainly not been the protocol in the past,"
Bishop said. "It's a fabulous appointment."

   Varmus is on vacation in London and could not be reached.

   The NIH, with a 1993 budget of $11.6 billion, is widely viewed as the best
biomedical research institution in the world. But it has been embroiled in
controversy recently because of such problems as the ban on fetal tissue
research initiated by then-President Ronald Reagan and the government's failure
to undertake research on the abortion drug RU 486.

   The institutes have also suffered from a brain drain of their best scientists
because of government regulations that prohibit federal employees from
benefiting financially from the fruits of their research.

   Largely because of such controversies, the NIH was headed by an acting
director for 18 months during the George Bush Administration. Several prominent
scientists are said to have turned down the director's post before the Clinton
Administration settled on Varmus.

   "There is a bit of re-crafting to be done in the directorship, in the
relation between NIH and the federal government," Bishop said. " . . . Harold
has the intellect and force of will to get these things done."

   "I think it's great," added molecular biologist Peter Vogt of the Scripps
Clinic and Research Foundation. "We need scientific leadership of that
distinction. . . . The entire biomedical research community will applaud it."

   Varmus, 53, is a medical doctor who also holds a master's degree in
17th-Century literature. He and Bishop gained recognition, as well as many
prestigious awards, for their cancer studies, which began with research on
tumors in chickens. They discovered that certain genes in healthy cells, called
oncogenes, can be activated by chemicals and viruses to cause cancer.

   That research triggered an immense outpouring of new discoveries in the
genetics of cancer that has led to new ways of detecting the disease and to
innovative treatments, including gene therapy.

   In recent years, Varmus' research interests have become more diverse. In
addition to trying to figure out how cancer genes work, he has studied the
mechanisms by which retroviruses, including the virus that causes AIDS,
replicate and insert their genes into infected cells. His work there may
eventually lead to new therapies for AIDS, experts said.

   Varmus has also worked on the molecular biology of development in mice,
exploring the manner in which genes are turned on and off during the growth of
mice from eggs. "He has diverse, almost catholic, scientific interests in
biomedical research," Bishop said.

   Varmus has told friends that he plans to establish a small laboratory at the
NIH to continue his research, and will maintain his facilities at UC San
Francisco.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Dr. Harold E. Varmus Associated Press


                             1101 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      July 7, 1993 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 878 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH MERITS PLACE IN HEALTH DEBATE

BYLINE: By BERNADINE HEALY, M.D

BODY:

   Managed care. Managed competition. Play or pay. The jargon of the health-care
debate is entertaining, if not always enlightening. Despite the fact that many
of the best minds in our country are focused on reforming the American
health-care system, the debate over how to stem the spiraling costs of health
care betrays a distressing lack of creative thinking and a dogged determination
to ignore a simple fact: that better medical research must figure in any attempt
to control costs. Does this country consider medical research a pearl of too
great a price?

   Americans know that the best way to manage the costs associated with disease
and disability lies in preventing disease and disability. Research is central to
prevention. Indeed, without improved health research, the real issue is not
vouchers versus play or pay, but rather pay and pay - and pay.  Thus, it is
surprising that the medical research community has been largely left on the
sidelines in the national debate on health-care reform.

   In the health-care discussions that abound, one often detects a nostalgic
yearning for the so-called good old days of medical care: days when costs were
low and the family doctor made house calls. What is omitted from the discussion
is the fact that, in the good old days, there was no renal dialysis or organ
transplantion, no coronary surgery, CAT scans or angioplasty.

   Hodgkins disease was fatal and, as late as the 1950s, public swimming pools
in the country were closed because of the widespread fear of polio. Today, the
iron lung has gone the way of the Iron Curtain.

   Our nation's post-World War II investment in medical research has made the
difference. Indeed, our nation's investment in the National Institutes of Health
and its grantee institutions across the country has yielded a greater tangible
return for every U.S. citizen than any other single public investment.

   The return on that investment is self-evident: Today Americans enjoy the best
medical care in the world and of all time. NIH has translated the American
public's investment into far-reaching biomedical discoveries and a wealth of
scientific knowledge that benefit not only Americans but people around the
globe.

   The tangible benefits of that investment extend also to our nation's economy.
The biotechnology, bioengineering and pharmaceutical industries (and related
life-science-based corporations) are increasingly important to improving the
nation's economy, creating new jobs, technologies, products and services. In
many regions, biomedical science is a great catalyst for the creation of
skilled, high-level jobs and is responsible for considerable economic
productivity.

   NIH is the engine that drives this emerging "bioeconomy": an economy that
will lead to better health, lower health-care costs, and sustained economic
growth.

   There are no greater threats to the well-being of the American people and the
American economy than cancer, heart disease, drug and alcohol abuse, mental
illness, debilitating diseases of the elderly, AIDS and drug-resistant
tuberculosis. Currently, neurological diseases are responsible for more hospital
admissions than any other category of diseases, affecting 75 million Americans a
year at a cost of more than $300 billion.

   Cardiovascular disease remains the leading cause of death and disability,
with costs in excess of $100 billion a year. Cancer alone costs another $100
billion, while alcohol abuse costs between $80 billion and $100 billion
annually. The estimated price tag of Alzheimer's is more than $90 billion per
year. Treatments to delay the onset of Alzheimer's by five years could reduce
costs by more than $40 billion annually.

   Delaying or preventing the onset of osteoporosis could greatly reduce the
cost of treating 1.3 million hip fractures, a cost which exceeds $7 billion per
year. Moreover, prevention of osteoporosis could keep some 3,000 Americans out
of nursing homes each year.

   Already, NIH-supported research in human genetics is leading to improved
treatments for such diseases as cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia,
Huntington's disease and Tay-Sachs disease.

   Research in genetics and the molecular bases of disease will provide a
sourcebook for physicians in the next century, enabling them to treat many of
the 5,000 genetic diseases that plague mankind. With 5% of all infants suffering
from a genetic disease and accounting for 10% of all pediatric hospital
admissions and almost 9% of all childhood deaths, it is clear that such research
will have as great an impact on medical practice and our society in the future
as the polio vaccine and organ transplantation have had in our day.

   Such research will also lead to human gene therapy to treat such diseases as
cancer and AIDS.

   We must not allow those who would reinvent American health care to stymie
medical research. Although research is expensive, disease exacts a higher price,
in both economic and human terms. Research is the best intervention in
combatting human suffering and disease. And, as playwright Howard Sackler once
observed, "to intervene ... between our fellow creatures and their suffering or
death, is our most authentic answer to the question of our humanity."

COLUMN: FORUM/ESSAY & COMMENT

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1993


                             1102 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                             July 6, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH SEEKS SECRET TO TREATING CHILDHOOD CANCER

BYLINE: Michael B. Lafferty; Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   Research at Ohio State University shows promise of eventually leading to a
treatment for one of the most deadly childhood cancers.

   In laboratory tests, researchers have found a way to slow the growth of
tumors of the nervous system - called neuroblastomas - by injecting them with
the growth protein somatostatin receptor.

   When the somatostatin receptor is not present, nervous system cells
proliferate and a tumor forms. Research is now keyed on the gene that is
responsible for forming the protein, said Dr. Sue O'Dorisio, a professor of
pediatrics at OSU and Children's Hospital.

   ''The absence of the protein allows the cells to keep dividing,'' O'Dorisio
said yesterday. ''Even cancer cells die, and one of the things that can cause
cancer is cells not dying when they're supposed to die.''

   At OSU, a research team from the departments of pediatrics, surgery, medicine
and radiation has formed to tackle the disease.

   O'Dorisio said neuroblastomas are resistant to long-term use of chemotherapy.
Treatment of the disease is particularly important because, while leukemias
account for the largest portion of childhood cancers, neuroblastomas are a
leading cause of childhood cancer deaths.

   The neuroblastomas form in children who are younger than 2 and have been
identified in some children at birth.

   O'Dorisio estimated that up to 20 children with the disease are treated at
Children's Hospital annually and that up to 100 each year suffer from the
disease statewide.

   ''It probably accounts for as many deaths as leukemia because we're able to
cure most leukemias now,'' she said.

   Human growth is regulated by an immense variety of proteins, and their
manufacture is controlled by genes that switch their production on and off.

   In children with the disease, either nerve ce6ylls lack the gene responsible
for the protein formation or the gene is not working.

   ''With the gene therapy, we can put it back or 'turn it on' if it's not
functioning,'' O'Dorisio said.

   At OSU, researchers took a sample of neuroblastoma tissue lacking the gene
and, in a test-tube experiment, injected it with the gene that makes the
protein. The cancer cells stopped growing.

   ''Now our job is to find out why,'' O'Dorisio said.

   The next step is to treat a tumor in a mouse. O'Dorisio said it will be at
least three years before the research has advanced far enough for human testing.
A major problem is how to turn on the gene or to inject it if it isn't there.

   ''We need to find a dietary supplement or a drug that will turn it on. If
it's not there, we have to find a way to inject it into the tumor cells without
injecting it into any other cells. We wouldn't want, for example, to put it in
white blood cells because those need to be dividing.''

   Because the protein is important in controlling the growth of cells in other
parts of the body, O'Dorisio believes that the research may eventually lead to
treatments of breast cancer and colon cancer, as well as a stomach cancer known
as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Lynn Ischay/ Dispatch, Dr. Sue O'Dorisio adds DNA to
neuroblastoma cells, which should make the cells stop multiplying.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             1103 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 1177 words

HEADLINE: Miniature Scope Gives The Earliest Pictures Of a Developing Embryo

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   THE human embryo was just six weeks old, about half an inch long and shaped
like a comma, its arms and legs still blunt buds. On ultrasound, an embryo as
early as this one would be just a blur. But now, using an experimental
technique, Dr. Ruben Quintero, an obstetrician at Wayne State University's
Hutzel Hospital, inserted a minute viewing scope into the woman's abdomen,
through a needle the diameter of one used to draw blood. With this device, Dr.
Quintero examined the embryo as closely as if he had opened the woman's womb.

   Dr. Quintero, a man given to understatement, described the experience of
seeing a living six-week embryo, an exploration into previously inaccessible
territory, by saying merely, "It was impressive." But he and other
fetal-medicine experts expect that embryoscopy, as the method is called, is
poised to become an invaluable new tool in diagnosing abnormalities of embryos
and fetuses early in pregnancy and in treating or even doing surgery on them.

    "Embryoscopy opens a whole new world, a whole new frontier that we never had
before," said Dr. E. Albert Reece, chairman of the department of obstetrics,
gynecology and reproductive medicine at the Temple University School of
Medicine. "It's just unbelievable. You can make a diagnosis much more rapidly
early in pregnancy and with a high degree of confidence."

   So far, the method is being used just by Dr. Quintero and Dr. Reece in the
United States and by Dr. Yves Dumez of Port Royal Hospital in Paris. But many
others are looking on with interest, planning to start using embryoscopy
themselves.

   Dr. Eugene Pergament, director of reproductive genetics at Northwestern
University in Chicago, said his group is trying to begin an embryoscopy program.
"This kind of effort has its own momentum," he said. The technology has become
so good that "if the fetus had a sign on it, you could read the letters," he
said. "The optics are just unbelievable."

   The idea of embryoscopy is not new, Dr. Reece said. Since the 1970's, doctors
have been able to view the second- or third-trimester fetus by inserting a
comparatively huge needle with a viewing device through a woman's abdomen and
into the amniotic sac.

Early Diagnosis

    But this old method of fetoscopy was risky, Dr. Reece said. It was used, for
example, to take fetal blood samples when a fetus was at risk of an inherited
anemia or when doctors felt they could save a fetus's life by doing a blood
transfusion. The viewing scopes were borrowed from rheumatology, where they were
used in operations on the joints of adults. The scopes were as large as 0.17
millimeters in diameter and the needles that carried them into the womb were 3
millimeters. That meant the procedure itself could be done only when the
pregnancy was well enough advanced to be able to withstand the insult of such a
large device making a hole in the amniotic membrane. And even then, the method
was risky, often causing miscarriages by rupturing the membrane.

   The new embryoscope was developed for use in cardiology, where it is used to
see inside blood vessels. About two years ago, Dr. Reece, who, with Dr.
Quintero, was then at Yale University School of Medicine, asked various
instrument manufacturers if they had viewing scopes small enough and suitable
for looking at a fetus in the first trimester. Dr. Reece began testing several
on women who had normal pregnancies but had decided to have abortions and who
agreed to let the investigators view their embryos first. Only now, after
establishing the safety of the method, is he starting to offer it to women whose
fetuses are at high risk of having serious disorders.

   Dr. Reece began by inserting the scope thorough the vagina and into a small
pocket that forms early in pregnancy between the inner and outer fetal
membranes. He said he has done about 100 embryoscopies using this route. Next,
he tried pushing a scope through a needle into the abdomen, reasoning that that
was less risky to the pregnancy. With the vaginal route, he explained, the scope
must pass thorough an area that contains bacteria and is very difficult to
disinfect.

   Dr. Reece said he had done about a dozen abdominal embryoscopies; Dr.
Quintero said he had done about 60. Both have used the method to diagnose
abnormalities during the first trimester of pregnancy, when ultrasound would
have been uninformative or inconclusive. In most cases, the embryos and fetuses
were at high risk of genetic defects, often because the women had already had
pregnancies complicated by particular disorders. But since the genes for the
disorders have not been isolated, the usual methods of prenatal diagnosis,
chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, could not detect the abnormalities.

   Dr. Quintero told of one diagnosis he had made. The woman had previously had
a child with Meckel-Gruber syndrome. Infants born with this condition have an
encephalocele -- a fluid-filled bulge behind the head -- as well as an extra
finger, and kidneys and lungs that cannot function. The babies die within
minutes of birth.

   In her previous pregnancy, the disorder was diagnosed by ultrasound at 19
weeks, the earliest that the deformities show up clearly on an ultrasound scan.
When the woman became pregnant again, she knew she had a 25 percent chance of
having another child with the disorder. An ultrasound at 11 weeks showed only
that the yolk sac was a little swollen, Dr. Quintero said. But with embryoscopy,
the doctors could see the fluid-filled bulge and the extra finger. The disorder
"was very, very easy to diagnose," he said. In fact, he added, "we could have
done it easily at nine weeks." The woman chose not to continue with her
pregnancy.

Potential for Treating Embryos

    Dr. Mark Evans, professor of obstetrics at Wayne State, said he and Dr.
Quintero had examined an eight-week embryo whose heart had stopped beating. With
the embryoscope, the doctors found that it had had a neural tube defect, a
malformation of the spinal cord. This meant that the woman was at
greater-than-normal risk of having a baby with a neural tube defect if she
became pregnant again. But without the embryoscope, no one would have known.
"This would never have been picked up otherwise," Dr. Evans said.

   Dr. Quintero said he had also been able to reassure some women that their
embryos or fetuses were perfectly normal, even though there might have been
suspicious shadows on ultrasound or a frightening genetic history.

   "This is a tremendous difference from a year ago when we could not offer
women anything," to make diagnoses so early, Dr. Quintero said.

   The next step will be to use embryoscopy to deliver treatment, medical
experts said. They could, for example, cut amniotic bands, which are
constrictions of the amniotic membrane that deform fetuses. Or, in the future,
they may be able to deliver gene therapy.

   Fetal surgery and fetal therapy in the first trimester is now definitely on
the horizon, Dr. Pergament said. For now, he added, "it's a bit of who's going
to be the first one to do it."

GRAPHIC: Photo: Embryoscope image shows that the foot of an 11-week fetus is
normal. (Detroit Medical Center)

Diagram: "Tiny Camera on the Early Fetus"

    An experimental technique called embryoscopy lets doctors see a fetus in
detail much earlier than before. The tiny scopes, carried in ultra-thin needles,
were developed for examining blood vessels. (Source: Dr. Ruben A.
Quintero/American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology.)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1993


                             1104 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 6, 1993, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A7

LENGTH: 307 words

HEADLINE: BABY WITH NEW GENE IS HOME

BYLINE: DAVID PERLMAN, SAN FRANCISCO CHRONICLE

BODY:


   Zachary Riggins, 7 weeks old and already a pioneer on the frontiers of
medical research, went home from the hospital with his parents last weekend in
splendid health.

   But it will be months before anyone knows whether the world's first effort at
gene therapy in newborns has given him the functioning immune system that was
missing in the cells of his body.

   Zachary was born in May at the University of California in San Francisco with
a rare genetic defect that made him unable to manufacture an enzyme essential to
create the specialized white blood cells that every human needs to protect
against deadly infections and diseases.

   Zachary's defect is known as severe combined immunodeficiency, and the vital
enzyme he lacks is called adenosine deaminase, or ADA. His older brother, Rhett,
was born with the same defect three years ago and has received twice-weekly
injections of ADA since then. He remains healthy, but the replacement therapy is
no cure.

   In Zachary's case, a team of physicians and scientists headed by Dr. Diane
Wara, a UCSF pediatric immunologist, removed a bit of blood from his umbilical
cord immediately after birth. Wara's UCSF colleagues then carried that blood to
the Los Angeles Children's Hospital, where Zachary's precious stem cells -- the
cells that give rise to all the body's varied blood cells including the immune
system's crucial T-cells -- were harvested.

   Scientists inserted newly engineered ADA genes into Zachary's stem cells, and
the tiny supply of cells was quickly flown back to UCSF to be injected like a
blood transfusion into Zachary's body. Those genes, it is hoped, will soon prove
fully capable of making the missing enzyme on their own for the rest of his
life. And if that happens, it will mean that this new experiment at gene therapy
has cured him of his genetic defect.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1105 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 5, 1993 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-3

LENGTH: 803 words

HEADLINE: New doubts about AZT's powers leave some confused, frustrated

BYLINE: CHERYL CLARK, Staff writer Cheryl Clark covers AIDS issues for The
Union-Tribune.

BODY:

   For 18 months, Ron Tully faithfully swallowed his blue-and-white capsules of
AZT, believing in their promise to keep the AIDS virus at bay. "But the side
effects were just horrible," said the 45-year-old San Diegan. Headaches and
nausea kept him bedridden for days.

   After enduring them as long as he could, he flushed the capsules down the
toilet. His decision last month came a few weeks after a major European study
raised questions about whether people infected with the AIDS virus but without
symptoms of the disease receive any benefit from AZT. The study, called the
Concorde trial, contradicts many previous studies showing AZT, or zidovudine,
prolongs life for such patients.

   The results prompted hundreds of infected people to stop taking it. Dr. Steve
Oppenheim, AIDS specialist for the Beach Area Family Health Center in Mission
Beach, said 70 to 100 of the center's 600 patients who have been taking the drug
dropped it in recent weeks. "It worries me," said Oppenheim.

   "A lot of people are interpreting Concorde to mean AZT doesn't work, though
that's not what it says.

   I have people with AIDS and 40 T-cells (indicating a severely deteriorated
immune system) who decided they shouldn't be on the drug." The Concorde study
raised questions about using the drug when a patient still has a relatively
healthy immune system.

   Under those circumstances, the patient lives no longer and stays no healthier
than someone who starts the drug only as health starts to fail. Numerous studies
have shown that for people whose immune systems are in rapid decline, AZT does
prolong and improve the quality of life.

   It costs about $2,200 a year. Initially, leading U.S. health officials argued
the Concorde study was only preliminary and was flawed. The drug's manufacturer,
Burroughs Wellcome Co., criticized it for using a dosage that was double that
currently recommended.

   Burroughs said the study was flawed because clinicians usually prescribe AZT
in combination with other drugs, like ddI and ddC that target a similar part of
the virus, and seldom by itself. But after much heated debate during last
month's international AIDS conference in Berlin, skeptical AIDS researchers
agreed that the Concorde study had merit. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and an AZT supporter,
acknowledged that for some patients, the study indicates AZT's powers are
limited. A federal panel issued new recommendations last week saying physicians
should no longer routinely prescribe AZT to infected, stable patients who have
not yet developed symptoms of disease, a major change in common practice. "The
big thing the Concorde study tells us is that the benefit from antivirals is not
as great as what we would want and is probably temporary," said Dr. Richard
Haubrich of UCSD, an AIDS specialist. Unfortunately, many panic-stricken
patients have generalized the Concorde findings to other AZT-like drugs that
target the same point in the virus's replication cycle.

   The other drugs -- ddI, ddC, 3TC, d4T and nevirapine -- were not tested in
the Concorde trial and many are still under study. In some people, those related
drugs can cause side effects including nervous system disorders, rash, liver
problems, anemia and diarrhea. One infected patient said he is taking d4T but,
because of the Concorde study, worries that the drug may be worthless.

   "And every time I do, it's like a psychotic episode.

   I worry it could be damaging my liver." Groups like the newly formed
Association to Reevaluate AIDS have seized on the Concorde study as proof that
AZT rather than the AIDS virus is what kills people, although no study supports
that claim. Many patients, said UCSD's Haubrich, "are frustrated and angry." The
debate is causing confrontations in doctor's offices, several physicians said,
with many patients demanding they receive a fuller accounting of the drug's
benefit from their doctors. Being Alive, a San Diego AIDS support group, now
counsels patients that if they don't have symptoms, they should think twice
about AZT. "If your doctor just takes out a pad and writes a prescription for
it, get a second opinion," said a Being Alive counselor. Researchers are working
on developing AZT-like drugs that are more powerful, less toxic and better able
cope with the AIDS virus's ability to mutate and escape the drug. But several
AIDS clinicians said they think benefits of AZT-like drugs would be short-lived.
"I get the feeling we've hit the wall with these," said Oppenheim.

   "A lot of people say we have to look beyond," to gene therapy, immune
boosters and what may be keeping long-term survivors alive. Since Tully flushed
away his AZT, the health of his immune system has declined a notch.

   But going off the drug was worth it, he said.

   "I want to feel healthy as long as I can."

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1106 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      July 5, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F23; WASHINGTON INVESTING

LENGTH: 1419 words

HEADLINE: Stocks Go Nowhere Fast in Second Quarter

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Stan Hinden, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   Call it the "rocking-chair" syndrome. There's lots of movement, but you don't
go anyplace. That's the way it was on Wall Street in the April-May-June quarter.
After three months of feverish trading -- and all those ups and downs -- the
stock indexes wound up about where they started.

   The 30-stock Dow Jones industrial average was the exception. It moved up 2.4
percent in the second quarter -- for a total gain of 6.5 percent in the first
half. Blue-chip stocks are still favored by institutional investors, foreign and
domestic.

   On the other hand, two broader measures of market activity, the Standard &
Poor's 500-stock index and the New York Stock Exchange composite, went nowhere
in the second quarter, turning in only fractional gains. For the first half, the
S&P gained 3.4 percent and the NYSE gained 3.7 percent.

   Looking back, the markets were strong at the start of 1992. They sank in
midyear and were revived by the Clinton rally, which began in October and lasted
until February. After that, prices flattened out or dropped, as individual
industry sectors were clobbered in a rolling downturn.

   Blue-chip stocks, strong nationally, were strong at the local level, too. The
Johnston, Lemon & Co. 30-stock index rose 1.9 percent in the second quarter, for
a total first-half gain of 8.5 percent.

   However, stocks in the broader Washington Business stock table dipped 3.5
percent in the second quarter, for a total slide of 5.4 percent since Jan. 1.

   In the first quarter, 106 area stocks rose, while 76 fell. In the second
quarter, there were 92 winners and 93 losers -- showing the shift to the
negative side.

   Here are the Washington area stocks, trading at $ 2 or more, that turned in
the best and the worst performances during the first half of the year. The names
are accompanied by stock symbols. The first number is the price on Dec. 31,
1992. The second number is the price on June 30.

   Here are the winners:

   Suburban Bancshares Inc. (SBNK), Greenbelt. ($ 0.50 to $ 2.38, up 376
percent). An amalgam of Bank 2000 N.A. and BankStar N.A. in Virginia and
Jefferson Bank & Trust Co. in Maryland, Suburban has a new chairman in Winfield
M. Kelly Jr., former Maryland secretary of state. Suburban is trying to raise $
8 million to $ 9 million to get its capital up to levels required by bank
regulators.

   First Citizens Financial Corp. (FCIT), Silver Spring. ($ 5.50 to $ 12, up 118
percent). Parent of Citizens Savings Bank, the thrift has seen its profits rise
rapidly because of favorable interest rate conditions. The stock sold for $ 1
only 18 months ago.

   FastComm Communications Corp. (FSCX), Sterling. ($ 7.13 to $ 14.88, up 109
percent). Since his arrival last year, President Peter C. Madsen has engineered
a turnaround at FastComm, which makes products used in communications networks.
In January 1992, the stock sold for $ 1.56.

   S&K Famous Brands Inc. (SKFB), Richmond. ($ 10.38 to $ 20.25, up 95 percent).
A men's clothing retailer that promotes a "value" image, S&K operates 129 stores
and is expanding westward. Profits for the April quarter rose 21 percent.

   Brenco Inc. (BREN), Petersburg, Va. ($ 6.38 to $ 12, up 88 percent). Profits
in the March quarter rose sharply at Brenco, which makes railroad car bearings,
as several large orders arrived from overseas.

   Optelecom Inc. (OPTC), Gaithersburg. ($ 5 to $ 8.50, up 70 percent). A
manufacturer of fiber-optics communications products, the firm recently has seen
strong gains in sales and profits.

   Microlog Corp. (MLOG), Germantown. ($ 1.19 to $ 2, up 68 percent). A producer
of voice-message systems, Microlog has seen its stock rise and fall rapidly. The
stock had moved up to $ 3 in the first quarter, before dropping back to $ 2 in
the second quarter.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. (GTII), Gaithersburg. ($ 10.50 to $ 17.25, up 64
percent). Investors have been snapping up Genetic Therapy shares on reports the
company is making progress in treating disease by genetically altering a
patient's blood cells.

   Capitol Multimedia Inc. (CDIM), Washington. ($ 7.75 to $ 12.13, up 57
percent). CD-I (compact disc interactive) technology is getting big play from
investors these days and Capitol Multimedia is expanding its production of CD-I
discs.

   USF&G Corp. (FG), Baltimore. ($ 12.38 to $ 18.13, up 46 percent). A major
property-casualty firm, USF&G continues to see its stock climb. Profits are
returning after a major reorganization.

   MCI Communications Corp. (MCIC), Washington. ($ 39.63 to $ 57.50, up 45
percent). The second-largest long-distance company, MCI leaped into the global
network business by signing an agreement with British Telecommunications PLC,
which will make a $ 4.3 billion investment in MCI.

   Washington Savings Bank (WSB), Waldorf, Md. ($ 3.38 to $ 4.88, up 44
percent). A favorable interest rate scenario has helped boost profits; for the
nine months ending April 30, the bank earned 54 cents a share compared with 13
cents a year earlier.

   Here are the losers:

   Netrix Corp. (NTRX), Herndon. ($ 20 to $ 5, down 75 percent). Netrix, which
makes data network equipment, saw its stock leap from an offering price of $ 12
to $ 23.25. But weakening foreign sales hurt the company's bottom line and
investors fled.

   PHP Healthcare Corp. (PPH) Alexandria. ($ 14.75 to $ 5.50, down 63 percent).
The slide continues. PHP recently told investors it expected a significant loss
for the fourth quarter, which ended April 30 -- but a profit for the fiscal
year. The stock got as high as $ 27.50 in the last five years.

   Intersolv Inc. (ISLI), Rockville. ($ 14.25 to $ 6.50, down 54 percent). A
software company, Intersolv had $ 80 million in sales in the fiscal year that
ended April 30. But it also had so many restructuring charges that it reported a
$ 11.9 million loss. Investors didn't like what they saw.

   Comnet Corp. (CNET), Lanham. ($ 28.75 to $ 14.50, down 50 percent). And Group
1 Software Inc. (GSOF), Lanham. ($ 15.25 to $ 8.50, down 44 percent). Comnet is
a computer software and services company that owns 81 percent of Group 1, which
creates software for the direct mail industry. Sales and profits for the two
companies were flat to moderately higher for fiscal 1993, which ended March 31.
A Comnet official said he was "perplexed" as to why the stocks had been drifting
lower.

   Verdix Corp. (VRDX), Herndon. ($ 5 to $ 2.75, down 45 percent). Verdix, which
specializes in Ada language software, took a financial hit in fiscal 1993,
ending March 31, because of a decision to discontinue its secure computer
systems operations. Sales of personal computer products also did not meet
expectations.

   Insituform East Inc. (INEI), Landover. ($ 5 to $ 2.88, down 42 percent). The
company repairs sewer pipes without digging them up. Business has been poor and
the company lost money during the first nine months, ending March 31. The
decline at Insituform hurt Cerbco Inc. (CERB), Landover, which holds a
controlling interest in Insituform. Cerbco shares fell from $ 3.13 to $ 1.75,
down 44 percent.

   Applied Bioscience International Inc. (APBI), Arlington. ($ 9.38 to $ 5.50,
down 41 percent. The company evaluates pharmaceuticals for other companies. The
stock has slipped from a high of almost $ 20 in 1992 -- depressed by a slowdown
in research spending, uncertainty over health care issues and the costs of
acquisitions.

   Williams Industries Inc. (WMSI), Falls Church. ($ 4 to $ 2.38, down 41
percent). A construction company, Williams erects steel frames for bridges,
buildings and factories. Hit by the slump in commercial construction, Williams
has piled up millions of dollars worth of losses, although the firm recently
reported a major increase in work orders.

   Cryomedical Sciences Inc. (CMSI), Rockville. ($ 8.75 to $ 5.44, down 38
percent). The company markets the AccuProbe device, which uses supercooled
nitrogen to destroy cancers. The company said it didn't know why its stock fell
recently.

   ICF Kaiser International Inc. (ICFI), Fairfax. ($ 7.38 to $ 4.63, down 37
percent. The last two years have been tough for ICF, which has seen losses, the
sale of subsidiaries, a canceled stock offering and changes in the executive
suite. But the good news is that the firm has returned to profitability.

   Student Loan Marketing Association (SLM), Washington. ($ 68.88 to $ 43.25,
down 37 percent). Sallie Mae shares have been clobbered by President Clinton's
move to revamp the student lending system. If adopted, the plan appears likely
to make deep cuts in Sallie Mae's business.?

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1107 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       July 4, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; NATIONAL DIGEST; THE NATION; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 317 words

HEADLINE: Baby given gene therapy goes home

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   A 7-week-old baby given a historic experimental genetic treatment two days
after birth to boost his immune system has gone home from a hospital. Zachary
Riggins was diagnosed with "bubble boy" disease - a rare hereditary disorder  in
which the immune system can't fight off illness - before he was born. Stem
cells, which normally produce immune system cells, were isolated in blood  drawn
from Zachary's umbilical cord. The cells were incubated with a mouse  virus that
had been engineered to infect the cells with good disease-fighting  genes and
re-injected into Zachary on May 17 at the University of California  at San
Francisco Medical Center. The baby is doing well, but doctors won't be  able to
tell if the procedure was successful for another three to five months.

Parents accused of hiring stripper

ROCKFORD, Ill. - A couple are accused of hiring an exotic dancer to perform at
their 12-year-old son's birthday party. Frederick Miles, 33, and Felicia Price
Miles, 30, are charged with two counts each of permitting the sexual abuse of  a
child, a misdemeanor. Prosecutor Paul Logli said his office will seek jail  time
if they are convicted. The couple let their son lick whipped cream off  the
dancer's breasts and let her lick his chest during the March party,  according
to court documents. The party was attended by about eight children  ranging in
age from 6 to 13, Logli said.

Wyoming gets snow in July

JACKSON, Wyo. - Meteorologists had a snowball's chance in July of predicting
the weather that hit northern Wyoming on Saturday. Most Wyoming residents  began
the holiday weekend with sunny skies and warm weather, but people in  northern
Wyoming scrambled for their snowsuits. One foot of new snow was  reported in
parts of Grand Teton National Park, and heavy snow also fell at  lower
elevations of the park.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1993


                             1108 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JULY 3, 1993, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Baby, New Genes Go Home
 Defect's cure may start with umbilical cord

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    Zachary Riggins, 7 weeks old and already a pioneer on the frontiers of
medical research, went home from the hospital with his parents yesterday in
splendid health.

   But it will be months before anyone knows whether one of the world's first
attempts at gene therapy in newborns has given him the functioning immune system
that has been missing in the cells of his body since birth.

   Zachary was born in May at the University of California at San Francisco with
a rare genetic defect that made him unable to manufacture an enzyme essential to
create the specialized white blood cells that every human needs to protect
against deadly infections and diseases.

   Zachary's defect is known as severe combined immunodeficiency, and the vital
enzyme he lacks is called adenosine deaminase, or ADA. His older brother, Rhett,
was born with the same defect three years ago and has received twice-weekly
injections of ADA since then. He remains healthy, but the ADA replacement
therapy is no cure.

   In Zachary's case, a team of physicians and scientists headed by Dr. Diane
Wara, a UCSF pediatric immunologist, removed a bit of blood from his umbilical
cord immediately after birth. Wara's UCSF colleagues then carried that blood to
the Los Angeles Children's Hospital, where Zachary's precious stem cells -- the
cells that give rise to all the body's varied blood cells including the immune
system's crucial T-cells -- were harvested.

   In Los Angeles, scientists also inserted newly engineered ADA genes into
Zachary's stem cells, and the tiny supply of cells was quickly flown back to
UCSF to be injected like a blood transfusion into Zachary's body. Those genes,
it is hoped, will soon prove capable of making the missing enzyme on their own
for the rest of his life. If that happens, Zachary will be cured of his genetic
defect.

   But while Zachary's parents, Lori and Rich Riggins, prepared their baby for
the trip home to Exeter in Tulare County, Wara said it will be four to six
months before tests of the baby's blood cells show whether the new genes have
taken over, or ''engrafted,'' as scientists put it.

   Until then, Wara said, Zachary must receive regular injections of ADA to hold
possible infections at bay, and he must remain home for several weeks in
isolation.

   In May, an infant named Andrew Gobea was born with the identical defect at
Los Angeles Children's Hospital. It was there that Dr.  Donald Michael Blaese,
who developed this gene therapy technique, and his colleague Dr. Donald Kohn
inserted the engineered genes into the stem cells of both infants.

   Andrew is also doing well now, and he too will probably go home soon,
according to hospital officials in Los Angeles. In his case, too, the results of
the experiment will not be known for months.

   To Lori Riggins, the wait will be ''scary but exciting,'' but if the gene
therapy works for Zachary, she hopes a slightly different procedure can be
adapted to cure Rhett.

   ''Sometimes during the past few weeks in the hospital here,'' she said, ''I'd
come out of Zach's room crying, and other times I'd be elated. But every once in
a while, I'd give myself a half-hour or so to contemplate the possibilities of
the future.''


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Rich Riggins held his 7-week-old son, Zachary, at UCSF , BY
FREDERIC LARSON, THE CHRONICLE


                             1109 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      June 28, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F10

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: APPOINTMENTS

SERIES: Occasional

BODY:

   Association/Nonprofit

   Clark Massie, a partner in the Tetra Partnerships, has been named chairman of
the Fairfax County Chamber of Commerce board of directors.

   Clyde "Rocky" Sorrell was named president of the Montgomery County Chamber of
Commerce.

   Hospice of Northern Virginia's board of directors named David J. English
administrator.

   Cathy Tavarozzo was named director of trade shows and conferences of the
Telecom- munications Industry Association.

   The Agriculture Council of America named Mark Bennett director of programs
and Steve Donovan director of marketing.

   Dalton A. Tong was elected to the board of directors of Healthcare Financial
Management Association.

   Gloria J. Anderson was named to the board of directors of the Southern
Gerontological Society.

   The Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association named Jeffrey L. Trewhitt
assistant vice president for communications.

   G. Kirb Raab, president and CEO of Genentech Inc., was elected chairman of
the board of directors of the Biotechnology Industry Organization.

   The National Retail Federation named Tracy Mullin president and chief
operating officer.

   George Quadrino, a partner at Warren & Associates, P.C., was elected
president of the Washington, D.C., Maritime Administrative Bar Association.

   The Enterprise Foundation, an affordable housing organization, named Janice
C. Daue director of communications.

   Mary Kay C. LeFevour was named executive director of the National Association
of Women Judges.

   The U.S. Chamber of Commerce's National Chamber Foundation and Center for
Workforce Preparation and Quality Education named Abigail Perlman director of
development.

   David C. Laughter was named executive vice president and director of
membership development of the National Business Owners Association.


    Companies

   FastComm Communications Corp. of Sterling named Charles Hellquist vice
president of U.S sales.

   Michael D. Casey was named chief operating officer and president of Genetic
Therapy Inc. in Gaithersburg.

   Robert Greenfest, vice president of National Capital Companies in Chevy
Chase, was named president of Potomac Home Funding Corp.

   Ogden Environmental and Energy Services Co. Inc. in Fairfax named Paul J.
Gretsky senior program manager and Wilbur "Bill" H. Boutin Jr. director of its
department of defense business development.

   R. Brent Gilroy was named vice president of Powell Tate of the District.

   Deborah Davis-Hicks was named communications coordinator at Union Privilege,
AFL-CIO.

   The George Hyman Construction Co. of Bethesda named Sidney J. Jordan senior
vice president and regional manager of the company's southeast region and
Herbert W. Brownett vice president.

   Twin Contracting Corp. in Alexandria named Alan E. Umstead vice president of
Twin CM Co., the company's construction management division.

   United Parcel Service named Sheryl Webber Washington manager of public
affairs.

   Hill & Knowlton named Reginald E. Gilliam Jr., former chief of staff to Rep.
Louis Stokes, senior vice president.

   Carey Winston, a Washington area-based real estate firm, named Peter J.
Wysocki associate vice president and Warren Dahlstrom senior vice president.

   Walter V. Connor International Inc., the Baltimore-based executive search
firm, named Philip H. Grantham a vice president.

   William R. Godfrey was named senior architect at Dewberry & Davis of Fairfax.

   CTA Inc., a high-tech aerospace systems engineering firm in Rockville, named
Robert F. Pelzmann Jr. vice president of systems development.

   Randall M. Griffin has been elected president of Constellation Real Estate
Group Inc. of Baltimore.

   Financial Conservators Inc. of Baltimore named Karen B. Zale vice president
and general counsel, Kenneth Cusick vice president and senior asset manager,
Carol J. Kaiser vice president and controller, and Alicia Merz Wopat vice
president and senior asset manager.

   The Campbell Group, a Baltimore-based advertising agency, named Bradley
Kunhardt to the newly created position of vice president management supervisor.

   Drucilla A. Richards was named vice president of corporate finance at Legg
Mason Wood Walker Inc.

   First Virginia Banks Inc. named Karyn Z. Hohmann vice president and zone
manager and Valerie A. Donnell vice president and cashier of First Virginia
Bank.

   BDM Federal Inc. in McLean named the following senior vice presidents: Walter
A. Frankhauser, Lawrence R. Lotspeich, William P. McQuiggan and Charles D.
Pollock.

   HCA Reston Hospital Center named Thomas D. Miller president and chief
executive officer.

   Barnes, Morris, Pardoe & Foster named A. Joseph O'Brien vice president and
commercial leasing specialist in its McLean office.

   Jill E. Kent was named associate vice president for financial affairs and
chief financial officer of the George Washington University Medical Center.

   Sigma International Inc. in Fairfax named Helen Frank Bensimon director of
communications and Candyce Allen senior instructional designer.

   William P. Binzel was named director of government relations at MasterCard
International.

   William W. Berry was elected to the board of directors of Scott &
Stringfellow Inc.

   Comsis Corp. named John B. Ippolito chief information officer.

   Internet Inc., owner and operator of the MOST electronic banking network,
named Christine R. Strock manager of business development.

   Jennifer Giles was named director of marketing at Enviro-Management and
Research Inc. in the District.

   MTR Consulting named S. Robert Kaufman national vice president.

   UNC Inc. in Annapolis named Art Greenberg vice president and general manager
of the Aviation Alliance & Capital Group, the company's aviation trading and
leasing joint venture.

   Keith deClercq was named president and general manager of EG&G Washington
Analytical Services Center Inc. in Rockville.

   Systech Group Inc. in Reston named John J. Strauchs chief executive officer,
Donald E. Poldy chief operations officer, Dale R. Wheeler president and Martha
C. Chase vice president.?

   Send information about appointments, promotions and other personnel moves to
Newsmakers, Business News Department, The Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW,
Washington D.C. 20071-5302. All material must be submitted in writing.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, CLARK MASSIE

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1110 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                      June 28, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F11

LENGTH: 593 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy's New Hire Seeks Market for Biotech Products

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Ross Kerber, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   For a man with no product to sell, Genetic Therapy Inc. President James
Barrett surely is eager to hire.

   Barrett's latest acquisition is a chief operating officer, Michael D. Casey,
whose arrival last week underlined a new round of investments for the
Gaithersburg biotech company.

   Genetic Therapy, founded in 1986, also is in the process of doubling its lab,
office and manufacturing space in anticipation of commercial production of its
genetic therapy treatments. But aside from investments and research contracts,
the firm has no revenue and doesn't expect to have products on the market until
1996 at the earliest.

   To get to that stage, Casey's task is to help "build the second half of the
company" now that it has set its patenting strategies and commercial targets,
Barrett said. Casey will manage the company's transition to manufacturing
batches of genetic products to treat diseases such as cancer and cystic
fibrosis.

   The company has several drugs undergoing human trials but has no approvals
from the Food and Drug Administration and does not expect to have any soon.

   Casey said he hoped the FDA would quickly approve any procedures that showed
revolutionary potential but that many genetic products now being tested would
never be sold.

   "It's only one out of five research products that go into human studies that
ever gets approval ... and the more complex you get, the lower success
percentage you get," Casey said.

   Unlike Barrett, who holds a PhD in biochemistry, Casey's background is in
sales, product development and licensing strategy.

   Casey, 47, said he was recruited because of his background in developing new
products. At Johnson & Johnson, he oversaw a division with products at similar
stages of development, including the launch of an antibiotic whose 1993 sales
are expected to be about $ 140 million. Before that, Casey worked for Ortho
Pharmaceutical, another Johnson & Johnson division, from 1968 to 1989, rising to
vice president for sales and marketing.

   Genetic Therapy expects its first product will be a treatment for brain
cancer, involving a virus that could be injected into tumors, Barrett said. The
company employs about 100 people, including about 80 scientists.

   Barrett credited his company's progress to arrangements it has made with the
National Institutes of Health under the 1986 Federal Technology Transfer Act.
Genetic Therapy was among the first companies to win such agreements, said Carol
Lavrich, who coordinates the program for NIH.  She said the research partnership
with Genetic Therapy was just what the NIH agreements are meant to foster.

   The government partnership programs have drawn criticism for the competitive
advantages some say private firms unfairly gain from government-funded research.

   The awards also mean headaches for the private sector; Genetic Therapy has
less influence than it might want over the direction of some NIH research and
must accept complex rules about conflicts of interest and proprietary control
over the knowledge gained by such research.

   Barrett said he hoped to continue to work with the NIH despite the obstacles.
With the partnerships, he said, Genetic Therapy's size was less a limit on its
research and development possibilities than it would be otherwise.

   Casey's arrival comes at a crucial time for Genetic Therapy, said Paul Boni,
an analyst who follows the company for Mehta & Isaly in New York.

   Said Boni, "Like a lot of small biotech companies, they're burning their cash
and hoping to get some products out by 1996 or 1997."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, MICHAEL D. CASEY IS CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER FOR GENETIC THERAPY
INC. DICK SWANSON

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1111 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 24, 1993, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 3982 words

HEADLINE: JEROME GROOPMAN, AIDS WARRIOR;
In a sealed lab, a Boston doctor and his army of researchers battle to unlock
the secrets of the deadly virus

BYLINE: By Barbara Carton, Globe Staff

BODY:

    Here, in an unmarked brick building just off Kenmore Square, is a laboratory
where researchers handle HIV, the deadly virus that causes AIDS, so concentrated
that it can be 1,000 times as potent as that found in the blood of AIDS
patients.

   There are no windows.

   The rooms are kept at a constant negative air pressure, so that any virus
escaping into the air will be immediately filtered out at .22 microns before the
air flows into the busy streets.

   The floor of the lab curves into the walls, eliminating any seams where the
virus might hide.

   A small radio is usually kept tuned to sports talk, or WMJX. It cannot be
removed - not unless it is first decontaminated, then burned to ashes. No
janitors enter or exit. Even notes taken inside have to be faxed out.

   This unnatural world is the biological theater of war in which Dr. Jerome
Groopman, an internationally known AIDS researcher, has assembled his armaments
to do battle against one of the 20th century's great scourges.

   He is one of thousands of AIDS researchers, slaving, like the others, in the
relative anonymity of a scientific netherworld, praying for answers.

   Groopman is 41, but his hair is nearly white. It has been 13 years since he
saw his first AIDS patient, and in the intervening time, he has watched many
die. Anguished patients still call him at home, often several times a night.

   As a doctor, Groopman has the medical tools to ease the diarrhea, night
sweats, swollen glands, fatigue. He can treat the thrush, the purplish-red
lesions, and manage a hundred other complications.

   But HIV, the human immunodeficiency virus, is a crafty opponent, cunning and
elusive. Despite years of his - and others' - work, it continues to evade
attempts at a vaccine, or a cure. In Groopman's battle against the disease, his
adversary - lurking in plastic test tubes that contain the thickish yellow
slurry of concentrated HIV - is still winning.

   "It's horrific," he says simply, of the infectious disease epidemic that
consumes his life.

   "I probably have seen more death than most people outside of those in
Cambodia, or concentration camps, or Nagasaki."

   Groopman has examined his enemy intimately, in detail. Its physical structure
is imprinted on his mind: the fatty membrane studded with protein spikes, the
p24 viral core, the snake of RNA.

   He knows the deepest crevices of the body, where it hides, silently, in the
dark, often for years . . . waiting . . . waiting. He understands that it hunts
like a smart bomb, wired with 9,213 bits of genetic information, programmed to
destroy.

   But knowledge about his labile, ever-changing enemy doesn't, so far, allow
him to overpower it.

   "There is a tremendous spectrum of strains," he says, "and a tremendous
capacity to mutate and slither away."

   Over the years, he has built a bigger and bigger research laboratory, aimed
at stalking the virus and unraveling its vicious mysteries.

   But he also has a human laboratory, in which patients' wracked bodies are the
vials and their blood the experimental solution. At any given time, he may have
a dozen clinical studies under way, aimed at testing new treatments for
complications of AIDS, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, or cancer of the lymph nodes,
as well as advanced AIDS and early HIV infection.

   He also knows the epidemic continues to gallop along.

   The World Health Organization is reporting that 14 million people have been
infected with the virus since the start of the epidemic, most through
heterosexual intercourse. By the year 2000, the total number worldwide is
expected to rise to a staggering 40 million, including growing numbers of women
and children.

   Already, more than 2 million infected adults have gone on to the final stage
of the disease, AIDS, and most of them are now dead. In some countries, as many
as 80 percent of hospital beds are occupied by AIDS patients, and there is a
growing debate over how to manage, and pay for, their care. Even in Boston, on
some wards, the figures have hit 20 percent or more.

   "This," says Groopman, "is a race against time."

The first cases

    Groopman who is chief of hematology/oncology at Deaconess Hospital and the
Recanati associate professor at Harvard Medical School - does not remember the
name of his first AIDS patient.

   There have been so many.

   Maybe it was Michael?

   It was 1980.

   He was blond, Groopman remembers, a homeless gay teen-ager living on the
streets, and he suffered from a constellation of perplexing symptoms.

   For starters, he had a rare pneumonia he shouldn't have had - Pneumocystis
carinii, generally seen only in cancer patients, or the severely malnourished,
or in those taking immune-suppressant drugs for, say, an organ transplant.

   "There was a lot of discussion and questioning and hypothesis," Groopman
recalls.

   Of course, no one called it AIDS at the time. No papers had been published.
You could only describe the symptoms: the pneumonia or swelling of the lymph
nodes.

   And when other patients began turning up, there evolved a whole spectrum of
possible explanations, everything from rock 'n' roll to swine virus to secret
military experiments gone awry.

   It wasn't until 1981 that the first papers began to come out, including
descriptions by Groopman and his colleagues of what they had seen.

   This virus killed so exquisitely.

   It ravaged the heart, the brain, the skin, the liver, the lungs.

   It was blood thirsty, parasitic, driven to destroy tissue and organs in its
path.

   It could be slowed.

   But it could not be stopped.

   Since then, Groopman has been working to halt AIDS' inexorable march.

   Groopman spends much of his time here, at his laboratory headquarters, where
53 researchers work amid the constant whoosh of overhead air being carefully
filtered. His is not one of the nation's largest research machines, but it is
substantial.

   He lopes through the corridors, a long man in a short white coat, pointing
out specialized weaponry for probing the defenses of the virus.

   Here is his $ 100,000 automated gene sequencer, which can map out a new gene
in three weeks instead of the usual year or two.

   Over there is a waist-high freezer containing 14,000 specimens taken from
AIDS patients, their serum and plasma preserved in suspended animation at minus
80 degrees centigrade.

   "In a way," he says, "it's strange to think that many of them are now dead."

   Along that wall are the two ultra-centrifuges, spinning to create a force
100,000 times that of gravity, their rotors worth $ 10,000 or more, carved of
single blocks of the purest titanium.

   And behind double-locked doors is the special containment area, where
researchers work with the concentrated HIV.

   All it takes is one exposure . . .

   Everything that touches the virus - the tissue plates, the plasticware, the
gloves - is decontaminated in a steam autoclave at 260 degrees, then
incinerated.

   When one of Groopman's seven principal investigators - Randal Byrn, 40, a PhD
in immunology and microbiology - accidentally spilled a plate of live HIV on the
floor, he followed emergency procedures, stripping off his blue surgical gown
and shoes, leaving them behind.

   Byrn's belongings were tossed into the autoclave, then burned. He was
unharmed, but he went home that evening in a pair of borrowed shoes.

   The worst incident happened several years ago. A medical student tried to
stuff too many pipettes into a container, snapping one off about 1/2 inch from
the live virus, slashing her finger in the process.

   Right away - plunge the finger in 70 percent alcohol for 10 minutes.

   Hurry.

   Bleed it.

   Squeeze the virus out.

   She was OK . . . that time.

Foot soldiers in the lab

    On this recent morning, Groopman has come to the lab for an update from his
troops.

   He is not interested in the plate of breakfast bagels and cream cheese that
someone has put on the laboratory conference table.

   Instead, he is focused on the microfiche slides flashed against one wall,
with titles like "Chimeric-Receptor CD8 Cells, Cytotoxicity Against CEM and
CE,/IIIB Cells Comparison of T3, T3/F3 and T3/F15 Effectiveness."

   One by one, Groopman's researchers stand before him in their white lab coats
and Adidas or Nikes and explain their latest probings into the deepest workings
of the virus.

   As is true for any army, they are trained to different tactical capabilities.

   You have the gene jocks and the membrane guys. Each is assigned to tackle the
virus from a different angle: genetic, developmental, structural, cellular.

   They are predominantly young and foreign - from Israel, Pakistan, Italy,
Bangladesh, Cambodia, Korea, Germany, England, Hungary, Poland, Greece, India,
China, Britain, Japan.

   In the distinct minority are Americans. They represent only about one-fifth
of the laboratory's fighting force, and most are at the less skilled end of the
hierarchy, working the technician's jobs.

   This is partly because competition for jobs in science is global.
Furthermore, new-minted American PhDs often emerge from the university so
swamped with debt that they can't afford to take a research salary of $ 18,000
to $ 25,000. Even MD/PhDs working on their second postdoc can expect to make
only about $ 27,000 starting out.

   Nationality aside, biology researchers are a breed apart, eager to roll up
their sleeves, get down in there, into the middle of the warfare, engage in
hand-to-hand combat with the enemy.

   Stalking HIV is not like astrophysics. It is not something you can do in your
head or only on a computer.

   You've got to know how the equipment works. You've got to fix the equipment,
build the equipment. Like everyone who has ever fought in a war, you have to be
able to handle the moments of terror and failure, as well as the long stretches
in which nothing seems to happen.

   You have to not mind spending your days like Anita Estabrooks, 35, a research
assistant, peering through plastic safety glasses, repeatedly punching the thumb
button on her black plastic pipette, filling 96-well trays - 12 columns this
way, eight that.

   Punch: add the antibodies. Punch: add the virus. Incubate. Punch: add the
cells.

   You've got to love the acrid smells of the lab, the bottles of orange
Cellgro, the feeling of coming in early and setting up experiments, of being the
first one to look at the data.

   "And you need to be highly self-critical," says Groopman, "because as opposed
to how people usually conceive of research, a lot of good ideas don't work, and
there are frustrations of incredible magnitude."

   And this is precise, fine, meticulous, small-picture stuff - an engineer's
war, really. There is an intensity and isolation that's required.

   It's easy, working at the bench, to shut out everything except that single
cell, that individual tat gene, the cold of the microscope pressing against the
eye socket as your white-lit circle of vision comes into focus.

   There it is.

   You can't see the virus.

   But you can see the infected cells.

   They look so beautiful, so translucent - a cluster of the tiniest pearls.
Malevolently beautiful.

   "The first time I worked with the virus I felt overly relaxed," Estabrooks
says. "And that bothered me afterwards. I was more concerned about radiation,
but everybody was like, 'No - you can withstand a lot of radiation, but you can
only withstand one exposure to HIV.' "

   And to be a part of this war, you have to be willing to work as part of a
complementary team, because a massive modern assault like that on HIV requires
numnds of feet down.

   It is easy, spending your days in a windowless laboratory, to forget about
the urgency.

   Many bench researchers only come into contact with HIV-infected patients on
television or at walkathons. If an experiment fails, you do it again. You can do
it over 100 times, if you have to.

   It is not as easy for Groopman to forget.

   He often finds himself at the bedside of the dying, or admitting yet another
sick patient to the hospital for the last time.

   He sees the hemorrhages and the loss of ability to think.  Pneumocystis
carinii is an everyday occurrence. He hears the rales from tubercular lungs,
runs his fingers over the shrunken and wasted flesh.

   As a general in the war against HIV, he directs clinical studies to test new
treatments. And he maintains a caseload of 100 patients, most of whom are
infected with HIV or suffering from AIDS.

Caring for patients

    On a recent morning, he welcomes a stream of patients, one after the other,
into his tiny examining room near the Deaconess.

   He greets them in his white laboratory coat, a stethoscope stuffed into the
right pocket.

   "Good to see you," he says, calling them by name.

   They drop their bicycle helmets and Jansport knapsacks near his desk, and
when he asks about their health, their responses are matter-of-fact: "Great - no
diarrhea whatsoever," and "I'm taking AZT, ddI and what's that other blue stuff?
Acyclovir."

   They lift their jeans and show him bruises, worried that the dark blotches
might be the harbingers of Kaposi's. They let Groopman peer into their eyes to
search for retinal damage.

   They speak nervously about T-cell counts, anxious that theirs have dipped to,
say, 410 - "but, as you know, my boyfriend had 360 two years ago, and now
they're up to 800."

   He listens when they say:

    - "Well, I had five friends die last summer, so that kind of put me in the
hole."

    - "As I told you early on, my goal is to be that one exceptional patient
that outlives everyone."

    - "Over the winter I would keep thinking, 'Oh, I think I'll call so-and-so.'
But then I'd remember they're all dead."

    Groopman asks one woman, a young veterinarian, what she plans to do,
career-wise, in life.

   For a second, she can't answer.

   He reaches out and grasps her hand.

   He continues to hold it . . .

   Later, another of Groopman's patients pauses briefly in the hospital waiting
room. "I love him," he says, simply. "I feel very, very lucky to have him."

   Groopman once considered becoming a rabbi.

   But he chose medicine because he thought he'd have the "most real" life that
way.

   And he picked hematology/oncology as a specialty because he knew that if you
had a blood disease or cancer, you needed a doctor who could take primary
responsibility.

   Also, hematology was so elegant, because such a tremendous amount of science
was known.

   In the academic-medicine establishment, the classic way to get ahead is to
select a rare disease - some metabolic abnormality - and study it, biomedically,
publish obscure papers on it and make a reputation as an expert in X.

   That way, you have your little niche, you work up the ladder and off you go.

   So, in 1979, after medical school at Columbia, an internship and residency at
Massachusetts General Hospital and further training elsewhere, Groopman went off
to UCLA as a research fellow to study a rare disease, human T-cell leukemia,
which occurred mostly in Japan and the Caribbean.

   It was while at UCLA that Groopman saw his first case of AIDS.

   And, curiously, it seemed to be the exact reverse of human T-cell leukemia.
Instead of infecting patients' T-cells and causing them to multiply and become
leukemic, and live forever, the AIDS virus just killed them.

   Death comes in many forms.

   AIDS is about as bad as it gets.

   The urgency and pressure Groopman says he feels from caring for patients who
know what may be in store for them is incredible.

   Many have already buried 10 friends, or 15, and have seen the vomiting and
the fungal infections and the bodies covered with tumors lying in sweat-drenched
sheets and the blindness.

   You can't compare AIDS to the Holocaust, of course. But on some level,
Groopman feels the connection. There is that sense of sudden disappearance of an
entire community.

   The Bayside, Queens, neighborhood where Groopman grew up was full of
Holocaust survivors - even the family doctor had numbers from Auschwitz tattooed
into his arm - and he heard all the stories.

   "I think about this a lot, actually," he says. "About what it must have taken
to sustain the energy and the commitment to persist in a situation that was
logistically much more horrendous than this, but there is that sense among
people who have HIV that they are fighting for their lives, and that sense of
'Why us?' "

   There are also financial pressures.

   Like all AIDS researchers, Groopman complains that he is spending more of his
time scrambling to write more and more grants, each of which is smaller and
smaller.

   And he worries endlessly about replenishing his $ 2 million budget, which is
supported by federal dollars, foundation donations, selected contracts with
pharmaceutical and biotech firms like the $ 100,000 one with Genentech, and
private gifts.

   "It's not that you're becoming personally rich," he says. "It's that
everything that touches the virus has to be disposed of, because it's
contaminated. And then you have the equipment - the gene sequencer costs $
100,000 alone, plus thousands of dollars a month to operate."

   And there's intense competition - the subject no one wants to talk about.

   Big science has always been about being first, being best and keeping one's
advances secret until publication. At stake are money, fame and the peer
recognition that helps determine how much grant money flows your way. An extreme
example is the acrimonious dispute between American Robert Gallo and French
researcher Luc Montagnier over who discovered HIV.

   In the United States alone, there are probably 100 cities where competitive
AIDS research is being done, including San Francisco; Bethesda, Md.; Baltimore;
Boston, and Durham, N.C. And there are legions of researchers, virologists,
epidemiologists, pharmacologists, molecular biologists and oncologists - all
rushing, like opman and his team, to answer any of thousands of scientific
questions about the virus.

   Yet in the face of an infectious-disease epidemic like this, there is also an
emerging, competing ethos that demands sharing knowledge.

   A lot of networking and collaboration take place, such as the $ 1.2 million
grant recently submitted to the National Institutes of Health on behalf of a
consortium of seven Boston hospitals, including the Deaconess. Even 15 major
pharmaceutical companies from the United States, Germany, Italy, Britain and
Switzerland recently made the highly unusual announcement that in order to speed
research, they would conduct joint studies of experimental medicines.

   The frustrations, too, are shared. There are so many different ideas about
how the virus causes AIDS that one British researcher has likened the confusion
to a group of blind men who encounter an elephant and attempt to identify it by
pressing and poking at various body parts. Everyone has a tiny piece. So much is
known, but so much is still obscure, and there are days when all familiar
markers are lost.

   As Science magazine recently put it, "The more we learn, the less certain we
are."

Getting away from it

    Swimming helps ease the pressure.

   On any given day, you can probably find Groopman at lunchtime, pulling his
gray Saab into the parking lot at Harvard's Blodgett pool for his 25-minute
swim.

   It's partly to soothe an old back injury; he once spent six months sleeping
on a bed of ice, and kept a stretcher in his laboratory so he could lie down.

   But there is, as he says, "a big Zen component" - something about losing
yourself in the warm blue water, the smells of chlorine, the humid air and the
crimson flags strung over the ends of the pool.

   Swimming also helps focus whatever has been percolating in the back of
Groopman's mind - say, how to construct experiments to understand the process by
which an innocent cell is invaded by the freeloading virus, with its halo of
spikes.

   It is so crafty.

   So utterly evil.

   Its life cycle consists of more than a dozen parasitic steps: Attachment . .
. Reverse Transcription . . . RNAseH Degradation . . . Migration To Nucleus . .
.  If any one of these can be interrupted . . .

   Then, there is Groopman's family.

   His wife, endocrinologist Pamela Hartzband, works several floors above him at
the Deaconess.

   "She has a wonderful effect," says Larry Kessler, executive director of AIDS
Action Committee, New England's largest AIDS service organization, "and I think
she is probably able to lift him up from time to time."

   Groopman also pitches in to drive his sons' early morning car pool several
days a week, and tries to break away for their Little League games - priorities,
he says, that are partly the result of being immersed in so much death.

   "We are not masters of the universe," he explains. "This is not like 'Bonfire
of the Vanities.' And disease is a humbling event. You see people with
tremendous fame or wealth or political power or achievement, and there are times
when all of these material attributes don't change things. It teaches you what's
substantial in life, like family relationships and friends."

   He also finds some relaxation in studying foreign languages. Groopman and
Hartzband often speak French at home and once trudged merrily through 40
Pimsleur tapes in Russian, astonishing the store clerk, who said that no one
ever finishes 40 language tapes.

   Groopman speaks Yiddish, too, and studies Hebrew for two hours every Sunday
with a private tutor.

   The process of discovery is never the way the public conceives of it, with
billowing test tubes of colored gasses, the heavens opening up and the pop of
exploding champagne corks.

   For many of these things, the light turns on only slowly. Even the discovery
of DNA's structure didn't come in a vacuum; it is only an incremental advance
over the other models that were proposed.

   Newspapers talk of "cures," but Groopman knows that up to now there have been
no cures for viral diseases.

   "In order to have a cure in the classic sense," he says, "you'd have to
figure out how to purge this virus out of the brain, the bone marrow, the
spleen, everything. Everything. And that is not, right now, medically
approachable."

   He sighs.

   Preventative vaccines against the virus are also very difficult.

   "People would want a vaccine that's significantly protective," he says, "and
I don't see it. I don't see it, probably, even at the 30 percent level. I don't
think it's very likely."

   In the end, the best odds are on prevention to block transmission, and on a
chronic treatment that would manage the disease the way insulin manages
diabetes.

   For example, gene therapy might control the virus by rendering cells
resistant to it. "That could start to amount to something within two years,"
Groopman says.

   "We are mobilizing a tremendous amount of technology to try to achieve that."

   Groopman is also optimistic that the next five years will bring new
medications to ease patients' suffering and extend their lives by up to 15
years.

   As he speaks, the deaths continue to climb.

   In some cities in Africa, one of every three adults is infected.

   Parts of India are doomed.

   The statistics are staggering.

   In the United States, a new government report states, among other things,
that last year, 30 percent of AIDS cases in American women were attributable to
heterosexual contact, an increase of 40 percent over 1990 . . .

   People always ask Groopman how he copes.

   Hanging on his office wall is a painting of a rainbow. It is linked in his
mind to God's promise to Noah, that after the devastation will come a rainbow of
hope, and that all flesh will be sustained on Earth.

   Groopman also keeps an old photograph near his desk. It is of family - his
great-grandfather, aunts, cousins. They were Jews, from the eastern Hungarian
town of Mamarosh, and most were exterminated in the Holocaust.

   "These people were Hassidim," Groopman says, carefully turning the photograph
over in his hands. "And their philosophy was sort of to maintain the faith, but
to never rest easy, and to always question the cause of so much evil and
suffering."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Dr. Jerome Groopman examines a patient with AIDS (right); an
HIV-infected cell (above) takes on a malevolent beauty.  / GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS /
PAT GREENHOUSE 2. Researcher Shuxian Jiang with data from the $ 100,000 DNA
sequencer (right).  3. Groopman (center) confers with researchers in an outer
room of the lab.  4. Groopman in his lab: "A lot of good ideas don't work, and
there are frustrations of incredible magnitude." / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / YUNGHI
KIM 5. Researcher John Ladias examines human cells through a microscope. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO / PAT GREENHOUSE 6. Jennifer Watters uses a pipette as she works in
Groopman's lab. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / PAT GREENHOUSE 7. Groopman: "People would
want a vaccine that's significantly protective, and I don't see it. I don't
think it's very likely." / GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS / PAT GREENHOUSE 8. Secretary
Youngsun Jung assists Groopman in his lab.  GLOBE STAFF PHOTOS BY PAT GREENHOUSE

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1993


                             1112 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     June 24, 1993, Thursday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 645 words

HEADLINE: Profiteering is found in transplant system;
Medical Notebook / RICHARD A. KNOX

BYLINE: By Richard A. Knox, Globe Staff

BODY:

    The nation's organ transplant system, supposedly based on altruism and
fairness, is marred by profiteering and favoritism, according to new studies.

   Some hospitals routinely add a 200 percent markup to their charges for
removing organs from donors, Roger W. Evans of the Mayo Clinic reports in a
study published yesterday in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

   Evans found a wide disparity in what hospitals and organ banks charge for
procuring organs for transplant. He also found sharp escalation in the cost of
organ procurement in recent years.

   Between 1983 and 1991, estimated charges for organ procurement, adjusted for
inflation, increased 13 percent for kidneys, 64 percent for hearts and 62
percent for livers. The average 1991 cost for removal, preservation and
transportation of these organs was $ 15,683, $ 16,050 and $ 20,776 respectively.

   "Transplantation is engendering its own version of a health care policy
crisis it desperately needs to avoid," Evans writes. "It is clear that the 'gift
of life' can be financially lucrative to hospitals and organ procurement
organizations."

   Profits aside, the case of Pennsylvania Gov. Bob Casey, who received a new
heart and liver this month, within hours of being put on a waiting list,
underscores growing concern about the fairness of organ allocation. As of last
month, more than 31,000 Americans were on waiting lists for various organs, and
20 to 30 percent of them are expected to die waiting.

   Organ procurement agencies are said to be reassessing their policies on which
patients should have priority for multiple-organ transplants. A survey last
month by the American Society of Transplant Physicians found only 24 percent of
transplant doctors think the present scheme is as fair as it should be.

Incentive to donate organs discussed

    Should Americans be promised funeral expenses if they pledge to donate their
organs in advance?

   Faced with a static supply of organs and escalating demand, the idea of some
modest financial incentive to donate - payable to the donor's family after
donation has been completed - is generating serious discussion.

   The American Medical Association's Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs
last week recommended a pilot program of such "future contracts." But after
hearing testimony at the AMA's annual meeting, a committee decided to study the
proposal more.

   "The big thing is to ask families to donate," Dr. Russell H. Patterson of the
American Board of Neurological Surgeons said at the AMA's meeting in Chicago. "I
don't think offering to pay money to families will add one donor, really."

Promising treatment for cystic fibrosis

    The first two cystic fibrosis patients to be treated with gene therapy have
suffered no ill effects, a leader of the experiment said yesterday. A third
patient will be treated soon.

   The goal is to deliver genes for the protein missing in cystic fibrosis into
the air passages of patients with the lung-clogging disease. A cold virus that
is disabled so it can not reproduce carries the normal genes into cells lining
the patients' airways. Once in place, scientists hope the genes will stimulate
production of the missing protein.

   The first hurdle is to demonstrate safety, because cystic fibrosis patients
are vulnerable to infection. Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of New York Hospital-Cornell
Medical Center said in a telephone interview that the first two patients,
treated in April, remained free of respiratory infection.

   Crystal, speaking at a New York briefing sponsored by the American Medical
Association, said it will be early next year before researchers know if the
imported genes actually started to overcome the disease. If it works, the
therapy would have to be administered every few weeks as a nasal spray, because
the genes do not fuse with the nucleus of airway cells.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1993


                             1113 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
Executive Changes

BODY:


   AIR LIQUIDE AMERICA CORP., Walnut Creek, Calif., a unit of L'Air Liquide
S.A., a Paris-based producer of industrial gas, named Robert D. Cadieux
president and chief executive.

CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE, Toronto, named Robert W. Stuart managing
director of a new telecommunications group based in New York.


   COLORADO MEDTECH INC., Boulder, Colo., a medical products company, named John
V. Atanasoff 2d chairman, chief executive and president.

DIACRIN INC., Charlestown, Mass., named E. Michael Egan senior vice president of
corporate development.

GENETIC THERAPY INC., Gaithersburg, Md., named Michael D. Casey president and
chief operating officer, a new position.

JOSTEN'S INC., Minneapolis, has named Robert C. Buhrmaster its president and
chief operating officer of the youth educational services company. In addition,
John Kernan, chairman of Jostens Learning Corp., was elected vice chairman of
the parent company.


   MATTEL INC., Los Angeles, named Francesca Luzuriaga executive vice president
of marketing services, finance and administration; Fred Okun executive vice
president of sales, and Diana Troup executive vice president of product design.

PENEDERM INC., Foster City, Calif., a pharmaceuticals development company, named
Lloyd H. Malchow president and chief operating officer.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1993


                             1114 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     June 24, 1993, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 3D

LENGTH: 579 words

HEADLINE: Cystic fibrosis breakthroughs due

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Nearly 30 years have passed without a new treatment for cystic fibrosis, but
medical researchers are now close to arming patients with some new anti-CF
artillery.

   Gene therapy experiments that attempt to correct lung defects inherent in the
disease have begun. And several new drugs are being tested; at least one - DNase
- could be approved by year's end.

   "I can't tell you when the disease is going to be cured or even if this (gene
therapy) strategy is going to work," says Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, New York
Hospital-Cornell University Medical Center. "But many scientists are working
very, very hard to cure the disease."

   Crystal, principal investigator for the first CF gene therapy trial, was
among experts discussing CF Wednesday at an American Medical Association
briefing in New York.

   Cystic fibrosis, which affects more than 30,000 people in the USA, happens
when one inherits a flawed gene from both parents. The consequences:
lung-damaging buildup of thick mucus "that leads to a cycle of obstruction,
infection and lung damage," says Dr. Beryl J. Rosenstein, director of the Cystic
Fibrosis Center, Johns Hopkins Children's Center, Baltimore.

   Since the CF gene was found in 1989, researchers have unraveled some clues to
the disease's basis. Having defective CF genes disturbs chloride and sodium
transport in airway linings, sucking water from lung mucus. That makes the mucus
sticky and hard to cough up.

   Most cystic fibrosis patients die young, but the CF average life span has
increased to 29 years today vs. 2 years in the 1940s. By the year 2000, nearly
half of the CF population will be 18 or older, experts say.

   Better diagnosis, improved diet and stronger antibiotics have contributed to
longer life spans, says Dr. Stanley B. Fiel, Medical College of Pennsylvania.
Now needed, he says: more medical providers to care for adult CF patients and
ways to pay for the medical care (home IV use, home oxygen, hospital stays) that
can cost from $ 17,000 to more than $ 40,000 each year.

    Research continues on 4 fronts

Among anti-CF strategies being studied:

   - Gene therapy. In April, two patients were given nose drops that had a
healthy CF gene packed into an inactivated cold virus. Theoretically, the gene
should help patients make a normal version of a protein that improves lung
function.

   The first two patients showed "no adverse effects," says Dr. Ronald G.
Crystal, leader of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute's trial. But
researchers don't know yet whether the protein was made. The next two patients
will soon get a dose 100 times larger; six more patients will get increasingly
larger doses during these safety trials.

   - Drugs that improve lung function. Genentech submitted DNase to the Food and
Drug Administration in March and the drug could be approved by year's end. DNase
has been shown to increase lung function and decrease need for antibiotics and
hospital stays. Also being tested: an aerosol combination of diuretic amiloride
and UTP, a naturally occurring compound associated with energy production in
cells.

   - Drugs that fight infection. Naturally occurring immunoglobulins, rich in
antibodies, are being tested to fight lung infections called pseudomonas.

   - Drugs to reduce inflammation. A steroid, prednisone, showed modest airway
benefits, but with some side effects. That's led to trials of ibuprofen, a
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, to test its ability to reduce swelling.


                             1115 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                            June 23, 1993, Wednesday

SECTION: CHEM, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 771 words

HEADLINE: DRUG FIRMS HUNT FOR TREASURE WITH GENE MAP

BYLINE: BEN HIRSCHLER; Reuters

DATELINE: LONDON

BODY:


   Drug firms are poring over the fast-emerging genetic map of the human body in
the hunt for new ways to fight disease.

    With the project to decode the estimated 100,000 pairs of genes that make up
the human "genome" set for completion within 10 years - faster than initially
expected - the hunt is on to convert this DNA coding data into commercial
roducts.

   The Anglo-U.S. pharmaceuticals group SmithKline Beecham PLC put itself in the
vanguard of the search last week with a wide-ranging strategic alliance with
Human Genome Sciences (HGS) of the United States.

   Stock analysts say the move underlines the growing need for drug companies to
be in the thick of fundamental research into the genetic cause of disease.

   "Companies that aren't actually involved in this field are going to find they
are just so disadvantaged they won't be able to grow," said Peter Laing of
Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull.

   SmithKline's link up with HGS, created in 1992 by leading health-care capital
venture fund Healthcare Investment Corp., follows other forays into the area,
notably by Glaxo Holdings PLC and Roche Holding Ltd., Mr. Laing said.

   The prize could be a range of new drugs and diagnostic products worth tens of
billions dollars a year in the next century.

   "It's very long-term stuff . . . (but) beyond the year 2000 this will be a
significant therapeutic area," said James Culverwell of Hoare Govett.

   The first fruits of understanding how individual genes can code for disease
will be a greatly expanded market for diagnostic kits to detect genetic
"markers" indicating individuals' predisposition to given diseases, analysts
predict.

   There could, for example, be a simple test to see if smokers have a
hereditary propensity to certain lung cancers.

   "Over the coming decade the use of these new molecular diagnostic tests will
create a major change in health-care delivery by shifting the emphasis to
disease prediction and prevention rather than reliance on treatment alone," said
SmithKline research and development chairman Dr George Poste.

   Such tests would offer great opportunities to SmithKline's SB Clinical
Laboratories unit, the leading clinical laboratory in the United States,
analysts said.

   The ultimate goal, however, is to cure disease, either by replacing faulty
genes using "gene therapy" or by blocking their action in a process called
"anti-sense".

   The shift in approach is fundamental. While today's state-of-the-art drugs
act on proteins, which control the way the body functions, the new treatments
would go one step back by directly targeting the genes that code for the
proteins.

   The first diseases to be tackled will be the relatively rare single-gene
diseases such as muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis and severe combined
immuno-deficiency (SCID). Clinical trials using gene therapy to treat SCID are
already under way.

   But eventually researchers hope to the find genetic keys to more common
complaints, like asthma, diabetes, heart disease - and even obesity - where
inheritance patterns suggest a role for groups of genes.

   Taken together, diseases involving multiple genes affect almost everybody,
said John Bell, Nuffield Professor of Clinical Medicine at Oxford University.

   Mr. Bell, whose Oxford colleagues are pioneering research into so-called
multifactoral disease, believes the field will become the most important area of
genetic research in the years ahead.

   "There's a huge amount of interest from pharmaceutical companies because it's
a vast potential market," he said.

   However, even if much of the human genome is mapped by the end of the
century, drug development will take many more years.

   Stewart Adkins of Shearson Lehman believes that while SmithKline and its new
partner may find diagnostic products from their gene sequencing venture in two
to three years, new drugs are probably at least 10 years away.

   "What they're doing has great potential but it's a "blue sky" project . . .
It might take them ages to find a gene sequence, which codes for a protein that
is relevant to them," he said.

   SmithKline's linkup with HGS also underlines the need for big drug companies
to collaborate with outside specialists in their effort to touch all bases in
the rapidly changing field of molecular genetics, analysts said.

   "The majors are increasingly appreciating that basic science is outside, and
they've got to go outside to get it," said Jonathan de Pass of BZW.

   "The number of deals being done is going up and up and up, and small
biotechnology companies are becoming a very important part of the pharmaceutical
industry," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1997


                             1116 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             June 22, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: `Jurassic Park': symbol of real fears

BYLINE: ARTHUR CAPLAN, CAPLAN is director of the Center for Biomedical Ethics at
the University of Minnesota.

BODY:

   It is hideous!

   It is monstrous!

   It is incredible!

   It is targeted at your children! No one can stop it! That's right, "Jurassic
Park" has finally opened at your local decaplex. When Hollywood and science mix,
watch out.

   Those who make movies like their scientists mad, bad and more than a tad
morally zonkers.

   From Dr. Frankenstein and his goofing around with corpses and electricity to
the folks in white coats whose nuclear shenanigans brought you Godzilla and
Mothra, the silver screen has had few kind words for nerds with advanced degrees
in science and technology. "Jurassic Park" falls smack in the cinematic
tradition that holds that science ain't no friend of yours or mine.

   Forget about the fact that the movie itself, loaded as it is with special
effects and 20-foot-tall robots, is a pure paean to technology.

   The driving message of the book and the movie is that the price of progress
in science and technology is too high in terms of the cost to human dignity and
morality. Many within the scientific community are simply battening down the
hatches until the hype blows over.

   They figure a single summer blockbuster is not going to have the townsfolk
organizing themselves into a vigilante party to set fire to the local gene
therapy institute.

   Others are not so sure. A couple of biologist friends have confided to me
that they are already tired of explaining at every picnic, barbecue or cocktail
party why they would not be tempted, even if they knew how, to try to recreate a
dinosaur from an ancient DNA sample.

   They say they are not sure what to say when a back-yard philosopher asks if
they think it is OK to fool with Mother Nature's secrets when everything from
their dog to their salad represents the results of mankind's manipulating
nature. I think those in the scientific community who argue for either ignoring
or simply blowing off the "Jurassic Park" phenomena as just so much Mad
Scientist nonsense are missing a great opportunity.

   Every kid I know under the age of 14 can't wait to see the movie.

   A lot of adults are curious too.

   While the themes of science out of control and a science indifferent to human
values do not accurately describe what is taking place in genetics today,
"Jurassic Park" does accurately reflect a set of anxieties about genetic
engineering that have deep roots in our culture. People are worried about what
the "experts" are up to with respect to genetic engineering.

   They are concerned that they are going to find some unhealthy, adulterated
product on their grocery shelf that represents a large company's best effort to
make a buck by genetically engineering milk, fruit or meat. They worry when they
learn that researchers have already bred a goat-sheep hybrid, a "geep" in the
jargon of genetics, without seeming to have needed permission or authorization
from any agency or review board. Genetic engineering does require more debate
and discussion than it has received to date.

   But our key institutions are not well-positioned to instigate that
discussion.

   Most legislators and public officials cannot tell a chromosome from a chrome
bumper. Our churches and schools are not adequately preparing the next
generation for the choices they will face about how to use our rapidly expanding
knowledge of heredity.

   And those who work in the media and the arts are frighteningly ignorant about
genetics and biology. The proof of our ignorance is right up there on the
screen.

   We and our kids are not really sure what these gene jockeys are up to in
their laboratories.

   We have no idea what sorts of regulations or rules govern their research,
what motives or visions inspire their work. Perhaps most frustrating is the fact
that it is fear rather than hope that dominates "Jurassic Park."

   For while there are reasons for concern about where we are headed with
genetic engineering and gene therapy, there are more reasons for excitement.

   As science slowly unravels the mysteries of heredity, medicine, agriculture
and veterinary science will change for the better. Molecular engineering will
allow us to prevent diseases such as cystic fibrosis, sickle cell anemia and
muscular dystrophy.

   We will be able to create animals that don't require massive amounts of
antibiotics to fend off diseases.

   And we should be able to engineer plants that can grow in hot, arid climates
-- making famine nothing more than a horrid memory. When you and your kids are
driving back from "Jurassic Park" and they are full of questions about dinosaurs
and mad scientists, tell them there are reasons for concern about how well
humanity will handle the secrets of heredity.

   But warn them too that they need to be concerned that our fear of genetic
engineering not blind us to its potential enormous benefits. (C) (C) 1993,
Knight-Ridder Newspapers

GRAPHIC: 1 CARTOON; PHOTOBY: MARGARET SCOTT

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1117 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     June 22, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE D1; DIGEST

LENGTH: 840 words

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: From news services and staff reports

BODY:

   Software Publishers Association said sales of PC programs run by Windows
exceeded those for DOS-based machines for the first time during the first three
months of 1993. Windows program sales reached $ 669 million, up 114 percent from
a year earlier, and DOS sales were $ 502 million, down 20 percent.

   MCI lost its appeal to the Supreme Court of a lower court ruling that found
the FCC had improperly dismissed a complaint by AT&T, which argued that all
long-distance telephone companies should file their rates with the commission.
The justices let stand the lower court ruling without comment.

   The Supreme Court, 6-3, rejected a bid by Brooke Group, formerly called
Liggett & Myers, to revive a $ 148.8 million antitrust award it had won against
a competitor that was later thrown out. The decision said Brooke Group failed to
prove that a price war waged by Brown & Williamson in marketing generic
cigarettes in the mid-1980s illegally stifled competition.

   Citicorp's biggest individual shareholder, Saudi Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal,
disclosed in an SEC filing that he sold 3.457 million common shares of Citicorp
on Friday for $ 95.5 million. The prince put his remaining stake at 41,144,149
common shares, or 9.999 percent of Citicorp's common stock outstanding.

   A German district court rejected part of General Motors's claim that its
former purchasing chief stole company secrets when he jumped to Volkswagen. The
court ruled the personal knowledge Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua took with him
did not represent such secrets. The Frankfurt court also allowed seven of
Lopez's aides who jumped ship to stay with him at VW. The ruling was made in May
but released only yesterday.

   The Treasury sold $ 12.11 billion in three-month bills and $ 12.18 billion in
six-month bills at average discount rates of 3.10 percent and 3.19 percent,
respectively. The actual return to investors is 3.17 percent for three-month
bills, with a $ 10,000 bill selling for $ 9,921.60, and 3.29 percent for a
six-month bill selling for $ 9,839.70. Separately, the Federal Reserve said the
average yield for one-year Treasury bills, the most popular index for changing
adjustable-rate mortgages, fell to 3.49 percent last week from 3.61 percent the
week before.

   China's supercharged industrial growth has pushed prices sharply higher and
tightened economic bottlenecks in a sign of overheating. The State Statistical
Bureau's May report said the economy is struggling with "overfast growth of
investment, over-expanded money supply [and] clear rises in market prices."

   Vietnam will apply for observer status in the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade as a first step to becoming a full participant in the world trade body
within five years.

   Sandy Spring Bancorp, parent of the nine-branch Sandy Spring National Bank of
Maryland, agreed to acquire First Montgomery Bank, which has a branch in
Rockville and one in Gaithersburg. The acquisition, subject to regulatory and
stockholder approval, will involve an exchange of stock and is expected to be
completed by year's end.

   Merck raised prices on 23 drugs by 4.2 percent -- 1 percent above what the
drugmaker expects inflation as measured by the consumer price index to be this
year. Among those increased: heart drugs Vasotec and Prinivil, prostate drug
Proscar and ulcer drug Pepcid.

   Credit card fraud continues to grow at a double-digit pace, but much slower
than in recent years, MasterCard International said. It said total fraud on
MasterCard credit cards worldwide grew 23 percent to $ 460 million in 1992, down
from 25 percent, or $ 375.5 million, in 1991.

   A new competitiveness study, sponsored by the National Academy of Sciences,
National Academy of Engineering and Institute of Medicine, urged that the United
States keep its eye on foreign competitors in setting federal funding priorities
in science and technology research, and that it try to stay on par with the
world's best-performing nations in science and strategic fields of technology.

   Sara Lee agreed to acquire a majority interest in Maglificio Bellia, an
Italian knit products company with about $ 130 million in 1992 sales. Terms were
not disclosed.

   SmartMoney will begin monthly publication with the November issue, said
Hearst and Dow Jones, co-owners of the personal business and finance magazine.

   The New York Times Co. plans to buy back as much as $ 100 million of its own
common stock before shareholders are asked to vote on its planned purchase of
the company that publishes the Boston Globe. The Times announced its plan to buy
back stock after the market closed. The Class A shares closed 12 1/2 cents lower
at $ 23.62 1/2 on the American Stock Exchange.

   National Health Laboratories agreed to acquire Damon Corp., another lab
testing company, in a deal valued at $ 280 million.

   A House bill would require sellers of municipal securities to reveal to
investors as much information as is required in corporate bond issues, including
political contributions made by underwriters.


GRAPHIC: CHART, TREASURY BILLS (DATA FROM CHART WASUNAVAILABLE.), TWP

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1118 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      June 17, 1993 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: 'BUBBLE' INFANTS AWAIT GENE THERAPY RESULTS

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   The first newborn to get gene therapy is doing well but remains in an
antiseptic hospital room, fed infant formula by parents wearing masks and gloves
as doctors try to rebuild his crippled immune system.

   "He's a good baby. He cries when he's hungry and he's feeding very well,"
said Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles. "As long as we keep him
protected from germs, he's healthy. We won't send him home until he has enough
immunity to protect him from colds and those kinds of germs."

   On May 15, at just 4 days old, Andrew Gobea became the first infant to
undergo gene therapy - replacement of a defective gene - in an attempt to cure
an inherited disease.

   He was born without an enzyme called ADA, a deficiency that destroys
disease-fighting white blood cells and leaves its victims unable to fight
infections.

   ADA deficiency is one form of severe combined immune deficiency, also known
as "bubble boy" disease after a boy identified only as David who spent 12 years
in a sterile chamber in Houston before he died in 1984.

   In the gene therapy procedure, blood was drawn from the newborn's umbilical
cord. Stem cells, which produce blood cells, were isolated and incubated with a
mouse virus designed to infect the stem cells with the gene that orders the body
to make the missing enzyme. The genetically altered cells then were returned to
the baby intravenously.

   Since Andrew's treatment, two other infants also have received injections of
their own genetically altered cells, one in Canada and one at the University of
California, San Francisco.

   Doctors won't know for two to five months if gene therapy will cure the three
infants. A blood test in two weeks will give preliminary hints whether the
technique is restoring immunity to the babies, Kohn said Tuesday.

   Meantime, doctors are giving the three children injections of the missing
enzyme to temporarily rebuild their immune systems.

   Two older children - Ashanthi DeSilva, 6, of North Olmsted, and Cindy
Cutshall, 11, of Canton, have shown improvement since receiving gene therapy for
ADA deficiency in 1990 and 1991, but in a form that requires repeated treatment,
Kohn said. Cindy recently received the same gene therapy used on the infants, he
added. Ashanthi will have the therapay later this summer.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1993


                             1119 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                     June 16, 1993, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 6; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 255 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE WATCH;
JURASSIC JITTERS

BODY:

   The Tyrannosaurus rex is awesome, the velociraptors fearsome. But moviegoers
should not leave a showing of the hit "Jurassic Park" with the mistaken notion
that biotechnology is some kind of threat to mankind. In the film, genetic
engineering -- in this case the patching together of bits of dinosaur DNA
material found encased in amber -- brings back to life the extinct species that
run amok.

   Although real scientists have indeed recovered DNA from the era of dinosaurs,
the giant beasts remain dead, with no change in sight. But biotechnology has
succeeded in unlocking genetic secrets that give new hope to victims of diseases
and help develop everything from drought-resistant crops to new drugs.

   Forty years ago Francis Crick and James Watson cracked the genetic code and
opened secrets of heredity in their remarkable discovery of the double helix
structure of DNA. The Human Genome Project now is involved in identifying and
mapping the estimated 100,000 human genes. Developments have been extraordinary.

   Four-day-old Andrew Gobea made medical history in May at Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles as the first infant to undergo a gene therapy operation to combat an
immune system disease. In March two disease-causing genes were identified: One
is believed to cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig's
disease; the other is linked to another nervous system disorder, Huntington's
disease.

   "Jurassic Park" is science-fiction fun; biotechnology is real science --
science that saves lives.


                             1120 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            June 16, 1993 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:5,6,7; B-3:1,4

LENGTH: 700 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy OK'd for woman apparently working

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Five months after a San Diego woman received gene therapy for a brain tumor,
her physician says he believes the novel treatment is helping to stop the
tumor's growth. "Yes, I think we're creating an effect," said Dr. Ivor Royston
of the San Diego Regional Cancer Center when asked if the treatment is attacking
the woman's tumor. The woman, 51, is the first person to receive an unproven
gene therapy after government officials approved its use on a compassionate
basis because conventional treatments had failed. Despite having a virulent
tumor of a type that is almost always fatal, the patient has lived longer than
doctors originally predicted late last year when they argued for permission to
use the gene therapy. Her condition has not deteriorated, and her capacities
have remained about the same during the course of the gene therapy treatments,
her husband said.

   He has asked that the family not be identified in order to protect its
privacy, and The San Diego Union-Tribune has agreed to the request. The woman
has received nine injections of cells altered to contain a gene that produces a
substance doctors hope will boost an immune-system response against the tumor.

   The treatments will continue, Royston said. One way scientists attempt to
measure the gene therapy's effects is with lab tests in which cancerous cells
from her tumor -- taken during a past surgery -- are exposed to samples of
immune system agents that researchers have attempted to make more potent.

   The agents are extracted from her blood. "We're getting encouraging results;
we're seeing an effect," Royston said in an interview yesterday. The patient's
husband said that in some of the tests more than 50 percent of the tumor cells
have been killed by the immune agents.

   Royston's colleague, Dr. Robert Sobol, cautioned that any result of the test
is not a proof that the therapy is working the same way in her brain. Royston
said he does not want to discuss details of those laboratory tests because he
wants to announce the results at a scientific meeting. The gene therapy
injections the woman receives in her arm contain about a thimble-full of cells,
each containing a gene for interleukin 2, a protein that the scientists believe
is crucial for stimulating increased activity of the immune system's killer
T-cells, which fight disease.

   The doctors hope the cells will circulate through her bloodstream and attack
the tumor. Any success at killing tumor cells in the lab dishes would not
necessarily mean that a stimulated immune response inside her body is attacking
the tumor in her brain, where conditions are different from lab dishes, Sobol
said. And despite any lab results, Sobol cautioned that it may be difficult to
discern the effects of the gene therapy from the effect of other treatments the
woman had previously, including surgery and drug therapies. Images made of her
brain using magnetic resonance imaging techniques indicate the tumor is about
the same size and has not increased, her husband said. After extensive lobbying
by the San Diego physicians and the patient's family, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institutes of Health approved use of the therapy
and in the process creating an expedited review process at the NIH to allow gene
therapy as a last-resort treatment when others had failed.

   She received her first injection in January. Sobol said the scientists also
are exploring ways to use tumor cells taken from this woman and genetically arm
them for gene therapy in other people some day.

   Such an ability would save having to remove part of a patient's tumor to
treat the cells for therapeutic use, Sobol said. In a separate event, Royston
said, the cancer center has agreed to grow tumor cells taking during surgery
from a man living on the East Coast who has the same type of tumor as the San
Diego woman, a glioblastoma.

   The physicians might someday consider using a similar gene therapy technique
on that man if his tumor returns, Royston said, and could use his cells to carry
the interleukin 2 gene. Royston said he still hopes someday to seek NIH approval
for a more wide-ranging trial of gene therapy techniques for cancer other than
on a compassionate basis.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1121 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      June 13, 1993, Sunday, City Edition

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. 79

LENGTH: 1360 words

HEADLINE: AIDS' awful future;
Fighting an unwarranted complacency;
LETTER FROM BERLIN Loretta McLaughlin is the Globe's editorial page editor.

BYLINE: By Loretta McLaughlin, Globe Staff

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   Here, at the ninth international meeting on AIDS, nearly 20,000 researchers,
treatment specialists and patients' advocates spent a week probing for signs of
progress against the disease while hearing fearsome news of its explosive spread
throughout the world.

   As reports dismally confirmed that known drugs are of only short-lived
usefulness, the talk turned to vaccines and novel gene therapies - all still
years away.

   Clearly, both AIDS and the armada of science assembled to fight it are now
moving into uncharted territory. However, very little was said of one of the
most striking and perilous newly uncovered aspects of AIDS: the virus, in
effect, learns on the job how to work more efficiently.

   Had he tried to imagine the most complex and dangerous virus possible, said
Max Essex a few years ago when scientists were first discovering the amazing
ability of the AIDS virus to multiply and mutate faster than any previously
known microbe, he could not have envisioned the AIDS virus.

   Yet even he had no idea of how much more was to come in terms of the
biological cleverness of this virus. In his role as head of the Harvard AIDS
Institute, Essex today continues to contemplate both the virus and the worldwide
pandemic of AIDS with profound wariness.

   For now it appears that this remarkable virus can - and has - changed in even
more ominous ways. Ways that fill him with concern over the unwarranted
complacency of the general public that still too often dismisses AIDS as a
disease of gay men and drug abusers but of little threat to the majority of
heterosexual Americans.

   It is the behavior of those groups - gays and needle-using drug abusers -
that largely accounts for the AIDS problem, so the prevailing thought goes. The
virus invaded their circles and they pass it around from one to another, but it
largely stays within their spheres, only occasionally straying outside by being
handed along to a heterosexual sex partner or to a fetus during pregnancy.

   But that, of course, is not the scenario in Africa, where from the outset it
has primarily been a disease afflicting heterosexuals. And in Africa, AIDS also
exacts its toll in a far shorter time frame, advancing from infection to acute
illness to death far more quickly than the 10-year-long course of the disease
typical in the United States.

   Somewhat understandably, the shorter time span for AIDS cases in Africa was
attributed to the less healthy, less nourished condition of many Africans also
beset by other diseases and dire poverty. And their vulnerability to AIDS also
was felt to be abetted by the prevalence there of untreated venereal diseases,
which are known to facilitate infection with the AIDS virus.

   A very different reason for the heterosexual nature of AIDS in Africa is now
emerging. The same explanation also seems to account for what is now regarded as
two separate and distinct epidemics of AIDS in Thailand.

   It is that the AIDS virus has developed sub-types which become more efficient
- and probably more virulent - according to the way they are transmitted. In
other words, AIDS viruses that are most frequently passed from one person to
another through contact with blood adapt to that route of transmission. Or, when
the virus most frequently is passed by contact with cells that line a woman's
vaginal tract, it becomes more infectious when exposure occurs via that route.

   "I think the sub-type of the AIDS virus that we have in the United States is
the most benign one, the least virulent one," Essex says while musing on the
paucity of drugs for treating AIDS patients and the need to look in completely
new directions for pharmaceutical products to thwart the virus. The need grows
more critical daily as the number of people infected worldwide soars, especially
in the densely populated nations of Asia.

   For its own sake as well as out of humane concern for the millions of Asians
and Africans infected with the AIDS virus - and virtually doomed - Essex thinks
the US government should be paying more attention to what is happening in these
disadvantaged areas of the world. Their patterns of AIDS - and more
specifically, their experience with sub-types of viruses - may hold a serious
warning for the United States - and for European nations where the same AIDS
sub-type is almost exclusively the one seen.

   The clearest lesson is coming out of Thailand's grim experience. A shift in
the AIDS outbreak there - from a drug-abuse population into the general society
of heterosexuals - may be a bleak forecast of what could next come to pass in
the United States.

   Beginning in 1985, Thailand became prey to an AIDS outbreak that was heavily
concentrated among drug abusers. While there was some extension of the disease
into the country's notorious prostitution market, most of the cases occurred
among male and female sex workers who also abused drugs. There was virtually no
spillover into the general heterosexual population.

   Only later was the sub-type of the AIDS virus in this first, Thai epidemic
identified as sub-type B.

   About 1988, however, a second epidemic of AIDS began developing in Thailand.
This time, the infection moved with lightning speed into the heterosexual
population, among whom the numbers of cases are now exploding.

   This time the prevalent sub-type is different. It is called non-Western A,
and most closely resembles an AIDS virus made up of a core set of genes seen
most frequently in Zaire and contained in a viral envelope prevalent in Uganda.

   In India, the drug-user type of AIDS virus appears rampant in one state,
while in a distant state the heterosexual type of AIDS virus seems to have taken
hold.

   In view of these new observations, that it is a different sub-type of virus
that apparently accounts for the concentration of AIDS in one group or another -
rather than the group's behavior - "We can no longer say with any certainty that
we won't get new epidemics of AIDS in the United States," Essex says. "It may
only be a matter of time before a heterosexual sub-type of the AIDS virus
reaches us and we could have another million Americans infected within a few
years."

   Epidemics that begin elsewhere in the world, spawned by different variants of
viruses, soon move from continent to continent, he notes, "like the Hong Kong or
New Jersey flu."

   "That's why it's so important for us to go into totally new approaches to
treatment. We are not making progress fast enough; the AIDS epidemics are
outpacing us," Essex says.

   Gene therapy stands on the new front line of AIDS research. "Our slant on it
is to try to make what are called negative dominant mutant forms of one AIDS
virus gene," Essex explains of his focus at the institute.

   The idea is to introduce a laboratory-designed mutant into the system of a
person infected with the AIDS virus. Essex' Harvard team is working to delete 10
amino acids from such a gene so that the virus would be unable to make a protein
essential to its action. The missing protein would have the effect of making the
virus inert - and harmless.

   At the same time, a genetically-dominant promoter of gene reproduction is
added to the same mutant gene. The second change enables AIDS viruses that take
up the mutant gene and are rendered inert to multiply faster and overtake the
remaining infectious AIDS viruses.

   Essex expects the mutant genes to be tested against AIDS in a handful of
trial patients within the next year - his team already has designed three mutant
gene models. But a simple, efficient and low-cost way must be found for
introducing them into the human system before they would be usable in Third
World countries where AIDS is spreading most rapidly.

   In the meantime, he thinks the United States should quickly establish
research outposts in Africa and Asia to monitor the spread of AIDS sub-types,
the intensity of the AIDS disease they cause and the specific groups within
society that they more efficiently infect.

   Only through such surveillance, Essex feels, can the United States be
forewarned of a shift in the pattern of AIDS toward a more virulent form of the
disease and a more heterosexual mode of transmission.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, A US-German-Swedish team crafted this model of an HIV virus; Max
Essex, below; ACT UP members demonstrate in Berlin Wednesday. / AFP FILE PHOTO
June 1991 / PHOTO/SUE OWRUTSKY / AP PHOTO June 9, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1993


                             1122 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                      June 13, 1993, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: FIRST TWO PEOPLE IN THE WORLD TO BENEFIT FROM GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By MALCOLM RITTER, Associated Press

DATELINE: CANTON, OHIO

BODY:

    If you want to see the first payoffs from a potential revolution in
medicine, take a peek in a couple of suburban yards in Ohio:

   Her brown ponytail tumbling out behind her baseball cap, Cindy Cutshall, 11,
chases pop flies. She has been at it for a good half-hour on a warm and humid
day, but no matter. She wants more fly balls to chase -- more, more.

   "She can do two hours of basketball on a court, whereas she couldn't do five
minutes before," her mother says. "She can swim, she can play baseball.  It's
amazing."

   An hour's drive away, near Cleveland, 6-year-old Ashi DeSilva boots a huge
yellow ball with her "Beauty and the Beast" tennis shoes. Her face framed with
black curly hair, she giggles as the ball returns and bounces off her head.

   "To see her running around, knowing what she was like when she was ill, it's
like a miracle," says her father. "It's absolutely a miracle."

   These two little girls, says Jennifer Howse, president of the March of Dimes
Birth Defects Foundation, are "the pioneering patients of our time" -- the first
two people in the world to benefit from gene therapy.

   They were born with a defective gene that could not tell their bodies to make
a critical enzyme. Without that substance, blood cells called T cells died off,
crippling the disease-fighting immune system and leaving them vulnerable to
potentially fatal infections.

   But it was their good fortune to live at a time when scientific advances came
at lightning speed. In a few short years, gene therapy -- the use of
transplanted genes to treat disease -- went from a theory to a reality.

   The idea was to equip as many remaining T cells as possible with a working
gene to let them make the missing enzyme. But no one -- not the girls, not their
parents, not the doctors -- knew if it would work.

   The future came quickly -- first for Ashi, then for Cindy.

   In May 1990, two researchers from the National Institutes of Health met with
Raj's parents to discuss trying a new experimental therapy on Ashi. Four months
later, they signed a consent form.

   Later, doctors withdrew some blood from Ashi so the T cells could be equipped
with a new ADA gene. On Sept. 14, 1990, just 12 days after Ashi's fourth
birthday, the treated cells were infused back into Ashi's veins.

   The procedure was repeated seven times in the next year and three times after
that, in an attempt to fix as many T cells as possible.

   Meanwhile, Cindy Cutshall endured the same process, starting in January 1991.
And everyone waited to see what would happen.

   The difference in both girls was dramatic.

   In early May, Cindy went through a second kind of gene therapy that
scientists hope will provide a wider-ranging and longer-lasting benefit.

   Her current treatment of T cells leaves gaps in her immune system's
repertoire for responding to germs, and the corrected T cells will eventually
age and die.

   So the new treatment aimed to plant the crucial gene in stem cells, which are
found in the bone marrow and give rise to all cells in the blood. If all goes as
planned, the corrected stem cells will come to dominate the marrow and
continuously pass along the crucial gene to the populations of blood cells they
produce.

   Ashi is scheduled to undergo the same treatment later this summer.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1993


                             1123 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                     June 12, 1993, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: After week of grim statistics, discord marks end of AIDS conference

BYLINE: By Dolores Kong, Globe Staff

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

   In ceremonies marked by protest and disagreement, the Ninth International
AIDS Conference closed here yesterday after a week of few major scientific
advances and the release of more grim worldwide statistics about the disease.

   AIDS activists chanted, "No more talking. We want a cure" during French
Health Minister Philippe Douste-Blazy's speech, and public health officials,
scientists, women and indigenous people called for more to be done about the
epidemic that is estimated to have infected 14 million people around the world
so far.

   "Clearly, the AIDS pandemic is an emergency, but society is responding as
though it is not," said Lars Kallings, a Stockholm scientist who helped plan the
conference. "The news is, the epidemic is still on the rise."

   The conference, which drew more than 12,000 participants from 166 countries,
highlighted tensions throughout the week between scientists and AIDS activists,
developed countries and the developing ones, pharmaceutical companies and people
infected with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. On the research end, the meeting
illustrated the incremental progress of the science, challenging notions about
the effectiveness of current therapies, raising hopes about vaccines or gene
therapy and dashing some of the ideas raised at earlier international AIDS
conferences.

   While the science goes slowly, public health officials and scientists called
for more attention to prevention.

   "We do not have a magic bullet although we have invested and continue to
invest billions of dollars in its pursuit," said Yamil H. Kouri, a Harvard
researcher representing one of the conference sponsors, the International Union
Against the Venereal Diseases and the Treponematoses. Instead, Kouri said, "We
need to change our priorities. We need to emphasize prevention, and we need to
allocate the resources for it."

   The World Health Organization has estimated that an investment of up to $ 2.5
billion a year could mount effective AIDS prevention programs that could cut in
half the number of estimated new infections in the developing world by the end
of this century. "The world cannot afford not to find this money," Dr. Michael
Merson, director of WHO's Global Program on AIDS, said at the closing session.

   Next year, the international conference will be held in Yokohama, Japan.
After that, the conference will be held every other year, with regional meetings
in between.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993


                             1124 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     JUNE 12, 1993, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1078 words

HEADLINE: NINTH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON AIDS
 AIDS Forum Ends With Focus On Prevention
 It offered new

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Berlin

BODY:

    For the world's AIDS workers and for those infected by the terrible virus,
it has been an extraordinary week in this city's huge congress hall.

   More than 15,000 physicians, scientists, health care workers, AIDS patients
and victims of human devastation from scores of Third World nations closed the
Ninth International Conference on AIDS yesterday.

   What appeared to be the most distinctive aspect of the week was the
participation of newly organized international militant groups of people with
AIDS and HIV infections. They agitated and demonstrated and at times interrupted
speakers whose words displeased them. But they also played a significant role in
planning the sessions here, and they will unquestionably participate in the
planning of the 10th International AIDS Conference, scheduled for Yokohama in
August next year.

   With the strongest emphasis this week on the need to strengthen AIDS
prevention programs worldwide, a significant development was a pledge by Dean
Jameson, a World Bank economist, to provide at least $ 2.5 billion a year in
loans to developing countries in Africa and Asia that would be earmarked for
prevention efforts to be organized locally with help from the World Health
Organization's global AIDS program.

    At yesterday's closing conference ceremonies, Dr. Michael Merson of WHO
underscored that money's importance. He remined the audience that, of the
millions of people becoming infected each year by HIV, the AIDS virus, at least
half are under the age of 25 -- many of them teenage men and women.

   At the very least, Merson predicted that the World Bank loans that Jameson
promised will be able to save 10 million lives by the end of the decade.

   MIXED RESULTS

    Merson was frank in his appraisal of the results of a week in which 800
research papers were presented and thousands of panel meetings and poster
discussions were held: ''There have been disappointments in anti-retroviral
therapy,'' he conceded. ''And we cannot report the big breakthroughs in
preventive vaccines for which the world is waiting.''

    But he insisted that the meeting did demonstrate significant progress in
understanding how the AIDS virus works.  Another conference summary came from
Dr. Ingegard Kallings, a Swedish obstetrician from Upsalla who pointed to the
emerging knowledge that ''HIV is a smart virus, and there is a virological
evolution rapidly going on. The virus forces us to think globally, whether we
like it or not.''

    Reports this week identified at least five subtypes of HIV, each providing a
different challenge to scientists seeking a common focus in their quest for AIDS
vaccines. At the same time, he noted, these subtypes of viruses are moving
rapidly around the world, and this may make possible a ''world vaccine,
appropriate for use in both developed and developing countries.''

    Many scientists pointed to the discovery that the virus seems capable of
causing varied effects. Some versions of the virus appear to take hold of
invaded cells and cause them to clump into masses of dead and dying cells known
as syncitia that could speed progression to severe disease and could prove to be
more quickly resistant to the anti-viral drugs such as AZT. Less insidious
versions of HIV -- the non-syncitia-forming viruses -- may be more amenable to
therapy, Kallings said.

   CONTROVERSY OVER AZT

    One of the major controversies in drug therapy emerged with the release of
new details from the so- called Concorde Study, a joint British-French trial on
the effects of AZT when given to patients immediately after infection by the
AIDS virus and before their immune systems are damaged, and comparing those
results with the use of AZT after the immune system's T-cells are depleted and
early disease symptoms show up.

    The Concorde trial has concluded that AZT does nothing to prolong the lives
of HIV-infected patients, that it offers no benefit to patients who start AZT
treatment early. In fact, according to Dr.  Maxime Seligman, the Concorde trial
leader, patients who begin AZT therapy early face a great risk of toxic effects
from the drug and develop resistance to the compound more quickly.

    Despite the report, many physicians treating AIDS patients insisted that
they prefer starting AZT therapy early but switching after a few months to one
of the other approved anti-viral drugs such as didanosine, known more commonly
as ddI. Several other studies showed that combinations of the two drugs seemed
to be more effective than either drug alone -- depending on the severity of the
immune system damage and disease state of the patient.

   NO SCIENTIFIC SURPRISES

    To Dr. James Curran, AIDS chief at the federal Centers for Disease Control,
who has battled the epidemic since it began in 1981, the conference offered no
major scientific surprises but was striking for its emphasis on the need for
effective and locally developed AIDS prevention efforts as the only defense
against the unabated epidemic.

    ''But that will take a revolution in norms,'' he said -- a willingness of
societies to loosen their rigid resistance to serious and candid education about
human sexualities and a willingness to explore widespread public promotion and
distribution of condoms.

    As for the conference programs, Curran suggested that they could be
productive if they were held every two years instead of annually. Perhaps a more
important step -- for Americans at least -- would be for government AIDS
agencies and major foundations to sponsor an annual conference on AIDS
prevention.

   Local and national leaders would demonstrate programs that have worked well
and others that have failed, and thereby stimulate a widespread new effort to
curb the epidemic's pace through innovative techniques that could offer the most
immediate benefit while new drugs and vaccines are still in the laboratory.

   SOME PROMISING LEADS

   Martin Delaney, founder of San Francisco's Project Inform, said that although
news of clinical advances was sparse at the conference, a lot of new scientific
knowledge emerged. Delaney, a former business consultant, plays a major role in
bringing knowledgeable AIDS activists into the federal government's planning
process for new drug trials.

   He added that promising leads were revealed at the conference that could
yield new drugs, and gene therapy techniques were suggested.

    ''The biggest danger now,'' Delaney said, ''is for us to come away from
Berlin with a false sense of hopelessness.''



                             1125 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     June 11, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. B5

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: PITT OK'D TO TEST GENE THERAPY ON GAUCHER'S DISEASE

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   A National Institutes of Health committee has given Dr. John Barranger of the
University of Pittsburgh approval to begin clinical trials of gene therapy in
five patients with Gaucher's disease.

   Gaucher's disease is a life-threatening enzyme deficiency affecting more than
20,000 Americans. The gene therapy trials will begin once the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration rules Barranger's procedures are safe.

   Barranger said yesterday that he hoped to submit his proposal to the FDA by
the first of July. The FDA then must respond within 30 days.

   It will then take Barranger's lab about a month to prepare for the trial.
''We're looking to start the first patient in September,'' he said.

   Pitt also is among a handful of medical centers to receive a five-year, $ 4.4
million grant from the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases to develop gene therapy techniques. The grant will support animal
research relating to Barranger's work and to other forms of gene therapy -- a
potential means of treating disease by introducing beneficial genes into the
body.

   Barranger proposes to remove stem cells -- primitive cells that develop into
bone marrow -- from patients with Gaucher's disease and add a gene that makes an
enzyme called glucocerebrosidase. Without this enzyme, fatty cellular wastes
accumulate in a patient's spleen, liver, bone marrow and brain, eventually
causing organ failure.

   These genetically altered stem cells will then be infused into the patients.
It is hoped the altered cell will produce enough of the enzyme to halt the
disease.

   Dr. Joseph Glorioso, co-director of the Pittsburgh Genetics Institute, said
hopes of curing Gaucher's through gene therapy were particularly high because it
appears even a small amount of the enzyme may be sufficient to prevent symptoms.

   The National Institutes of Health's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
unanimously recommended approval of the clinical trial on June 7.

   A synthetically produced form of glucocerebrosidase is available for treating
Gaucher's patients but costs more than $ 250,000 a year for an adult. Gene
therapy, by contrast, promises a permanent cure at a lower cost.

   ''We're selecting patients now,'' Barranger said. All will be adults who show
significant symptoms of the disease, such as enlarged organs, bone abnormalities
or anemia. Or, they must be patients who already are taking the synthetic
enzyme.

   Glorioso said the $ 4.4 million program grant would be used for animal
research in the development and testing of gene therapy techniques.

   For instance, Neal DeLuca, associate professor of molecular genetics and
biochemistry, is developing a defective herpes virus -- one that will infect
human cells but not cause disease -- that could be used to transfer genes into
the central nervous system.

   DeLuca is particularly interested in using the virus to introduce a gene into
the brains of people who suffer Lesch-Nyhan disease, a disorder in perhaps 100
to 200 men worldwide that causes mental retardation, leads to self-mutilation
and usually results in death by age 30.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1126 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 11, 1993, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 574 words

HEADLINE: Dinosaur DNA could send in the clones

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    Before you start seeing velociraptors a la Jurassic Park creeping through
your back yard, remember: Dinosaurs can't be cloned . . . yet.

   But a report out Thursday in Nature - showing dinosaur-era DNA can be
extracted from insects preserved in amber - certainly brings the possibility one
step closer.

   The premise of Jurassic Park is that ancient dinosaur DNA is extracted from
blood in the stomachs of mosquitoes that had been feeding and then flew off and
got stuck in tree sap. The sap fossilizes into amber and preserves the insect
over millions of years.

   The fragmented dinosaur DNA is extracted, pieced together with frog DNA,
inserted into eggs with a little magic and other ingredients, and voila!

   For now, however, cloning whole organisms is impossible because scientists
don't have the technology. But the premise has potential, says Raul Cano of
California Polytechnic State University, who wrote the Nature report about the
120-million-year-old DNA.

   DNA is the basic material that carries the genetic code.

   Amber is a perfect source of ancient DNA because, as sap, it encases many
different insects and plants, says George Poinar Jr., entomologist and amber
expert at University of California, Berkeley.

   Second, amber contains turpenoids, which preserve plant and animal tissue.
Amber is also fairly plentiful. Large deposits have been found in Poland, the
Dominican Republic and western Canada, says Poinar, whose book Life in Amber is
considered one of the most complete references on amber inclusions.

   But Dominican amber, which is mined in the movie, is only 20 million to 40
million years old - too young for dinosaur DNA. Scientists estimate dinosaurs
died off about 65 million years ago.

   DNA has been extracted from a variety of insects 25 million to 35 million
years old, wooly mammoths, Egyptian mummies and 9,000-year-old humans preserved
in the sediment of a Florida swamp.

   "The real reason for studying ancient DNA is that extinct organisms can tell
us a lot about the relationships between living organisms," says scientist Rob
DeSalle of the American Museum of Natural History in New York.

   No dinosaur DNA has been found yet, but paleontologists and geneticists alike
agree it's only a matter of time.

   The hard part will be learning how to clone - not likely for another 40 to 50
years. For now, scientists can clone single genes and key gene fragments, an
accomplishment that gives us gene therapy. To clone an entire dinosaur,
scientists will have to wait until they can identify most or all of its genes,
know the order of their alignment along DNA strands and be able to read all of
the genetic coding - or sequences - on the genes.

 Reality is suspended More people have heard of genetic engineering than have
heard of 'Jurassic Park: '
Half are familiar with genetic engineering
Familiar         50%
Not familiar     46%
Don't know        4%

But few ever heard of Jurassic Park (book or movie)
Read book         5%
Heard of movie   10%
Neither          61%
Don't know       24%

Of those who have heard of 'Jurassic Park,' many feel scientists will be able to
recreate animals through genetic engineering . . .
Likely           58%
Not likely       35%
Don't know        7%

. . . and most will see movie
Likely           72%
Not likely       28%

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Stephen Conley, USA TODAY, Source: Survey of 1, 000
adults from May 7-24, 1993, by American Opinion Research. Margin of error: plus
or minus 3 percentage points (Pie charts); PHOTO, b/w, Robert Deutsch, USA TODAY


                             1127 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     June 9, 1993, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 209 words

HEADLINE: Using herpes is one approach to fighting AIDS

BYLINE: Kim Painter

DATELINE: BERLIN

BODY:

    Using part of one virus to fight another is among imaginative strategies
researchers are considering in the quest for AIDS treatment.

   Researcher Robert Gallo's lab at the National Cancer Institute has found that
a herpes virus called HHV-7 - a virus not yet known to cause any disease -
infects the same cells as HIV and uses the same molecular doorway to get into
the cells.

   The implication: This virus might somehow be used to block entry by HIV.
Gallo says that's been done in a test tube.

   He says he's not "seriously proposing using virus to inhibit virus," but
might use parts of HHV-7 as blocking agents - a strategy that should ensure
safety even if HHV-7 is later linked to a disease.

   His idea is one of many circulating among scientists as they try to outsmart
a complex illness.

   Others include:

   - Gene therapy. This might involve inserting protective genes in bone marrow
cells that then would travel throughout the body.

   - Immune system repair. Scientists now believe that stopping the virus won't
be enough - that they must also fix the immune system it has battered.

   This could involve not only drugs, but also transplants of key immune system
components, such as bone marrow and the thymus gland.

    - Teens and condoms, 1A


                             1128 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     June 8, 1993, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy for cancer gets key panel's approval

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   A Houston scientist's plan to use gene therapy to boost the
body's ability to take anticancer treatment received unanimous
approval Monday from a key federal committee.

   The recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health has given the go-ahead to the technique
proposed by Dr. Albert B. Deisseroth, chairman of the University of
Texas M.D.Anderson Cancer Center's hematology department.

   Calling the committee decision ""a big step,'' Deisseroth
said the technique could provide ""a turning point in genetic
therapy that uses bone marrow. ''
 Anderson must receive final approval from the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration before beginning the study later this year.

   Deisseroth will begin the work in patients with ovarian
cancer for whom surgery and chemotherapy have not worked.

   ""We have no shortage of patients with this problem,'' he
said explaining that 20 patients will be part of the initial study.

   ""It's bad to get cancer at any age, but to have it rob you of your
chance of bringing up your children is especially heartbreaking. ''

   The gene technique attacks one of the biggest problem areas
in cancer treatment -- toxic chemotherapy that kills good and
malignant cells at the same time.

   But the destruction of the ""good'' cells limits the amount
of chemotherapy that can be given to an individual patient -- often
to levels lower than those needed to cure the cancer.

   ""We have designed a program to reverse that,'' said
Deisseroth, whose plan centers on a gene that in normal cells
produces a pump that sits in the cell wall that removes toxic
materials from the cell.

   The gene -- called the multidrug resistance gene -- is put
into a virus that has been modified in the laboratory so that it
does not cause infection.  This virus then carries the gene into the
cell.

   The virus puts additional pumping genes into the cell so
that the cells containing the virus with its added gene produce
high levels of this pump.

   ""We wanted to overproduce this pump,'' Deisseroth said.

   ""The only reason we can deliver chemotherapy at all is that this
little pump is there normally.  But it's not enough to protect cells
from high doses.

   ""It's just like putting a pump in a boat that's leaking
water.  If you have a big leak, you need more or bigger pumps. ''

   Deisseroth and his collaborators -- Dr. Richard E. Champlin
of Anderson's bone marrow transplant section, Dr. John J.Kavanagh
of the section of gynecological medical oncology and Dr. Elie
Hanania of the stem cell modulator laboratory -- will remove bone
marrow from the patient, add the virus that contains the pumping
gene to the marrow and then return it to the patient.

   The new ""wonder drug'' in ovarian cancer, taxol, actually
suppresses the bone marrow.  ""If we deliver levels that are
tolerated, we get a response in the range of 6 percent.  If we
increase the dose, we can increase response to 60 percent,''
Deisseroth said.

   Studies of the technique in animals have been successful,
and he said it has an added benefit as each treatment is given.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1993


                             1129 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Science Desk; Medical Science Page

LENGTH: 682 words

HEADLINE: Search Advances For 'Antisense' Drugs

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE M. FISHER

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SCIENTISTS at a small biotechnology company have taken a significant step
toward developing a new class of drugs designed to block the action of specific
genes. Such drugs hold the potential to treat many viruses and cancers that
elude current therapies.

   The drugs are an improved version of "antisense" agents, chemicals intended
to target and impede messenger RNA, which mediates translation of the genetic
information of DNA into specific proteins. The researchers, from Gilead Sciences
Inc. of Foster City, Calif., report their findings in the current issue of
Science.

    Antisense molecules have a sequence of bases that is opposite to that of the
RNA molecules they target and therefore bind closely to them, since bases in
nucleotide molecules attract their opposite pairs.  Since messenger RNA is
designed to function as a single stranded molecule, a double-stranded region
caused by an antisense molecule will halt its operation and prevent the
synthesis of whatever protein the messenger specifies.

Chief New Gain

    Although the theory of antisense is elegant, in practice antisense molecules
have not proved particularly effective in the past, in part because they do not
bind tightly enough to the target messenger RNA's. The principal advance
described by the Gilead researchers is a method for modifying the component
bases of the antisense molecule so that it grasps its target much more firmly.
The method is to add to the base a small chemical group known as a propyne
group.

   "The difficulty with the whole antisense approach has been that it sounded
great on paper but when you really tried to do it there were a lot of problems,"
said Fred Cohen, an associate professor of biochemistry and biophysics at the
University of California at San Francisco. "They've made a real chemistry
advance here, in a simple way, and in a way not likely to cause problems."

   "We made a modification to the base of the nucleotide -- a very simple
modification -- which it turns out, increases their affinity tremendously to
single strand DNA" and also RNA, said Brian C. Froehler, a principal scientist
at Gilead. Binding affinity, a measure of potency, was increased by 10 to 100
times, according to the Science paper.

   The modifications made by the Gilead team only work with the T and C bases.
The team is currently working on modifications of the A and G bases, which
require different chemistry.

   Another issue dealt with by the Gilead researchers was the question of
proving that their antisense molecules had interfered with messenger RNA and not
some other aspect of the cells' activity.

   "One of the problems in this field is it is very difficult to be sure you
have an antisense mechanism," said Mark D. Matteuci, Gilead's director of
bioorganic chemistry. "You can pick your controls and see whatever you want to
see, but unless someone demonstrates destruction of a message, it's really short
on formal proof."

Tests of Antisense Drug

    The power of the method is that as long as the genetic sequence of a virus's
proteins is known, an antisense molecule can be designed to target them. Isis
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Carlsbad, Calif., has begun human clinical trials of an
antisense drug to treat the papilloma virus that causes genital warts. The
Gilead scientists note that they injected their antisense molecule directly in
cultured cells, a method of delivery clearly impractical for a drug.

   But Jacqueline Siegel, the chief financial officer at Isis, said that cell
penetration was less difficult in living animals than in laboratory cultures.
"We have 11 publications on antisense in animal models that actually surprised
us regarding how potent these compounds are," she said.

   Other biotechnology experts said that while much remained to be done,
Gilead's work was yet another vindication of antisense. "This novel approach,
along with others like gene therapy, will yield the next generation of drugs
that are far more specific and cause fewer side effects," said Viren Mehta, an
analyst with Mehta & Isaly Worldwide Pharmaceutical Research.

GRAPHIC: Diagram: "Making Sense of Antisense"

Antisense agents are designed to seek out and impede the functioning of
messenger RNA, which issues basic directions (un theform of "sense" strands) for
the production of specific proteins. The new antisense drugs are designed to
create mirror images of the RNA molecules they target. This allows the antisense
strand to bind with the sense strand, halting its operation.

Messenger RNA, or sense strand, moves out to the body of the infected cell armed
with directions for making disease-causing.

The antisense drug makes a mirror image of the sense strand.

By combining with the sense strand, the antisense drug prevents the cell from
producing harmful proteins.

(Source: Isis Pharmaceuticals)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1993


                             1130 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                    June 7, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: Using Viral Genes to Overpower Tumor Cells

BODY:


   A lone herpes virus gene inside the shell of a mouse virus tumbles down a
long needle into a mass of rapidly dividing cancer cells in a person's brain.

   The mouse virus instinctively turns on its machinery, seizes the dividing
cells and inserts its payload inside. The herpes gene assimilates the DNA of the
cancer cell, forcing it to behave and look like herpes.

   In a few days, when the herpes genes have taken over as many tumor cells as
possible, Dr. Kenneth Culver, Genetic Therapy Inc., will give an anti-herpes
drug, killing the cells that carry the herpes gene.

   The strategy is being tried at the National Cancer Institute by neurosurgeons
Edward Oldfield, Zvi Ram and Stuart Walbridge. It's one of the latest in a
series of gene therapies for cancer.

   "Gene therapy is the introduction of a gene or genes into a patient's cells
to provide a new set of temporary or permanent instructions to those cells,"
Culver says.

GRAPHIC: See also related story.; Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1993


                             1131 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                    June 7, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: Focus Is on Cancer, Gene Link ;
Science Stands at Brink of A Therapeutic Revolution

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:


   Through the study of genes and the code of life written upon them, we are at
last beginning to glimpse how cancer arises in a single cell, spreads through
the body and evades our best efforts to destroy it.

   Whether inherited or induced, we now know that at the heart of all cancer is
a tiny misprint in the genetic instructions of our cells - a word deleted or
misspelled, or a phrase printed in the wrong sentence.

   And after decades of frustration with toxic cancer treatments that, like a
shotgun, blast the body along with the tumor, the seemingly academic pursuit of
how our genes work has brought us to the threshold of a therapeutic revolution.
Gene therapy, getting under way in 47 trials worldwide, may ultimately prove to
be the least toxic, most direct way to edit the misprints that cause cancer.

   "All cancer is genetic at the cellular level," says Dr. Michael Gottesman,
director, National Human Genome Project and chief of molecular biology at the
National Cancer Institute. "Our understanding of genetics has contributed
enormously to the understanding of cancer."

   The link between cancer and genes has been drawn most clearly since 1983,
when a new gene-hunting technique called "positional cloning" was developed.
Positional cloning means linking specific misprints in gene coding with specific
diseases.

   Experts say its development by Ray White, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
and others, was among the most important advances for pinpointing key genes -
including those linked to cancer.

   With the Human Genome Project, in which hundreds of scientists now search for
genes, the pace of discovery has jumped into warp drive. And as genes for
specific cancers have begun appearing, they reveal broad insights into how
cancers arise.

   Two landmark discoveries are genes for a rare eye cancer called
retinoblastoma, and for Li-Fraumeni syndrome, in which affected family members
get many different tumors.

   "The retinoblastoma gene is now known as a tumor-suppressor gene, and it
turns out to be a model for the understanding of cancer," says Laurence Meyer,
of the VA Medical Center and University of Utah, Salt Lake City. Meyer is
tracking a gene responsible for malignant melanoma.

   Li-Fraumeni syndrome led to the discovery of the p53 gene - an important
tumor-suppressor gene involved in cancers of the colon, lung and breast.

   But, to understand cancer genes, it's important to know how genes work,
Gottesman says. The human body has 30,000 to 100,000 genes. Each gene carries
instructions for making proteins, such as enzymes, which run the biochemical
machinery of the body.

   The genetic language is written in chemical code, which corresponds to the
letters ATGC. Adenine, Thymine, Guanosine and Cytosine are the building blocks
of DNA and the substance of our genes. Various combinations of ATGC, which can
be thousands or millions of letters long, determine the function of a gene.

   As cells routinely divide, misprints in the ATGC sequences arise in one in
every million cell divisions. The reason we all don't get cancer is the body has
a built-in DNA repair kit for random mutations. And we usually have two copies
of each gene as a backup in case we inherit a mutation or the coding just gets
messed up.

   "Cancer is caused by a failure of the regulation of genes that normally
control cell growth," Meyer says. "It appears in many cases that the initial
insult is that you inherited one bad regulatory gene and this gives you an
increased likelihood of a total failure of growth regulation because you don't
have a backup copy."

   Tumor suppressor genes, such as retinoblastoma and p53, appear to prevent
cells from dividing out of control. Tumor promoter genes signal cells to divide.

   Adds Gottesman: "It turns out that most human cancers require both types of
mutations - ones that tell cells to grow and ones that fail to tell them not to
grow."

   But what causes the misprint, or change in DNA, to begin with? For inherited
cancers, a mutation or missing gene can arise spontaneously and is passed
through generations. For non-inherited cancers, one new and intriguing theory
suggests its origin is closely related to healing.

   Biochemist Harry Antoniades, Harvard School of Public Health, has shown that
the same genes and substances that stimulate cell growth after an acute injury
are turned on in malignant tissues.

   "The only difference we could see was that in acute injury, after the wound
healed, all gene expression was suppressed. In tumors, it continues," says
Antoniades.

GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; See roll microfilm. See also related story.; Gannett News
Service

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1993


                             1132 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 7, 1993, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1318 words

HEADLINE: BACKING OUT OF BIOTECH;
HEALTH CARE REFORM DAMPENS ENTHUSIASM OF INVESTORS

BYLINE: By CHRIS KRAUL, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Noting falling prices for biotechnology stocks, executives of San Diego-based
Viagene in March scrapped a $25-million stock offering, froze hiring and shelved
some of the company's AIDS research until it can raise money elsewhere.

   Similarly spooked was Sibia of La Jolla, which gave up on a public stock sale
this year. Since then, executives have flown to Europe and Japan to try to
hustle $15 million from institutional investors. They are resigned to signing
away twice the equity they would have relinquished in a public sale.

   "The health care reform cyclone has put a tremendous damper on investor
attitudes about biotech. We are being unduly punished," said Frank Kung,
president of Genelabs Technologies in Redwood City, which sold stock to a German
company in a private deal last month after also giving up on the stock markets.
These cash-hungry companies fear that biotechnology's current troubles are not
just another cyclical slump, and that national health care reform will sour
investors on biotech stocks for months, even years, to come.

   Although published reports say President Clinton's task force on health care
reform is backing away from proposing strict price controls on drugs, they fear
that the final plan will include some mechanism for putting serious restraints
on drug prices.

   Investors fear that biotech companies will have difficulty recouping profits
from their enormous investments in developing drugs for market, they add.

   Indeed, the 40% drop in biotech stocks since the Clinton Administration took
office in January reflects that fear.

   "Everybody's a little squeamish about (investing in) the whole
pharmaceuticals and health care industry because it still isn't clear what's
going to happen," said William T. Comer, president of Sibia, which is developing
a treatment for epilepsy. "And until there's some kind of clarification,
especially in the pricing structure of drugs, you won't see investors get
excited about us."

   If the market fails to rebound soon, biotech executives say, there will be a
fundamental transformation of the industry, with a trend toward consolidation
accelerating. Additionally, they say, foreign drug firms will probably take an
increasing share of the American-born industry as they sense there are bargains
to be had.

   Last week, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer, a French-owned maker of prescription and
over-the-counter drugs, said it will pay $113 million for a 37% stake in Applied
Immune Sciences, a Santa Clara biotech firm specializing in sophisticated cell
and gene therapies. The principals in the deal said Friday that they have been
talking since last fall and that the timing of the French company's announcement
was coincidental to the slump in stock prices.

   Earlier in May, Boehringer Mannheim agreed to a $14-million deal to buy stock
in Genelabs Technologies and finance some of the company's research. Genelabs'
Kung conceded afterward that he would have driven a "much harder bargain in a
more relaxed manner" with the German firm if the stock market had not soured.

   Companies such as Genelabs have huge cash needs because of expensive drug
development programs, in which they spend from $1 million to $4 million a month
developing and testing drugs in labs and hospitals. And since most companies
have no product sales and just 12 months to 15 months worth of operating capital
in the bank, they are feeling increasing pressure to make deals with other U.S.,
Japanese and European investors.

   "The airways from here to Japan are full of biotechnology executives trying
to arrange investment deals," said David Hale, chief executive of Gensia
Pharmaceuticals in San Diego.

   But the biotech companies are finding that these potential investors --
mostly large domestic and foreign drug companies -- are driving hard bargains.

   "The possibility that introductory prices of biotechnology drugs may be
subject to controls has caused some investors concern in terms of getting a
satisfactory return on their extremely high-risk, early-stage investments," said
Steven C. Mendell, former chief executive at Xoma of Berkeley who left recently
to start up Prizm Pharmaceuticals in San Diego.

   Eli Lilly, which has invested in 40 biotechnology companies as a way of
keeping an eye on emerging drug development, has tightened its standards to the
point that it will no longer buy into a biotechnology company that has only one
or two drugs in the pipeline, chief scientific officer Leigh Thompson said.

   "There just aren't many winners in the industry," Thompson said on a recent
visit to San Diego, where Lilly's Hybritech biotechnology unit is based.

   The irony is that up until six months ago, investors could not seem to get
enough of biotechnology. Between January, 1991, and June, 1992, biotechnology
companies raised about $6.5 billion in stock sales, nearly as much as in the
entire previous decade, said Steven Burrill, national director of Ernst &
Young's biotechnology practice in San Francisco.

   During that time, biotech stocks such as Gensia Pharmaceuticals, Immune
Response and Synergen sold at stratospheric prices pushed up by the "feeding
frenzy," said Pat Sullivan, a Coopers & Lybrand partner in San Diego who handles
biotech clients.

   Now, with health care reform on the horizon, there is the perception that
1,200 biotech companies is too many and that the "process of natural selection"
will soon accelerate, Thompson said.

   Some see the stock market's cooling off as simply a stage in the maturing of
a still young industry -- of a new "sense of realism" in the aftermath of the
failure of three highly touted anti-sepsis drugs to gain FDA approval in the
last year, said Jacqueline Siegel, chief financial officer at Isis
Pharmaceuticals, a Carlsbad biotechnology company.

   "There's a growing awareness on the part of investors of what we go through
to get these products developed," said Howard E. Greene, chairman of Amylin
Pharmaceuticals, a San Diego biotech company working on a treatment for
diabetes. "Large drug companies have never talked about individual drug
development. They don't like to get up and make predictions until they have the
new drug in the bag, so to speak.

   "Only with the emergence of biotechnology has Wall Street got to watch, step
by step with painful clarity, the difficult process of developing a drug,"
Greene said.

   Another indication of a maturing industry is that prospective investors are
more discriminating.

   "Whereas in the past you dazzled them with science or laboratory or animal
experiments, now (potential investors are) focused on human clinical trial
results," Greene said.

   And investors' patience is shorter, Sibia's Comer said. Companies hyping
stock offerings a year ago were able to sell shares by projecting product sales
by the end of the decade. "Now you have to have a reasonable chance of having a
product on the market by 1996 or (companies trying to raise capital) have a
tough sell to investors."

   Inevitably or not, the financial condition of many biotechnology companies
will soon be critical unless the capital markets revive, Gensia's David Hale
said.

   "If the condition persists, you are going to see some new companies shut down
or end up in a fire sale of what's left," Hale said. "The concern I have is that
biotechnology as an independent, viable industry will cease to exist."

Biotech Slump
A long slump in biotechnology stocks has caused biotech companies to avoid stock
markets as a means of raising money.  From a total of 70 biotech offerings in
1991, the number of issues declined to 40 in 1992 and has been declining since
January as has the amount of money raised from stock offerings.

   *
Number of offerings in 1993
January: 13
February: 6
March: 6
April: 3
May: 2

   *
Millions of dollars raised in stock offerings in 1993
January: $382
February: $134
March: $100
April: $77
May: $31

   Source: Hambrecht & Quist

GRAPHIC: Photo, COLOR, WILLIAM T COMER, Sibia president DAVE GATLEY / Los
Angeles Times; Photo, Tina Berger, Steven Mendell of Prizm Pharmaceuticals in
San Diego.  DAVE GATLEY / Los Angeles Times; Chart, Biotech Slump, Los Angeles
Times


                             1133 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                              June 7, 1993 Monday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 272 words

HEADLINE: ENZYME-REPLACEMENT THERAPY HELPS FIGHT IMMUNODEFICIENCY DISEASE

BODY:

   Monday, June 7, 1993 ENZYME-REPLACEMENT THERAPY HELPS FIGHT IMMUNODEFICIENCY
DISEASE

   To the Editor: Sheryl Stolberg's informative coverage (Los Angeles  Times -
Washington Post Service, May 16) of the most recent experiment in gene therapy
for patients with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or  ADA-deficient
SCID, managed to capture the significance of this major research initiative with
admirably few mistakes.

   But she leaves the reader with the impression that patients with the
so-called boy-in-a-bubble disease face an either-or proposition between an
experimental gene therapy and enzyme-replacement treatment when bone-marrow
transplants fail.

   Since 1986, a breakthrough enzyme-replacement drug called Adagen made by
Enzon Inc. has emancipated more than 35 patients who were previously held
hostage by their condition. For the most part, these are patients who failed  to
respond to or were unable to find an identical match for bone-marrow
transplantation, the first line of treatment for ADA-deficient SCID.

   While Stolberg makes a passing reference to the use of enzyme-replacement
drugs, she neglects a very important fact about gene-therapy research: It  could
not take place without Adagen. Each of the research protocols for  patients
participating in the U.S. gene-therapy program calls for Adagen  therapy during
the experiments.

   In fact, two Ohio patients have continued on Adagen after they withdrew  from
gene therapy. The reason: The researchers want to take no chances with  these
children's lives should the experiments fall short of everybody's  hopes.

   ABRAHAM ABUCHOWSKI  Enzon Inc. Piscataway, N.J.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1134 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      June 7, 1993, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 514 words

HEADLINE: GLOOM PERVADES MEETING ON AIDS

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, SCIENCE EDITOR, BLOCK NEWS ALLIANCE

BODY:


   The world's biggest scientific conference on AIDS opens today amid deep new
pessimism over the prospects for curing AIDS or eliminating it with a vaccine.

   It has led to calls for development of a new generation of vaginal products
to protect women from infection with AIDS and other sexually transmitted
diseases.

   The gloom comes from some of the most prominent scientists among the 12,000
experts assembled for the ninth International Conference on AIDS. They include
pioneers who attended eight previous conclaves, and have battled AIDS since the
epidemic was detected in 1981.

   They are unanimous in citing major advances in treatment that have extended
the lives of AIDS patients, and delayed the onset of AIDS in people infected
with human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, the cause of AIDS.

   But they fear that AIDS -- in the words of Dr. Karl-Otto Habermehl, noted
German immunologist who is chairman of the conference -- already ''has become
another cancer,'' a chronic disease that will continue to claim lives for
decades to come.

   ''There is a great parallel to cancer,'' Habermehl said. ''We have huge
progress in research, even in areas like gene therapy that were science fiction
a short time ago. Yet we have no real breakthroughs.''

   Indeed, Habermehl cautioned the 1,200 reporters covering this meeting to
avoid exaggerating the hundreds of scientific reports that will present new
advances in AIDS research. He emphasized that there will be ''no spectacular
breakthroughs'' at the conference.

   Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, top AIDS official at the National Institutes of Health,
says that the race to cure AIDS has reached ''4'' on a scale of 10. He sees no
vaccine going into general use before the year 2000 -- if then.

   Even then, the first vaccines may be effective against only some of many
different strains.

   The recognition of AIDS as a more daunting problem than previously believed
has led to calls for a major shift in research priorities to place more emphasis
on new methods of prevention.

   ''One of our top research priorities now must be the development of an
inexpensive anti-viral preparation that women can put into the vagina to prevent
sexually transmitted diseases and AIDS,'' Dr. Michael Merson said.

   He is director of the World Health Organization Global Program on AIDS.

   Studies have shown that women who use vaginal foam contraceptives reduce
their risk of gonorrhea and other sexually transmitted diseases, or STDs.

   Dr. Joep Lange, chief of AIDS drug development for WHO, said there has been
surprisingly little research on the safety and effectiveness of existing foams
in prevention of STDs.

   The products would give women the ability to prevent infection, Lange said.
About 75 percent of AIDS cases worldwide now result from heterosexual
intercourse. And women account for an increasing proportion of new infections
with HIV and new AIDS cases.

   ''A big advantage is that these products could be used without the male
partners knowing,'' Lange said, citing male objections in many countries to the
use of condoms.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1135 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)



                              June 6, 1993, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS LOCAL & NATIONAL; Pg. 7B; SCIENCE

LENGTH: 403 words

HEADLINE: SURVEY INDICATES READERS WANT MORE SCIENCE NEWS

BYLINE: Earle Holland

BODY:


   Americans aren't getting their fill of news about science and medicine, and
newspaper managers, concerned over reducing the growing cost of covering the
news, are the main obstacle to fulfilling this need.

   So sayeth the Scientists' Institute for Public Information, a respected
organization that has touted news about science for several decades.

   The fact that a science organization finds the media lacking in coverage of
science isn't surprising. But a survey, done by pollster Lou Harris earlier this
year, can't be ignored. It is, the institute claims, the first survey of public
attitudes toward media science coverage in 36 years.

   The Harris survey telephoned 1,250 Americans during the second week in
February. Among the findings:

   Two out of five people described themselves as ''active consumers of science
news'' and just over a third of those questioned claimed to follow science news
daily.

   While men tend to show higher interests in science, women showed
substantially higher interests in medicine and health coverage.

   Science news was deemed as important as education by 75 percent of those
surveyed, as important as crime news by 69 percent, as important as financial
news by 66 percent, as imporant as political news by 63 percent and as important
as sports news by 56 percent.

   One finding dealt with what kinds of science stories the people interviewed
considered ''very interesting.'' Women consistently outdid men in their interest
in stories dealing with dangers to children's health, AIDS research and
treatment, women's health, gene therapy and genetic testing. The only non-health
topic that ranked as high in interest was how we deal with solid wastes. Half of
the men and 54 percent of the women claimed considerable interest in the
subject.

   Less than 20 percent indicated support for computer columns, barely 30
percent wanted more coverage of product breakthroughs and the same proportion
named space exploration as their main interest. Even global warming and
endangered species stories would interest only 43 percent.

   Earlier this year, the institute reported a strong decline in the number of
newspapers that set aside space for science news. The Harris poll is sure to
give the institute more ammunition in promoting science news, but whether that
makes a difference in coverage is anybody's guess.

   Earle Holland is a science writer at Ohio State University.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994


                             1136 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       June 4, 1993, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part D; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 514 words

HEADLINE: CELL RESEARCH DRAWS DRUG MAKER'S INTEREST;
PHARMACEUTICALS: RHONE-POULENC RORER WILL PAY $113 MILLION FOR A 37% STAKE OF A
BIOTECH FIRM ON THE CUTTING EDGE OF SCIENCE.

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Pharmaceutical maker Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. will invest $113 million in a
small California biotech company specializing in sophisticated cell and gene
therapies, the companies said Thursday.

   The deal, which gives Rhone-Poulenc Rorer a 37% stake in Santa Clara-based
Applied Immune Sciences Inc. as well as the option to acquire another 23%, is
the latest example of a big drug company buying access to cutting-edge science.

   In over-the-counter trading, AIS jumped $3.87 1/2 a share to $22.87 1/2.
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer slipped 50 cents to $52.87 1/2 a share in late trading on
the New York Stock Exchange.

   The newest technology involving cells "moves from treating the symptoms (of a
disease) with traditional pharmaceuticals to preventing or curing the disease,"
Rhone-Poulenc Chairman and Chief Executive Robert Cawthorn said.

   Besides collaborating on cell therapy research and development, the two
companies plan a global network of Cell Therapy Centers, at which scientists and
technicians will treat and alter cells so they can be infused into patients to
strengthen their ability to fight crippling diseases such as cancer and AIDS.

   Rhone-Poulenc Rorer estimates an additional investment of up to $30 million
to establish a network of nine centers worldwide over the next several years.

   AIS already operates one center in San Francisco and plans another one in Los
Angeles early next year, said Thomas Okarma, the company's chief executive.

   But current cell processing at the center is done on a kind of clinical trial
basis. AIS is not likely to receive approval to process cells as a commercial
service for another three to five years, said Paul Boni, an analyst with the
firm Mehta & Islay.

   Using the tools of molecular biology and genetics, researchers at several
companies are developing techniques that can isolate cells and alter their
structure either by using drugs or inserting genes.

   A sample of a patient's blood is sent to a Cell Therapy Center, which is like
a hospital for cells. There, cells culled from the blood are modified over
several days or weeks, then returned for intravenous infusion into the patient.

   The new, altered cells are expected to boost the immune system so the body
can fight cancerous tumor cells and other diseases. Ultimately, cell therapy
could make some pharmaceuticals obsolete.

   Cell therapy can also be used to teach cells to respond to a particular drug
or to resist drugs. That could enhance the performance of some drugs that
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer is developing.

   Last year, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer decided to tighten its research and
development focus, said Ken Kulju, an analyst with UBS Securities. "They decided
to get rid of the me-too-type products." The AIS collaboration "complements the
work they're doing in cancer and the infectious disease areas," he said.

   One of the most prominent drugs in Rhone-Poulenc Rorer's pipeline is
Taxotere, which inhibits cell division in cancer patients and is now in clinical
trials. The company is also developing a drug that stimulates an immune response
in AIDS patients.


                             1137 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      JUNE 4, 1993, FRIDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Drug, Biotech Firms Forge $ 113 Million Partnership
 French drug maker, AIS will focus on cell and

BYLINE: Alex Barnum, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:

    French drug giant Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. will invest $ 113 million in
Santa Clara-based Applied Immune Sciences Inc., forging an alliance to
commercialize two cutting-edge medical technologies -- cell therapy and gene
therapy.

   The deal gives the Paris-based Rhone- Poulenc a 37 percent stake in AIS and
an option to increase its holding to 60 percent. It is the latest example of a
large drug company buying a major stake in an American biotechnology company and
the second in the area of gene therapy.

   AIS stock rose 3 7/8 to 22 7/8 a share in heavy over-the-counter trading,
while Rhone-Poulenc slipped 1/2 to 52 7/8 a share in late trading on the New
York Stock Exchange.

   The alliance reflects a growing belief among large drug companies that new
technologies, like gene and cell therapy, will replace the role of conventional
drugs as the focus shifts from treating symptoms to curing the underlying causes
of disease.

   AIS and Rhone-Poulenc ''share a vision of the end of pharmaceutical medicine
and the dawn of molecular medicine,'' said Dr. Tom Okarma, a former Stanford
professor who founded AIS in 1984. ''They understand the importance of cell
therapy for performing gene therapy.''

   AIS pioneered the field of ''cell therapy,'' in which disease-fighting white
blood cells are isolated from a patient's blood, supercharged outside the body
in a brew of immunity-boosting proteins, and returned to the patient to help
fight such diseases as cancer and AIDS.

   To commercialize the technology, AIS has established cellular hospitals
called Cell Therapy Centers. There, patients' disease-fighting cells are treated
over several days or weeks and re-infused into the patient. The first such
center was established last year in South San Francisco.

   In addition to its acquisition, Rhone- Poulenc and AIS formed a joint venture
to develop a global network of Cell Therapy Centers. Rhone Poulenc will commit $
30 million to establish nine centers worldwide over the next several years.

   AIS's cell-isolating technology also offers a way to use gene therapy, which
involves attacking disease at the genetic level.

   Using AIS's procedure, doctors could remove specialized cells from the blood,
splice new disease-fighting genes into them and return them to the body.

   Rhone-Poulenc has been increasingly interested in gene therapy. It recently
agreed with the French National Scientific Research Center and the Institut
Gustave Roussy, a French cancer center, to explore gene therapy procedures
involving adenoviruses, which can cause the common cold.

   Bruce Shackman, biotechnology analyst at Furman Selz in New York, called the
acquisition ''a good deal for shareholders.''

   He said AIS commanded a smaller premium over its stock price than past
biotech acquisitions have.

   But he added, however, that reflected a new environment for biotechnology
investments brought on by concerns about health-care reform and recent product
disappointments.

   CHART:

    STAKING OUT THE FUTURE
    For large drug companies, investing in biotechnology companies is often
the fastest way of harnessing new technologies. Among the largest  acquisitions
 are these:
 .
 BIOTECH                  DRUG                    AMOUNT    PERCENT
 COMPANY                 COMPANY                 INVESTED    STAKE
 Genentech Inc.       Roche Holding Ltd.        $2.1 billion   60%
 Genetics Institute   American Home Products    $666 million   60
 Systemix             Sandoz                    $392 million   60
 Immunex Inc.         American Cyanamid         $350 million   54
 Applied Immune
 Sciences Inc.        Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc.  $113 million   37
 .
 CHRONICLE GRAPHIC
 EC:

GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE END


                             1138 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 4, 1993 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 497 words

HEADLINE: NATIONAL and WORLD

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   The trade skirmish between the United States and the European Community
continued yesterday, with U.S. Trade Representative Mickey Kantor criticizing in
advance the EC's expected imposition of $15 million in sanctions on American
firms doing business in Europe.

   The 12-nation trading bloc is expected to approve measures next week in
reaction to sanctions Washington adopted last week. (Eds. 1,2,3,4,5) Retail
sales at most major chains were lackluster again in May as economic uncertainty
continued to weigh on consumer spending.

   While retailers said yesterday that their sales last month were generally
better than in the previous three months, when bad weather kept consumers from
the malls and cut demand for warm-weather goods, most posted only 2 percent to 3
percent gains in sales at stores open at least a year. Allstate Corp.'s new
shares rose in heavy trading yesterday as investors grabbed a stake in the
biggest initial public offering in Wall Street's history.

   The stock climbed to $29.375 from a pricing of $27 for the 78.5 million
shares of the insurance giant offered by its parent, Sears, Roebuck & Co. By the
closing bell, more than 28 million shares in the nation's second-largest
property-casualty insurer were traded on the New York Stock Exchange. The number
of newly laid-off workers filing claims for jobless benefits rose by 5,000 last
week, continuing what analysts said was an aimless drift that suggested a
lackadaisical labor market.

   The four-week moving average of new claims edged up 500 to 340,250 from
339,750 a week earlier and 341,500 during the period ended May 15, the Labor
Department said. Pharmaceutical maker Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. will invest $113
million in Applied Immune Sciences Inc., a small Santa Clara-based biotech
concern specializing in sophisticated cell and gene therapies. The state Supreme
Court set the stage for a ruling that could finally resolve state Insurance
Commissioner John Garamendi's authority to order rebates under voter-approved
Proposition 103. The court granted a request by Garamendi, supported by both
insurers and the consumer group that sponsored Proposition 103, to review a Los
Angeles judge's ruling that rejected the commissioner's current rules requiring
rate rollbacks. Starbucks Corp. reported $96.8 million in sales for the 34 weeks
ended May 23 at its 211 stores, led by a 23 percent sales gain at stores open a
year or more.

   The Seattle-based coffee retailer said it plans to open at least 33 more
locations during 1993, including five licensed airport stores. Orders to
American factories fell in April for the second consecutive month, pulled down
by declines in a wide range of products, the government said today.

   Orders fell 0.3 percent to a seasonally adjusted $253.5 billion following a
sharp 1.6 percent drop in March, the Commerce Department said. They were the
first back-to-back declines since July and August of last year.

   Analysts had been expecting a slight 0.1 percent gain. (Eds. 6,7)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1139 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       June 4, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; LETTERS; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 1939 words

HEADLINE: Not all convinced that proposed Btu tax will be workable or fair

BODY:


   The rabid attacks on Sens. Dole, Boren, Danforth and others, (May 29, letters

 to the editor) demonstrate the effects of getting all your news from liberal
sources. The writers have no grasp of whose interests these senators are
protecting.

   Clinton's Btu tax would be applied at the source and would simply become a
cost of production to be passed along (with the associated administrative
costs) to the end user. It will not adversely impact the "Big Oil"  companies.
Since energy is a necessity for survival in our society, its  effects will be
inflationary. Tractors, trawlers, processors, transports,  refrigeration, even
the cost of lighting the grocery store will increase. The  National Association
of Manufacturers estimates that 600,000 jobs will be lost  if the Btu tax
becomes a reality.

   President Clinton wants to increase the Earned Income Credit and Food Stamp
Program to offset the damage this tax will do to lower-income families. I  would
prefer to keep my job and not have to rely on food stamps.

   Bob Dole and others like him are working for special interests - yours and
mine. Thank God for gridlock - it exists for our own protection.

Dan Schulz, Crystal Beach

   On behalf of the employees at Anchor Glass Container Corp., I am writing to
express my concern about the administration's Btu energy tax proposal. The
proposal has been poked through so many times that it's beginning to look like
Swiss cheese. So many groups have received exemptions from the proposed tax
that the result will be a heavier burden on those industries remaining in the
bill. The net effect of the current bill would be an unlevel playing field
among competing industries and an overall loss for the environment.

   By the way of illustration, the glass container industry, which requires a
very energy-intensive production process, would be put at a severe competitive
disadvantage under the current proposal. Preferences would be given to our
competitors resulting in less production of glass containers, a 100 percent
recyclable material. For example, competing industries such as plastics,
aluminum and steel have already received exemptions from the proposed bill
allowing them to avoid paying their full share on the tax.

   The glass industry is ready to pay its fair share and the country needs our
president to be successful, irrespective of our individual political
persuasion. The dilemma that legislation with exemption creates, is a
competitive tilt that is untenable for our 8,000 employees. We are not opposed
to energy consumption taxes but, when they place us at an economic
disadvantage, it is no longer fair.

James R. Malone, President & CEO,

Anchor Glass Container, Tampa

A 'crime deterrent'

     Re: Every home should have a gun, legislator says, May 16.

   Rep. Al Lawson correctly cites Kennesaw, Ga., as an example of legislation
which promotes citizen ownership of guns for crime deterrence. The Atlanta
suburb of Kennesaw passed legislation requiring that every household have a
gun. This was done in response to the first handgun ban in the United States
which occurred in the Chicago suburb of Morton Grove in 1981. The result was  an
89 percent drop in burglaries, and stays low today.

   As a member of the American Society of Law Enforcement Trainers, I receive
periodicals which reflect current trends in training, equipment and attitudes
in law enforcement. One such journal, Law and Order magazine (January 1993)
published results from a recent study by the National Center for Policy
Analysis, a non-profit, non-partisan public policy research institute in
Dallas. The study demonstrated that firearms in the hands of civilians are a
crime deterrent. The study goes on to debunk the negative myths usually
associated with civilian handgun ownership.

   Similarly, ownership of handguns was proven successful when tested in
Orlando in the 1960s (and elsewhere more recently). Women frightened by a
series of brutal assaults began to buy firearms. The local newspaper
cosponsored a series of weekend gun training sessions conducted by the police
department. Some 3,000 civilian women received gun defense training. Publicity
generated by the program caused a virtual cessation of rape. Rape dropped 88.2
percent while aggravated assault and burglaries both declined by approximately
25 percent. According to the FBI, Orlando was the only city in the United
States with a population of over 100,000 to decrease crime that year. Five
years later, it was still 13 percent below the level before the program, while
rape increased 64 percent nationally and 96.1 percent in Florida.

   The presence of firearms and trained citizens deters crime. Training in
tactics and the lawful use of deadly force results in a responsibly armed
citizenry and a lower crime rate. Best of all, target practice is a safe and
fun sport!

Michael La Sala, New Port Richey

Another view

   Re: Editorial, A climate of violence, May 25.

   Blaming the death of a Japanese exchange student on society misses the  mark,
as society is only the sum of its parts.

   One of society's parts is the "Dirty Harry" mentality promoted by  Hollywood
- the shoot-first-and-ask-questions-later attitude instilled in  Americans from
the first movie they see.

   Another of society's parts is the National Rifle Association (NRA) which,
after many decades of promoting open sale on handguns, must now somehow
continue to justify its position that 70-million concealable handguns have  made
this country a safer place. With the demise of the communist, the NRA
desperately needs another bogeyman to justify its crusade to arm every
American.

   The NRA is now spending millions each year depicting the average American  as
being so besieged by crime that he stands trembling behind his front door,
Dirty Harry Special ready to perform the act the NRA has equated with manhood,
patriotism and sainthood - defend himself and his family from the slightest
provocation.

   With this campaign, the NRA hopes to convince Americans that self defense
with a handgun is not only your right, but your patriotic and God-given duty.
Needless to say, gun manufacturers love it.

Arthur C. Hayhoe, Tampa

Vet defended

   Re: Pet doctor accused of abusing animals, May 27, about the suspension of
Dr. Marianne Keim's license to practice as a veterinarian. The allegations are
ridiculous. Another vicious vendetta by disgruntled employees, and a few
displeased people on minor matters. Her spay and neuter prices were  affordable,
which displeased other vets. She may not have a movie star's  personality, but
she is a compassionate person who truly cares for animals, as  many people can
testify to. In Tampa, the name of the game is not to ruffle  the feathers of
greedy vets. Why does Tampa continue to deal the cards from  the bottom of the
deck?

   Could it be that it is a one horse town?

Larry E. Admire, Tampa

   In regard to your story concerning Dr. Marianne Keim, I would like to
comment that I find the allegations against her to be untrue.

   I am the owner of three dogs and three cats and Dr. Keim has been my vet  for
the past four years.

   I have never known a vet with as much compassion or dedication toward
animals as she has. I find it impossible to believe that she was abusive  toward
any animal.

   The first time I went to her office was on a Saturday night and she
postponed her dinner plans so she could treat my dog who was very ill. I was
very surprised when she called back the next day to check up on my dog to see
how he was doing. Having lived in Tampa for over 30 years I have never known a
vet to show the level of concern she has.

Dale Blake, Tampa

Great display, lousy music

   Re: Boomsday 93.

   Fantastic display! Very entertaining. However, the music was as bad as the
display was good.

   Next year let's "hear" the firework display and play the music low in the
background.

Don T. Wright, St. Petersburg

A breakthrough drug

     Re: Gene therapy may save kids, May 18.

   Your story about the most recent experiment in gene therapy for patients
with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, or ADA-deficient SCID, managed
to capture the significance of this major research initiative with admirably
few words.

   Unfortunately, it leaves the reader with the impression that patients with
the so-called "bubble boy disease" face an "either-or" proposition between
experimental gene therapy or enzyme-replacement treatment when bone marrow
transplants fail. This simply isn't true.

   Since 1986, a breakthrough enzyme-replacement drug called Adagen has
literally emancipated more than 35 patients who were previously held hostage  by
their condition. For the most part, these are patients who failed to  respond to
or were unable to find an identical match for bone marrow  transplantation, the
first line of treatment for ADA-deficient SCID.

   And here's where the article neglects a very important fact about gene
therapy research: It could not take place without Adagen. Each of the research
protocols for patients participating in the U.S. National Institutes of Health
gene therapy program calls for Adagen therapy during the experiments. In fact,
two Ohio patients have continued on Adagen after they withdrew from gene
therapy. The reason: The researchers want to take no chances with these
patients' lives should the experiments fall short of everyone's hopes.

   We are proud of Adagen, for both the lives it saves and for its role in  gene
therapy research. We do not expect to make a significant profit from  Adagen
sales; ADA-deficient SCID is an extremely rare disease, and the drug is
expensive to manufacture. But we do want to offer hope for every person with
the condition, their families and the community at large with thorough,
accurate information about enzyme replacement therapy and gene research.

Abraham Abuchowski, President and CEO,

Enzon Inc., Piscataway, N.J.

Respect all life

   As a member of PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) I assure
you we do not rejoice at a death of a human as a recent letter writer stated.
On the contrary, PETA has the highest respect for life in all forms, no matter
how different we are physically or mentally. It is not right for one species  to
kill another, just because one species is deemed insignificant.

   As for the letter writer's so-called "love for animals," maybe he should
rephrase that to, love for the profit they bring him, from the grooming,
training and breeding. If he truly loved animals he wouldn't add to the  massive
overpopulation problem, in which millions of animals are killed each  week in
this country.

   To live in universal peace we must all learn to respect others' lives.

Stasi Brewer, Hudson

A "symposium'

   Re: Don Addis' cartoon, Tailhook "Symposium" (May 28).

   "Symposium" may be apropos after all.

   Prince Philip was once invited to speak to a symposium of doctors. He began
by defining the term: "A symposium, in the original Greek, means a drinking
session."

Hugh Paulk, Belleair

Share your opinions

   Letters for publication should be addressed to Letters to the Editor, P.O.
Box 1121, St. Petersburg, FL 33731. They must include the handwritten  signature
and address of the writer. Letters may be edited for clarity, taste  and length.
We regret that not all letters can be printed.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE CARTOON, DON ADDIS; A battle scene with broken toys and
burned "Religious Wars" books with a passage reading, "the little children
suffer."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993


                             1140 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              June 1, 1993 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Take two shots of DNA, and see me in morning;
UCSD team can see genes treating age, chronic ills

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists have long imagined gene therapy for treating catastrophic
ailments, such as cancer or inherited disease, but some UCSD researchers think
injections of genes can treat chronic conditions, too, including the arthritis
and immune deficiencies associated with aging. By injecting genetic material
directly into mice, researchers were able to alternately boost and suppress the
mice's immune systems, said Dennis Carson, director of the UCSD Institute for
Research on Aging. The genes that muted a natural immune response demonstrate an
approach that might be useful against the arthritis that accompanies aging, in
which the cartilage at the joints decays. By boosting immune function in the
elderly, scientists might help them fight off infections, flu and even reduce
their susceptibility to cancer, Carson said. "This gives us a new approach to
chronic disease in adults and conditions associated with aging," Carson said.

   He reported the study with mice this month in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences. If the approach were to work in people, it might also be
used for other conditions in which the body's immune system attacks itself,
including juvenile diabetes; psoriasis, which causes skin rashes; and lupus, a
condition where the immune system attacks various bodily organs to cause rashes
and problems with breathing and heart function. The ability to stimulate or
suppress the immune system in mice is "telling us DNA can be used as a drug,"
Carson said. Scientists imagine that DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, might be
more effective and less toxic than the drugs now used for the chronic
conditions. Carson altered the immune system in the mice with a rarely used
technique for injecting millions of the genes -- the DNA that makes a natural
substance -- directly into muscle tissue. "We're trying to make DNA a simpler,
cleaner, safer treatment," Carson said. By contrast, most gene therapy
techniques put the genes into disabled viruses which are very efficient at
infecting millions of cells that have been taken from a patient.

   After the cells have been altered to contain a desired genes, they are then
injected back into a patient. The direct injection of the DNA erases any chance
a virus might cause a disease, Carson said, even though the odds are considered
small because the virus itself is altered to render it harmless. He injected
mice with a gene that produces interleukin-2, a hormone that stimulates the
activity of killer cells that police the bloodstream looking for invaders.

   The genes are injected into leg muscle cells, where they enter the nucleus
and make copies of the interleukin-2. Analysis of blood showed that the
interleukin-2 levels circulating through the blood were higher. In another
experiment with Eyal Raz, a visiting scientist from Hadassah University in
Jerusalem, Carson injected mice with the gene for transforming growth factor
beta, or TGFb, which inhibits the action of the hormone, interleukin-2. In this
instance, levels of the immune systems's antibodies and T-cells decreased in the
blood.

   The finding suggests such an approach might mute the effects for arthritis
and lupus sufferers whose injury and pain are caused when these cells attack the
body. Next, the TGFb reduced the levels of those immune agents in the blood of
mice that were suffering from lupus. "Using this method, we may be able to
create a new treatment for autoimmune diseases," Carson said. Studies from
Carson's lab that are expected to be reported soon are attempting to use
injections of genes actually to ease the symptoms of lupus in mice disfigured by
the condition.

   The animals die from lupus, but the injections' effectiveness can be proved
if the animals live longer than they normally would, he said. Most gene therapy
research has focused either on attacking various types of cancer or replacing
genes to treat inherited conditions in which a gene is missing or damaged and
cannot make a crucial substance the body needs. Inder Verma, a gene therapy
expert at the Salk Institute, said much of the early work with gene therapy has
focused on these virulent diseases because existing treatments usually are not
very effective.

   And federal health officials are more likely to approve experimental gene
therapies in these cases. As researchers and physicians demonstrate a greater
mastery over gene therapy, genes might increasingly be studied as treatments for
a range of chronic and more common conditions, Verma said. The delivery
technique of injecting genes into the body will likely find a place in therapy,
too, Verma said, in cases where a large amount of the gene's product is not
required. "The advantage is you can simply, directly inject DNA, and you don't
have to take out cells and manipulate them and put them back," Verma said.

   "And there is no worry of any virus with it." But the direct injections
generally produce less of the product than do the virus--infected cells, he
said. While the virus technique carries the gene into tens or hundreds of
millions of cells, direct injection lets genes penetrate many times fewer cells
and there is less chance the genes' product will be made, he said. Vical, a La
Jolla biotechnology company, reported earlier this year how its scientists were
able to take DNA from the core of a virus and directly inject it into mice to
boost an immune response to "immunize" them against influenza viruses. Robert
Zaugg, a trained biochemist and senior director of business development at
Vical, said Carson's work advances gene therapy by showing that "genes can
produce therapeutic proteins to treat common, chronic diseases." Vical also has
a licensing agreement with Gary Nabel of the University of Michigan, who is
trying to use the direct gene injections, sometimes called naked DNA, in people
with melanoma, a virulent skin cancer, Zaugg said. Nabel injects the cancer
cells with a gene that makes a protein that tags the cancer cells as foreign
bodies in hopes of stimulating an immune system attack on them.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 CHART; CAPTIONS: 1,2. DENNIS CARSON, IMMUNOLOGIST (B-8);
PHOTOBY: 2. UNION-TRIBUNE

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1141 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      June 1, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 5D

LENGTH: 1045 words

HEADLINE: Keys to dinosaur life may lie in ancient DNA codes

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

    One steamy afternoon millions of years ago, when the whole earth was like a
Jurassic park, a mosquito finds the soft underbelly of a tyrannosaurus rex and
begins to draw blood.

   Its stomach engorged, the mosquito buzzes away, alighting briefly on a tree
trunk. Suddenly, the mosquito finds itself stuck in a pool of dripping tree sap
and becomes entombed.

   Time passes and the tree sap fossilizes and turns to amber - preserving the
mosquito for millions of years. Then in the 20th century, scientists remove the
mosquito from the amber, discover dinosaur blood cells in its stomach and use
genetic engineering to grow a new dinosaur.

   That's the scenario outlined in 1982 by George Poinar Jr., entomologist and
amber expert at University of California, Berkeley. The idea arose after he
found that the nuclei and other cell structures appeared intact in a bug trapped
in 40-million-year-old amber. If the cell structures were intact, Poinar
thought, so might be the genetic material inside.

   Poinar and a group of like-minded individuals then formed the Extinct DNA
Study Group and started a newsletter in which they first printed the dinosaur
cloning scenario.

   Almost immediately Poinar drew the disdain of fellow scientists and piqued
the curiosity of a science fiction writer named Michael Crichton.

   "Our original purpose was to share ideas and information about the first
recovery of genes from extinct organisms," says Poinar. "But we were shunned by
other scientists and they thought we were crazy."

   Crazy or not, a handful of scientists at Berkeley combined their knowledge of
paleontology, entomology, botany, zoology and genetics to form the new - and now
legitimate - study of ancient DNA. So, while Michael Crichton went to work on
Jurassic Park, which may be the summer's most popular movie, real scientists
went to work in the lab.

   "We can't bring back a complete dinosaur and we have no way to clone any
animal," says Poinar. "But there are many important things we can learn from
resurrecting the DNA of ancient organisms."

   Molecular biologist Raul Cano, California Polytechnic State University, San
Luis Obispo, says DNA may be retrieved from ancient plants that could make
modern plants more hearty and robust, and that the genes of ancient parasites or
viruses might be used to make vaccines against their modern relatives.

   The resurrection of specimens millions of years old is possible because of
amber's remarkable preservative abilities. Not only does amber protect the
specimen from the outside world, anti-microbial chemicals called terpenoids keep
the organism from decomposing. Egyptians used terpenoids on mummy cloth.

   Ancient DNA also can be retrieved from old tissue and bone. Michael Braun,
director of the Molecular Systematics unit at the Smithsonian's Musuem of
Natural History, is using tissue from museum specimens and bone to trace the
evolutionary history of animals.

   "Right now, we're looking at the loss of genetic diversity in endangered
species," says Braun, whose lab is comparing DNA from 300-year-old stuffed
whooping cranes with modern relatives.

   So far DNA has been recovered from a variety of sources including mummies, a
17 million-year-old magnolia leaf, a 30 million-year old bee and a 30
million-year-old termite, says Rob DeSalle, American Musuem of Natural History,
New York, whose team got the termite DNA. Scientists also are trying to extract
DNA from dinosaur bones, but no one has reported any success.

   Cano says his lab has retrieved DNA from an amber-entombed biting midge from
the Cretaceous period - "a la Jurassic Park," he says.

   "We have the DNA now but we don't know if it's from a dinosaur," says Cano.
"Even if it is, we will not be seeing little dinosaurs running around our
countryside any time sooner or later."

   Sorry, no theme parks or dinosaur pets, but getting dinosaur DNA could settle
two major disputes: whether they were cold-blooded or warm-blooded and whether
they were more like birds or repitles.

   So, why do scientists insist dinosaurs can't be brought back? Simple.

   First, ancient DNA, however well-preserved, is too fragmented, says Kelly
Thomas, UC-Berkeley. To make a dinosaur or any creature, you need the full
compliment of genes in a cell - the genome - which serves as the instructions
for making organs, limbs, the nervous system and all other aspects of a living
creature. Besides,
scientists don't know enough to arrange the DNA fragments in the right order.

   Second, scientists so far can only clone or copy single genes or key gene
fragments. But even that isn't so simplistic and it is what makes gene therapy
possible.

    Extracting from the past In Jurassic Park, dinosaurs are brought back from
extinction using ancient DNA. In reality, ancient DNA researchers are
reconstructing glimpses of the past - but cloning a whole creature is still
science fiction. This is how scientists work with ancient DNA in real life:

    1. Identify the specimen from which the ancient DNA is to be extracted. It
could be a bug in amber or a piece of tissue from a museum specimen or
fossilized bone.

    2. Grind up the specimen and add water. This makes a soup of DNA fragments,
proteins and cell debris. Care must be taken not to contaminate the mixture with
DNA from other lab specimens or human DNA, which sheds from the body like
dandruff.

    3. Chemicals are added to separate the DNA from everything else. It is then
strained through an ultrafine filter and combined with special chemicals that
make identification possible of the DNA.

    4. The DNA fragments are then put through a special machine that makes
millions of identical copies like a molecular photocopier.

    5. The copies are then put through a "genetic sequencing" process that
breaks down the DNA into its basic elements, revealing its particular set of
genetic instructions. The result resembles a supermarket bar code.

    6. Scientists compare the sequence with other known gene sequences from a
computerized library - hunting for something similar. Differences between the
old gene and an existing gene can show how something evolved over time and
reveal its relationship with other species. If dinosaur DNA were available it
would show if dinosaurs were more like birds or reptiles.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, color, Gary Visgaitis, USA TODAY, Source: USA TODAY research
(Illustration; Chart)


                             1142 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 30, 1993, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1116 words

HEADLINE: 2 LITTLE GIRLS LOVING LIFE, THANKS TO GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: MALCOLM RITTER, ASSOCIATED PRESS WRITER

BODY:


   If you want to see the first payoffs from a potential revolution in medicine,
take a peek in a couple of suburban yards in Ohio:

   Her brown ponytail tumbling out behind her baseball cap, Cindy Cutshall, 11,
chases pop flies. She's been at it for a good half-hour on a warm and humid day,
but no matter. She wants more fly balls to chase -- more, more.

   ''She can do two hours of basketball on a court, whereas she couldn't do five
minutes before,'' her mother says. ''She can swim, she can play baseball. It's
amazing.''

   An hour's drive away, near Cleveland, 6-year-old Ashi DeSilva boots a huge
yellow ball with her ''Beauty and the Beast'' tennis shoes. Her face framed with
black curly hair, she giggles as the ball returns and bounces off her head.

   ''To see her running around, knowing what she was like when she was ill, it's
like a miracle,'' says her father. ''It's absolutely a miracle.''

   These two little girls, says Jennifer Howse, president of the March of Dimes
Birth Defects Foundation, are ''the pioneering patients of our time'' -- the
first two people in the world to benefit from gene therapy.

   They were born with a defective gene that could not tell their bodies to make
a critical enzyme. Without that substance, blood cells called T cells died off,
crippling the disease-fighting immune system and leaving them vulnerable to
potentially fatal infections.

   But it was their good fortune to live when scientific advances came at
lightning speed. In a few short years, gene therapy -- the use of transplanted
genes to treat disease -- went from a theory to a reality.

   The idea was to equip as many remaining T cells as possible with a working
gene to let them make the missing enzyme. But no one -- not the girls, not their
parents, not the doctors -- knew if it would work.

Ashanthi DeSilva, as Ashi formally is known, was born in Sri Lanka in September
1986 and came with her family the next month to the United States. Then her
troubles began.

   At about two months old, she began to get recurring chest and ear infections,
with what seemed to be a constantly runny nose. She just could not overcome her
colds. She was continuously on antibiotics.

   It got worse. At age 1, she was vomiting and having diarrhea so often her
parents, Raj and Van, had to wet-vacuum the carpet several times a day. She was
too weak to walk across the living room, recalled Van, and ''she was so thin you
could see her ribs.''

   Ashi repeatedly was misdiagnosed, but soon after her second birthday, Raj and
Van finally learned the truth: Ashi had an extremely rare genetic disease called
ADA deficiency, the lack of an enzyme called adenosine deaminase. It could kill
her.

   An experimental drug, PEG-ADA, saved Ashi's life. The diarrhea and vomiting
stopped. Her appetite came back. She began to put on weight and grow.

   But she still was tired and sickly, with frequent colds and flu, and her nose
still ran constantly. One Saturday morning, her supply of blood platelets was so
low that she bruised to the touch.

   Her doctor sent samples of her blood to the National Institutes of Health.
Scientists there were investigating whether ADA deficiency could be cured by
giving patients new genes, he explained.

   It was called gene therapy. It might work. Someday.

   ''He said, 'Not in our lifetime, Van. Don't build up your hopes,''' Van
recalled.

Words tumble out at an adolescent's urgent pace as Cindy Cutshall conducts a
breakneck tour of her photo album (''Look! We rode a camel at the zoo. ... Look!
A Smurf. ... Do you know there was a zebra that came up to our car?'')

   In one photo of a group of children, her finger flits from one face to
another: ''He's got it, he's got it, I've got it, he's got it ...''

   six times a year.

   She responded rapidly to antibiotics, so doctors ''didn't think a whole lot
about it. None of us did,'' recalled her mother, Susan, a nurse.

   But at age 4, a hip infection forced Cindy into surgery and four weeks on
antibiotics. Just two weemily to an immunologist who diagnosed ADA deficiency in
May 1987.

   With PEG-ADA, she became sick less often and avoided serious infections alt

   When Cindy's doctor mentioned he was sending blood samples to the National
Institutes of Health to help them develop gene in a decade or two, Susan said,
''We didn't.''

The future came quickly -- first for Ashi, then for Cindy.

   In May 1990, two researchers from NIH met with Raj and Van in Cleveland to
discuss trying a new experimental therapy on Ashi.

   ''They started talking about this gene therapy and genes, things we didn't
understand at all,'' Raj recalled. ''Itng to teach a kid advanced calculus.''

   ''For me,'' said Van, ''it was going to work. I just kept on believing it's
going to ha, it would happen, it would happen.''

   ''I just kept telling her, forget it. It's not going to happen,'' Raj said.

   But four months later, Raj and Van entered a room at NIH to sign a consent
form for Ashi's gene therapy.

   Raj had doubts. It seemed risky, and he quizzed sciee chemical engineer from
Sri Lanka realized his dilemma could not be solved by data''They answered the
questions as best they could. You got the gut feeling they were honest and
straightforward, ' he said.

   He signed.

   Later that day, doctors withdrew some blood from Ashi so the T cells could be
equipped with a new ADA gene. On Sept. 14, 1990, just 12 days after Ashi's
fourth birthday, the treated cells were infused back into Ashi's veins.

   The procedure was repeated seven times in the next year and three times after
that, in an attempt to fix as many T cells as possible. She received PEG-ADA
injections in tandem with the gene treatments.

   Meanwhile, Cindy Cutshall endured the same process, starting in January 1991.
And everyone waited to see what would happen.

   The waiting was not protracted.

   The difference in Ashi was dramatic. Her runny nose dried up. When the whole
family got the flu, Ashi got over it first. Shedding her lethargy, she asked for
roller skates and became as boisterous as a young girl should be.

   Now she runs into the living room and spots her father, in an easy chair. She
grabs his arms and drives her head into his chest like a determined, 76- pound
defensive lineman. After a few minutes of tussling, she runs out.

   ''It's made her whole,'' Raj says. ''PEG-ADA saved her life, but gene therapy
gave her life.''

   Cindy's energy returned, as well. She's playing in a softball league now, and
she's seriously into baseball. She has uncounted baseball cards in her album.
With great earnestness, she instructs a perfect stranger to grunt ''Unnnh!''
like an umpire when she throws or catches a strike.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), Elizabeth Fulford/Associated Press: Cindy Cutshall plays
outside her home in Canton., Ashi DeSilva

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1143 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 30, 1993 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 197 words

HEADLINE: TREATMENT AIM IS TO FIX WHAT'S BRED IN THE BONES

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.

BODY:

   In early May, Cindy Cutshall went through a second kind of gene therapy that
scientists hope will provide a wider-ranging and longer-lasting benefit.

   Her current treatment of T cells leaves gaps in her immune system's
repertoire for responding to germs, and the corrected T cells will eventually
age and die.

   So the new treatment aimed to plant the crucial gene in stem cells, which are
found in the bone marrow and give rise to all cells in the blood. If all goes as
planned, the corrected stem cells will come to dominate the marrow and
continuously pass along the crucial gene to the populations of blood cells they
produce.

   To do the therapy, scientists at the National Institutes of Health gave Cindy
a drug to make stem cells leave her marrow and enter the bloodstream.  Then
blood was drawn and scientists separated out the stem cells. In the laboratory,
a virus was used to carry the helpful gene into the cells.

   The cells were then infused back into Cindy's veins, where they would
naturally return to the marrow.

   It will take three to six months to know if the treatment has worked. Ashi
DeSilva is scheduled to undergo the same treatment this summer.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                             1144 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                        May 30, 1993 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 780 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY LETS 2 GIRLS LEAD ACTIVE LIVES

BYLINE: By JOAN M. MAZZOLINI; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Gene therapy may still sound like science fiction, but two young Ohio girls
are modern-day pioneers in the life-saving treatment.

   Nearly two years ago, Ashanthi DeSilva, now 6, of North Olmsted was the first
human being to undergo gene replacement therapy. A few months later, Cindy
Cutshall, 11, of Canton, was the second.

   Gene replacement was the only chance for Ashanthi, known as Ashi, and Cindy,
both born with a rare and deadly immune problem called ADA deficiency, to live a
normal life. So far, the gamble has paid off.

   At a press conference today, the girls will be introduced as the "research
ambassadors" for the March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation.

   "For us, Ashi and Cindy symbolize the potential of gene therapy in treating
birth defects," said Jennifer Howse, president of the March of Dimes Birth
Defects Foundation. "Within our lifetime, many will benefit from gene therapy
treatment, but we will never forget that two girls from Ohio ... are the
pioneering patients of our time."

   Since Ashi's treatment in September 1990, the use of gene therapy -
transplanting genes to treat disease - has exploded.

   Research is underway treating cystic fibrosis, cancer, and heart disease with
gene therapy. And as the Human Genome Project, a $3 billion, 15-year project to
map human genetic structure, moves ahead in locating and decoding our 100,000 or
so genes, treatment for more diseases will quickly follow.

   At the time of Ashi's and Cindy's births, the future didn't look so
promising.

   Both girls were born with a defective gene that kept their bodies from making
a critical enzyme, adenosine deaminase, or ADA. Without the enzyme,
disease-fighting blood cells called T cells died off. And without the T cells,
the girls were vulnerable to possibly fatal infections.

   ADA deficiency is extremely rare, with fewer than 10 children in North
America born each year with the faulty gene. Untreated, a child with ADA
deficiency dies within a few years.

   By two months, Ashi began getting reacurring ear and chest infections. She
was constantly on antibiotics.

   In Cindy's case the defective gene didn't show itself till she was about 5.
Then she got constant sinus infections that would quickly turn into pneumonia.

   Fortunately, an experimental drug, PEG-ADA, helped the girls fight off
infections and kept them alive.

   But the drug couldn't give them a normal life. While infections weren't as
severe, they were still sickly, with no energy to play and learn. Ashi's father,
Raj DeSilva, said even with the drug, something like chicken pox could have
killed his daughter.

   But Ashi, and then Cindy, were picked by researchers from the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., to undergo experimental gene therapy.

   The idea behind their gene therapy was to put into the girls a normal ADA
gene, to take the place of their own faulty one, that would make the missing
enzyme.

   Blood was drawn from the girls, and a normal ADA gene from a healthy person
was inserted into the white blood cells. A few days later, after the cells had
grown outside the body, they were infused back into the girls. The procedure was
repeated every six weeks.

   When they first infused Ashi, the researchers were not very optimistic.

   "They (the doctors) said this is very tentative," said Ashi's father.

   But after about four months of treatment, "it suddenly dawns on you that she
(Ashi) doesn't have a runny nose and she has more enthusiasm for living," said
DeSilva, a chemical engineer originally from Sri Lanka. "She was becoming more
like a normal child. She wanted to swim and do things."

   When Cindy's turn came in January of 1991, the researchers were much more
optimistic, said her mother Susan Cutshall, a nurse at Aultman Hospital.

   Cutshall said the change in Cindy occurred gradually over the next six
months.

   Traveling to Bethesda twice a month, the first trip to take the blood then
back a week or so later to get the infusion, took a lot out of Cindy, Cutshall
said. Now Cindy has as much energy as any almost-12-year-old.

   For Ashi, gene therapy meant she could go to school with other kids.

   Because of her weakened immunity the family feared putting her in a class
with other children because of the chance she might get ill.

   Now when Ashi gets the flu, it runs its course and no antibiotics are needed.

   Ashi hasn't had an infusion since last August. Later this summer, Ashi will
undergo another type of gene therapy, one that Cindy had earlier this month and
that scientists hope is longer lasting and has wider-ranging benefits.

   Said Howse "Because of the courage of Ashi, Cindy and their families, future
children may lead healthier lives."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO BY: AP photos/MARK DUNCAN; PHOTO 1; Cindy Cutshall, 11, plays
catch outside her home in Canton.; PHOTO 2; Ashi DeSilva, 6, mixes colored sand
in her first-grade class in North Olmsted.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                             1145 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe



                      May 29, 1993, Saturday, City Edition

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: Museum of Science's hands-on guide to biotechnology

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

    If the Steven Spielberg movie "Jurassic Park," with its dinosaurs gone amok,
is your fictional introduction to biotechnology, a follow-up trip to Boston's
Museum of Science will provide a better grasp of biotech's real-world
implications.

   Last week a new permanent exhibit called "Frontiers of Biotechnology" opened
that focuses less on the complex science behind biotechnology and more on its
everyday applications.

   Located on the main floor of the museum between the escalators, the exhibit
is a series of large panels with several hands-on computerized "mini-labs" to
show visitors how biotech products are developed. Also on display are
genetically engineered chrysanthemums of different colors plus a bone-shaped
telephone to help explain how some biotechnology companies take scienific
research and begin to create medical products.

   To illustrate how biotech evolved visitors learn that birds evolved from
dinosaurs. They are also asked to judge whether animal exteriors such as
porcupine quills, snakeskin and wool are made from the same material as hair or
nails.

   Aimed primarily at families with children 10 years and up, the exhibit
spotlights the commercial application of biotechnology, notably in medicine,
agriculture, materials and clothing. There is one display showing how new indigo
dyes are used to produce blue jeans.

   Biotechnology, the exhibit explains, is the harnessing of the biological
process of living cells to make new products and modify others. For example, a
jar of leeches is displayed with the explanation that their saliva is being used
in cardiac care and in surgical procedures. And one panel notes how a poison
protein called ricin from castor beans is modified to treat some forms of
cancer.

   "With this exhibit, we want to show how science is applied and how
biotechnology is changing our lives," said Roy R. Gould, the museum's exhibit
planner. "In a way this is our first exhibit focused mostly on the application
of science."

   To demonstrate the process of genetic engineering, visitors use a computer
terminal to learn how gene therapy might treat cystic fibrosis, an inherited
disorder that affects one in 2,000 births.

   By manipulating a button with a trackball, visitors mix beakers of enzymes,
viruses and genetic material, use eyedroppers and centrifuges. One warning: hold
down the button while using the trackball to avoid hearing only clicks without
any screen movements.

   A similar hands-on mini lab shows how genetic engineering could create
freezable tomatoes using microscopic genetic material found in the flounder
fish.

   To appeal to adults and older children interested in the societal issues
created by genetic engineering there is a two-character presentation on a bare
stage behind the exhibit. Offered only on weekends, the 15-minute
thought-provoking play called "One Second to Midnight" includes humorous
references to Cambridge's initial opposition to biotech research in 1976. At
that time, Cambridge residents' fears led to a series of safety guidelines and
regulations.

   "It scares me," said a character named Harriet. "It's not natural. I was
reading in the paper about some 'hairy, orange-eyed creature' that was spotted
in Dover, and I'm worried it's connected somehow to this biotechnology."

   Joe, the second actor, responds, "We should not be playing God."

   The banter leads to a debate over the potential long-term harmful
consequences of biotechnology.

   The actors play a doctor and a daughter who is worried about her
cancer-ridden father. At issue is whether he should receive a new experimental
treatment using ricin. The doctor notes that the treatment was developed by a
Cambridge biotech company. "I think it's the best option available," he says.

   The company, ImmunoGen, Inc. was among the biotech firms that donated $
350,000 to finance the new exhibit that stresses the role of the Massachusetts
biotechnology industry in developing new products and services.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/JANET KNOTT / Bethany Bottone and Debby
Kennedy work on the computer at the Museum of Science's new exhibit "Frontiers
of Biotechnology."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993


                             1146 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 28, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. C2

LENGTH: 104 words

HEADLINE: A GIANT STEP FOR CHILDREN

BYLINE: SYLBIA KUNST, PH.D.  CHAIRMAN

BODY:


   Thank you for the article, ''Newborn's Gene Repair Gives Hope'' (May 16). The
exciting news is that these first trials of stem-cell gene therapy in humans are
the next logical step in the continuing attempt to cure children with birth
defects. Cure and prevention of birth defects have been the March of Dimes goal
since 1957.

   We congratulate Dr. Donald Kohn for his pioneering research and are pleased
that he is also conducting gene-therapy research for the March of Dimes.

   Success in gene-replacement therapy holds new hope for babies to lead normal
healthy lives and save thousands of health care dollars.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1147 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
                              Journal of Commerce

                             May 25, 1993, Tuesday

SECTION: CHEM, Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: INVESTORS PUMP CAPITAL INTO BIOTECH NEWCOMER

BYLINE: DEBRA BEACHY; Houston Chronicle

DATELINE: HOUSTON

BODY:


   Even though biotechnology stocks aren't hot on Wall Street right now,
investors have taken a shine to Genemedicine Inc. The Houston newcomer said last
week it had raised $ 8.5 million in venture capital - the most ever raised on a
first round of financing by a Houston biotech company.

    "It's the biggest deal in Houston," said William Mullaney, managing general
artner at Houston-based Ventures Medical Associates, a venture capital firm.

   "Gene therapy is a really hot area right now, and the company has people who
are world-renowned in that area" of science.

   Genemedicine is developing a way to give gene therapy to people with a simple
injection.

   In order to do that, the company is focusing on delivering genes to muscle
cells for therapy in people whose muscles are wasting away because of AIDS,
cancer and other diseases, said Dr. Fred D. Ledley, a physician, company co-
founder and faculty member at Baylor College of Medicine.

   It also is developing technology that could turn a gene "on" and ''off."

   "This is really designed to be like conventional medicines," he said. ''It
allows the doctor to stop therapies and try something different."

   But the company has a long way to go. Its research still has to get beyond
the laboratory to animal trials, and then human clinical trials.

   Most gene therapy now is done by transplanting genes into a patient, either
by doing a biopsy, and inserting genes into tissue, then transplanting it back,
or by extracting a patient's blood, putting genes into the blood, then putting
it back with a blood transfusion.

   Besides attracting investors with new technology, Genemedicine also got a
bigger deal because fewer financing deals are being done, Mr. Mullaney said.
Consequently, those that are done are for more money.

   "Even though it's harder than ever for early-stage companies, and really
tough for biotech companies to get money - because investors know how long it
takes to get companies to the point of being publicly held - you see fewer deals
being done but when they are being done, it's for a larger amount of financing,"
he said.

   Mr. Mullaney said he thinks the financing is significant because large
venture capitalists are investing in a Houston biotech company for the first
time. The new investors include London-based Abingworth and San Francisco- based
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, he said.

   Investors were attracted to Genemedicine because of its promising gene
technology, said Preston Tsao, the managing director of D. Blech & Co., the New
York-based biotech investment firm that led the investors, which included 10
venture capital firms.

   "The overall (stock) market has a dampening effect on enthusiasm for
biotechnology, but for a high quality deal, placement can be made without too
much difficulty," Mr. Tsao said. "It's always a selling job."

   For a second round of financing, which usually falls between $ 3 million and
$ 8 million, the amount raised was on the high end, and included the Houston
company Ventures Medical among investors, Mr. Tsao said.

   Even though the company did well, it will still need lots more money. ''The
average cost of developing a pharmaceutical is between $ 150 million and $ 200
million," said Mark D. Gessler, Genemedicine's director of corporate
development. "We will need an additional round of financing."

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1996


                             1148 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                    May 24, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MEDLIFE; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 271 words

HEADLINE: Babies Benefit From Latest Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:


   Gene therapy treatments have come to the cradle.

   Two weeks ago, a five-day-old boy became the second baby in three days to get
cells genetically altered to fight a rare, inherited immune system defect.

   Zachary Riggins was treated at the University of California-San Francisco
Medical Center.

   Andrew Gobea, now about two weeks old, got the same therapy the week before
at Children's Hospital, Los Angeles. A 10-year-old girl also received a similar
treatment that week at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.

   "This really is a historic week in the evolution of (gene therapy)," said Dr.
Michael Blaese of the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. Success "opens
up the door for (treating) a host of disorders," including sickle cell disease.

   These children are among the 100 born in the United States each year with
severe combined immunodeficiency. They lack a gene making adenosine deaminase,
an immune-system enzyme.

   Researchers harvested cells from the placenta after birth and inserted the
ADA gene in the cells. The babies got the cells in a transfusion-like procedure.
Three to six months from now, physicians should know if the treatments worked.

    By treating newborns, "hopefully we can prevent them from getting
infections," said Dr. Don Kohn, Children's Hospital.

   Past gene-therapy trials added working ADA genes to white blood cells. But
"fixing" self-renewing stem cells instead - Blaese calls them "the grandmother
of all cells" because they make all the body's blood and immune cells - leaves
other cells "basically fixed for the rest of (a person's) life," he said.

GRAPHIC: Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                             1149 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       May 24, 1993, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 6; Column 4; Letters Desk

LENGTH: 430 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH FUNDING

BODY:

   The recent exciting news from institutions in Los Angeles related to gene
therapy and pancreatic cell implantation reminds us all of the great and direct
potential of biomedical research to enhance our lives ("Baby 1st to Receive Gene
Treatment, May 16, and "Artificial Pancreas Is Implanted in Diabetic," May 14).
Few would deny that the relatively modest investment made by the federal
government to research in our universities and research institutes has paid off,
in improvement of quality of life, as well as in establishment of the
biotechnology industry. Basic biomedical research saves lives and provides jobs.
We take the great successes of biomedical research for granted. Yet many may not
be aware of the threat posed by national policies to the health of the basic
biomedical research establishment.

   Much of the success of the national research establishment can be traced to
the existence of the so-called "peer review" system by which stiff competition
for grants results from a team of highly qualified independent scientists
evaluating proposals. However, in the last four years the ability to get a new,
novel idea from an independent research laboratory funded has declined
precipitously. In many areas of basic research, including my own (diabetes
research), barely 10% of new applications are funded by the federal government.
This is due not only to overall limitations of funds, but also the re-targeting
of large amounts of federal money to specific research programs, at the expense
of investigator-initiated ideas. And yet it has been the independent scientist
who has been the germ of the biomedical revolution over the last 25 years.

   It is obvious that the present accomplishments in medical science, such as
gene therapy and vaccine production, are the result of a long-term and solid
investment in the development and nurturing of those who choose a scientific
career. It can only be shortsighted if we do not allow young and dedicated
scientists (including women and members of minority groups) who are just now
entering the scientific work force to have a reasonable probability of trying
out their new ideas. Biomedical research is inherently inefficient, but
demonstrably of enormous benefit. It is important for our elected officials to
guarantee that enough funds are targeted to independent investigator-initiated
grants to raise the chance of funding such grants to a level that makes a career
in biomedical research a realistic possibility.

   RICHARD N. BERGMAN

   Professor, and Chair

   Physiology and Biophysics

   USC Medical School


                             1150 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words

HEADLINE: Medical Research Is Also Health Care

BODY:


   To the Editor:

   It was heartening to read "A Five Dollar Cancer Cure" (Op-Ed, May 12) by
Senator Tom Harkin. He is right that research is the key to an effective and
less costly health care system. For too long, the Clinton Administration has
underestimated the importance of medical research in the debate on health care
reform.

   Top scientists, including the Nobel laureate James Watson, have stated that
within the decade, 80 percent of stroke can be eliminated; effective treatments
can be found for such previously hopeless conditions as brain and spinal cord
injuries; genetic therapies will be developed for disorders such as Tay-Sachs
disease and Huntington's chorea, and treatments will be found to reverse
neurological loss in Parkinson's and multiple sclerosis. The National Institute
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke has requested $300 million more for fiscal
year 1994 to achieve these and other advances quickly.

    Such an expenditure for research is a tiny fraction of the costs of
neurological disorders. Diseases and injuries of the brain and spinal cord cost
our country a staggering $400 billion each year and unleash exceptional
devastation and suffering on the lives of patients and their families.
Investment in neurological research will quickly produce vast economic savings
and transform millions of lives.

   I hope that Senator Harkin's voice will be heeded by an Administration that
seems to be in need of such wise counsel.

ARTHUR ULLIAN
President, National Council
on Spinal Cord Injury
Boston, May 13, 1993

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1993


                             1151 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                    May 23, 1993, SUNDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: SUNDAY NEWS; THE WEEK THAT WAS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 291 words

HEADLINE: Boss' Unwanted Advances Earn Payoff for Her Victim

BYLINE: Theresa Walla

BODY:


   A manager at a California spa company was awarded more than $ 1 million by a
jury that decided he had been sexually harassed by a female superior.

   The verdict appeared to be the first jury award in favor of a man suing a
woman over the issue.

   In a unanimous decision, the jury ordered California Acrylic Industries Inc.
to pay Sabino Gutierrez, 33, slightly more than $ 1 million as recompense for
six years of harassment. Chief financial officer Maria Martinez also was ordered
to pay $ 10,000.

   Martinez, who is married, forced Gutierrez to have sex with her and sabotaged
his job and office after he married another woman, according to Gutierrez's
attorney.  Reconsiderate Danes: Assuaged by key exemptions, Denmark citizens
approved the Maastricht Treaty for a politically and economically united Europe.
In an indication of its division over the issue, however, the otherwise stable
Scandinavian society was shaken by rioting in Copenhagen, where several
protesters were shot by police. The treaty had failed in an earlier referendum
over fears that the nation would sacrifice power to a federal Europe. As a
compromise, Denmark will not be forced to use a universal currency.  Gene
therapy milestone: Huge scientific hopes rest on Andrew Gobea, whose 6-pound,
12-ounce body lacked a functioning immune system. The first newborn to undergo
gene therapy, Andrew was injected with a teaspoon's worth of genes that doctors
hope will cure the inherited defect. Its effectiveness should be known in about
six months.  2 HEADS ARE BETTER

    Identical even in overachievement, twins Julie (left) and Carol Anne Senello
can out-think everyone but each other. The two are co-valedictorians at
University of Maryland Catonsville.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                             1152 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                    May 21, 1993, Friday, South Bay Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 3; Column 1

LENGTH: 1520 words

HEADLINE: THE BEAT GOES ON;
DONATED HEARTS AND SKILLED MEDICAL CARE GIVE LIFE TO INFANTS, HOPE TO PARENTS

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SCHOCH, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   When Jonathan Mark returns to the Loma Linda International Heart Institute,
his mother wheels his stroller through a lobby lined with life-size color
photographs of the children who came before him.

   There is Baby Moses, and Baby Eve, dressed in play clothes, smiling icons of
what the future may hold.

   Like Jonathan, these children are members of a pioneering corps, some of the
153 children under the age of 6 months to receive heart transplants at Loma
Linda University Medical Center since the technique was first tried there in
1985.

   Jonathan became number 124 more than a year ago when surgeons cut open his
5-week-old chest to save his life by implanting a new heart the size of a
walnut. Television crews stood by that night in January, 1992, ready to report
the results of the successful surgery in time for the 11 p.m. news.

   Now, the celebrity glare has faded for most of these transplant children,
testimony to how swiftly medical miracles can become routine. The media have
moved on to new technological horizons, events like last weekend's first gene
therapy on a newborn.

   But even out of the limelight, 17-month-old Jonathan and his young cohorts
are still subject to intense scrutiny by doctors monitoring just what happens to
an infant who grows up with someone else's heart beating in its chest.

   No one knows for sure what will be normal for a child like Jonathan when he
reaches the age of 10, or 15, or 20. Baby Moses, the first successful
infant-to-infant heart transplant, performed at Loma Linda in November, 1985,
has not yet turned 8 but is doing well, hospital officials report.

   Of the 153 infants given transplants at Loma Linda, 117 are still alive.

   "The goal is a normal life span. Going to school, going to college. Having
families," said Dr. Richard Chinnock, medical director of the Loma Linda
pediatric heart-transplant program.

   Betting on their son, Jonathan's parents, Eva and Kevin Mark of Torrance,
both 27, have already started his college savings fund.

   When people describe Jonathan, they frequently use the word normal -- a
miracle in itself considering his problems at birth. He was born with a
defective heart and doctors determined only a transplant could save him.

   Since then, his recovery has gone smoothly, and his life is much like that of
any toddler. His heart has grown with his body and is now plum-size, his doctor
says. He started walking the day before Easter, and now he chugs around the
living room at a near run. He eats a regular diet -- his favorite food is
ravioli -- although he just acquired a taste for peanut butter and jelly
sandwiches.

   But twice a day Jonathan must swallow cyclosporine, an immunosuppressant drug
widely used after transplants to suppress the body's tendency to reject a new
heart. He is taking two medications daily, down from nine when he first left the
hospital.

   Concern about infection is a constant. As a measure of their caution,
Jonathan's parents have a family friend care for him during the day, fearing
that a large day-care group could expose him to an infection from other
children. A simple case of chickenpox could affect Jonathan severely because his
body's natural defenses are suppressed by drugs, doctors say.

   Medication has also toughened his gums, painfully stretching out the time it
takes new teeth to break through. So Jonathan rubs his mouth and cries. The
medication also promotes hair growth, giving Jonathan a set of lush, dark
eyelashes.

   To date, Jonathan has not suffered a single rejection episode. The biggest
scare so far came last fall when he suffered a bout of stomach flu, his
temperature rising to 104. It passed in a few days.

   It was just one day after Jonathan's birth on Dec. 16, 1991, that a nurse
detected a heart irregularity. Testing showed that the left side of his heart
was so underdeveloped that it could not pump blood properly. The condition,
known as hypoplastic left heart syndrome, is normally fatal within weeks.

   His parents decided to fight to save their firstborn child. They contacted
Loma Linda hospital, and, after a physical exam, Jonathan was placed on a list
of potential heart recipients.

   Then, on Jan. 22, 1992, a suitable heart was located, and Jonathan's
five-hour transplant surgery was conducted by Dr. Leonard L. Bailey.

   While more than two dozen such transplants were performed at the hospital in
1992, only five have been done so far this year -- the most recent on Thursday
when a 2-month-old girl got a new heart. Hospital officials say the slowed pace
is due to two factors: More centers are doing such transplants, and the supply
of donors of all ages has not kept pace with demand.

   "The success rate has made so many more patients candidates for organ
transplantation that the gap continues to widen," said Joel Newman, spokesman at
the United Network for Organ Sharing in Richmond, Va.

   That gap concerns Jonathan's parents, who want to encourage more people to
become donors. Eva Mark tries to persuade colleagues at the Irvine travel agency
where she works to consider signing up as donors. One co-worker has agreed;
three more are thinking about it.

   "We have Jonathan as sort of our benchmark here. We know the potential
benefits. It's just a shame that other parents are missing out on the good
fortune that we have," said Kevin Mark, a financial adviser with Prudential
Securities in Pasadena.

   Jonathan lives with his parents in an apartment on a quiet cul-de-sac in
Torrance, where their lives have settled into near normalcy. Kevin and Eva think
about having another child, maybe next year. Eva recently picked out a Catholic
elementary school that she wants Jonathan to attend.

   Like many toddlers, he walks with a sailor's rolling gait, delighting in the
smacking sound of his rubber sneakers hitting the floor. The high point of his
month: his first trip to Disneyland. His major accomplishment so far this week:
cutting his fifth tooth.

   Still, there are times when the Marks feel uneasy with the lack of hard
statistical data that would tell them what kind of life their child might
expect.

   "Sometimes you just want someone to give you an answer, yes or no. But I
guess we just wait and see," Eva said.

   To monitor his progress, Jonathan's parents frequently take him on the
160-mile round-trip drive from Torrance to Loma Linda hospital in San Bernardino
County. There he is tested to see how his body, and his heart, is developing.

   Earlier this week, he spent most of the day at the hospital for two tests he
will receive annually.

   In one test, slightly radioactive dye was injected into his blood to measure
his kidney function, because cyclosporine can cause kidney damage.

   The second test studied his heart for 24 hours, using a portable EKG device
known as a Holter monitor.

   "Hello, Jonathan, we're going to hook you up like a robot today," teased a
technician before she pulled up his T-shirt to implant five electrodes on his
chest. Then she strapped an adult-size monitor to his back, looping the straps
around his shoulders.

   Puzzled by the weight, he readjusted his posture and set off down the
corridor on his own, quickly adapting to the black box dangling from back.

   Jonathan seemed uncommonly at home in this hospital, barely fussing as his
mother whisked him from floor to floor, test to test. He drew a few smiles in
the nuclear medicine waiting room when he began rolling a small foam ball under
the chairs.

   The Marks say that Jonathan's medical bills for 1992 totaled about $470,000.
The transplant surgery was covered by his mother's insurance. Jonathan is now
covered by his father's policy.

   Eva Mark knows that someday Jonathan will ask her about the vertical scar on
his chest, and she and Kevin will tell him about the transplant.

   At the Marks' apartment near Hawthorne Boulevard, two photo albums trace
Jonathan's life.

   One contains the photos after Jonathan came home from the hospital; that is
the one she usually shows guests. But there is a second album showing him in the
hospital, attached to wires and machines.

   Jonathan will see it one day if he asks. He can also watch videotapes of the
television coverage of how he acquired his new heart.

   "When he gets older," Eva Mark said, "I think he'll think it was pretty
neat."

Transplant Technology Advances

   Heart-transplant technology has progressed significantly since Dr. Christiaan
Barnard performed the first transplant in South Africa in 1967. The technique
was spurred on with the advent of the anti-rejection drug cyclosporine, which
the FDA accepted for use in 1983.

   There were 2,173 heart transplants performed on patients of all ages in the
United States in 1992, according to the United Network for Organ Sharing. That
same year, 13% of waiting patients died before a heart could be found.

   Network figures show that, among recent transplant patients, 77% have lived
two or more years after receiving a new heart.

   Most transplants have been done among middle-aged patients, but the number of
transplants among children 5 and younger has risen rapidly in the United States,
from 62 in 1988 to 169 in 1991.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Holter device monitors 17-month-old Jonathan Mark's transplanted
heart as he walks the halls of the Loma Linda International Heart Institute. ;
Photo, Joyce Dodd, EKG specialist at Loma Linda heart institute, hugs Jonathan
during one of his frequent visits to the institute for follow-up tests. The
tests included the Holter monitor and its many attachments and one that required
a technician to draw Jonathan's blood. ; Photo, Eva Mark of Torrance takes a
break in the waiting while son Jonathan eats between checkups.  KEN HIVELY / Los
Angeles Times; Photo, COLOR, Young Pioneer: Jonathan Mark is among the infants
who have undergone heart transplant surgery at Loma Linda University Medical
Center since the technique was first tried there in 1985. Jonathan became No.
124 more than a year ago when surgeons cut open his 5-week-old chest to implant
a new heart the size of a walnut. Now, his parents look to a hopeful but
uncertain future. And Jonathan? He's a typical toddler.


                             1153 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                      May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 17; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 326 words

HEADLINE: 2ND INFANT GETS GENE THERAPY FOR IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDER

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   As one Los Angeles newborn recovered from pioneering gene therapy to combat
an immune system disease, another afflicted infant Monday underwent the same
treatment -- one that doctors hope can be used to fight other, more common
genetic disorders.

   Three-day-old Zachary Riggins, whose rare hereditary defect could mean an
early death or dependence on costly drugs, received an injection of his own
genetically altered cells at the UC San Francisco Medical Center.

   The procedure, resembling a blood transfusion, lasted about five minutes.

   Meanwhile, 6-day-old Andrew Gobea was doing well at Childrens Hospital Los
Angeles, two days after he became the first baby to undergo gene therapy.

   Both children suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, caused
by the lack of an enzyme essential to maintaining the immune system. The rare,
inherited disorder leaves the body defenseless against infectious disease.

   About 100 babies are born in the United States with the disorder each year.
If untreated, many die before their first birthdays. The best-known victim was
David, the "boy in a bubble," who lived in isolation in a Houston hospital for
12 years before his death in 1984.

   Doctors hope that the experimental therapy will cure the babies, letting them
lead normal lives. They say it also may pave the way to treat more common
disorders.

   "If this approach . . . is effective, then it could be applied to newborns
with many other genetic diseases, such as . . . sickle cell anemia," said Dr.
Diane Wara, a UC San Francisco immunologist overseeing the treatment of Zachary.
One day, doctors hope, similar gene therapy can even be used to treat AIDS.

   The procedure for both infants is the same. Immediately after birth, doctors
drew blood from the babies' umbilical cords and isolated some stem cells, which
produce immune system cells in the blood. The cells are genetically treated to
remove their defects and then re-injected.


                             1154 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1742 words

HEADLINE: Medical Schools Gaining An Unexpected Popularity

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

BODY:

   In spite of expectations of reduced earnings for doctors and restrictions on
professional autonomy under the health-care changes expected to be proposed by
the Clinton Administration, people are applying to medical school in record
numbers.

   According to the Association of American Medical Colleges in Washington,
applications for the 1993-94 school year are at an all-time high. Final
tabulations of applications for next year will exceed the record of 42,621 set
in 1974-75, the association says. There are now 16,500 places available.

    Success in overhauling the health-care system will depend in large part on
the cooperation of doctors. The resurgent popularity of a career in medicine
augurs well for the overhaul that the Clinton Administration is expected to
propose, because many applicants said they were optimistic that the good of the
reforms to society would outweigh any hardships for them.

   Yet the applicants also expressed reservations that if the patient-doctor
relationship or professional autonomy seriously erodes, future applicants would
begin to look elsewhere, sinking the popularity of medicine in a very short
time.

Steady Increase

    Beginning with applications for the 1990-91 year, the increase has been
steady, reflecting a stunning reversal of the decline in popularity of medicine
as a profession among young Americans. As recently as 1988, applications to
medical schools had plunged to the lowest level since 1970.

   The drop was attributed to a number of factors, including fear of contracting
infectious diseases like AIDS from patients.

   Another factor was the discontent expressed by older doctors about the
growing bureaucracy and resulting paperwork, including the requirement that they
get prior approval for many diagnostic tests, surgical procedures and admission
of patients to a hospital. Older doctors reportedly advised their children and
other younger Americans to do anything except become doctors.

   In welcoming incoming students to Washington University Medical School in St.
Louis last fall, Dr. William A. Peck, the dean, asked how many of the students
had talked to someone who had tried to discourage them from becoming a doctor.
"Virtually all raised their hands," Dr. Peck said.

   But Dr. Robert G. Petersdorf, the head of the Association of American Medical
Colleges in Washington, said, "Students aren't taking the advice, they keep on
coming, and at colleges the lines outside premed advisers' offices are long."

   "This is a bumper year," Dr. Petersdorf added. The 16,500 places being
offered this year are about the same number that have been offered since 1980,
and about double those offered in the 1960's. The number of places in 1974, the
second highest year for applications, was 14,576. The quality of students is
also very high, based on test scores, medical school officials said.

Rapid Turnaround

    The average medical school applicant applies to 11 medical schools. There
are 2.6 applicants for every one place, which approaches the record high ratio
of 2.8 to 1 in the mid-1970's. The ratio jumps to 70 to 1 for a place at a
small, selective school like the Mayo Medical School in Rochester, Minn. At the
three schools with the highest number of applications -- Georgetown and George
Washington Universities in Washington or Chicago Medical School -- where
applications this year exceed 10,000 each, the ratio is almost as high.

   Medical and educational leaders interviewed said they were puzzled by the
rapid turnaround in the popularity of a medicine as a career. But the applicants
themselves, as well as officials of medical schools and colleges, offered a
number of explanations for the turnaround in interviews.

   Medicine, they say, offers both a degree of economic security and, in viewing
health as a way to help people, a chance to do good for the community. An
additional attraction is the excitement of new technology, like gene therapy.
And many students are optimistic that things will somehow improve for doctors,
though most offer little in the way of specific predictions.

   Applicants are also realistic. In a generally inhospitable job market, they
see medicine as a surer way of earning an income.

   "There is going to be an enormous demand for doctors in the future," said
Cynthia Shoemaker, a sophomore at Wellesley College who plans to apply to
medical school after returning from a year at Oxford University. "Whether
there's money or not, people are still going to be sick and dying."

   Many applicants have relatives and friends who have been laid off at I.B.M.
and other corporations that had been seen as bastions of stability. "Interest in
engineering, computer science, banking, business and law has fallen off with the
end of the boom," said Dr. Gerald Foster, director of admissions at Harvard
Medical School. Medicine, he added, is seen as recession-proof.

Diversity in Applicants

    The incoming class will probably much more closely resemble the American
population in sex and ethnic background than past classes. This year about 42
percent of the applicants are women, 18 percent Asians, 8 percent blacks and 5
percent Hispanic people.

   As in the past, the overwhelming majority of those entering medical school
next fall will come straight from college. But officials of several medical
schools said they hoped to admit a small number of students who have done
something else since graduating from college.

   "The student who breaks step, even for a year, is a different student,
especially if they did it by choice," said Dr. D. Daniel Hunt, a dean at the
University of Washington in Seattle. "You just can't get away with saying sit
down and take notes, and they keep the teachers more honest than someone right
out of college who tends to accept what is said."

   Among those who have already been accepted in this year's pool of applicants
are a National Basketball Association player, an Orange Bowl queen, nuns and
other clergy, commercial airline pilots, bankers and a massage therapist who had
worked with AIDS patients. Some said they have made enough money in the years
since graduating from college to pursue the career in which they were most
interested, medicine.

   "It's ironic that as medicine is becoming more and more restricted in
independence, it is becoming increasingly competitive and popular," said Dr.
Barry Stimmel, a dean at Mount Sinai School of Medicine of the City University
of New York.

   Most of those entering medical school next fall had filed their applications
before Bill Clinton was elected President. The deadline for applications came
before he moved into the White House and made overhauling the health-care system
a major priority.

   "You have to realize that most of us who are going to medical school next
year made our career decision four years ago, long before this debate started,"
said Ruby K. Nagpal, a 22-year-old premed student at Emory University from Stone
Mountain, Ga.

   Sang Kim, a senior at Yale who plans to enter New York University Medical
School in the fall, is among the applicants who said they were not concerned
about how they will be affected by changes in the health-care system. She said
she was "just hoping for the best."

   At age 38, Lynne Kelley is resuming the premedical studies that she dropped
as a student at Boston College, in part because she became disenchanted with
students who just wanted to make a lot of money, she said. But she predicts that
although applications are up, "if what Hillary Clinton is planning goes through,
I think the number will drop."

   Cyndi Robison, a senior at Stanford University from Idaho who plans to enter
the University of Washington Medical School in Seattle, said: "I don't want to
be pushed into a position where I don't have patients who come back to me. If
you take the personal aspect out of it, no one is going to be happy."

   Many applicants have shown a commitment to community service by having
organized soup kitchens or worked in shelters for the homeless, said Dr. Sara J.
Kremer, a dean at Albany Medical School. She and other officials said that many
students now enrolled in medical school have organized AIDS prevention
instruction programs for high school students and clinics for the indigent.

   Like many doctors before them, some are seeking a medical career because of
their own experiences with doctors. Derek Young, a 21-year-old student at the
University of Texas at Austin, said he hoped to improve on the care he received
when he had open heart surgery as a 4-year-old.

   "I had trouble communicating with my pediatrician," Mr. Young said. "I want
to be able to give an understanding ear to a child and make them feel like they
are being heard. By helping kids I can help the future."

   Among those who have rejected parental advice in applying to medical school
is Scott Sidney, a 21-year-old junior at Amherst College from Des Moines. Mr.
Sidney's parents, his stepmother and his grandfather are all doctors.

   "I've been counseled against becoming a doctor by my family because of all
the problems they already see," like the growing bureaucracy of medicine and
"the loss of physicians' individual rights," Mr. Sidney said.

   "Yet I can't think of a career that would be more intellectually
challenging," he said.

   Mr. Sidney said he expected to earn less than his doctor-parents and, by the
time he is finished medical school, to owe from $60,000 to $100,000 in student
loans. The annual tuition ranges from $2,230 for residents attending a state
school to almost $28,000 at some private schools. The average debt after four
years of medical school is $50,000, but the total can reach $150,000, medical
school officials said..

   When applications were at a peak in the 1970's, many of those rejected by
American medical schools went to foreign ones. No one knows how many rejected
applicants will go to foreign medical schools now because no one keeps track of
such data, officials said.

   Medical school officials are pleased with the flood of applications but find
it hard to explain rejections of the many qualified individuals to disgruntled
parents, alumni, influential members in the community and legislators.

   Dr. Anthony P. Tartaglia, the dean of Albany Medical School, said: "With the
dramatic increase in applicants, we now are rejecting younger siblings of
someone who got into medical school several years ago with a worse academic
record. And it's tough explaining the facts."



GRAPHIC: Photo: As President Clinton plans to overhaul health care, record
numbers of people are applying to medical school. Many, like Derek Young, a
student at the University of Texas, said they wanted to be doctors not just for
the money. "By helping kids I can help the future," he said. (Zigy Kaluzny for
The New York Times) (pg. A19)

Graph: "Medical School Applications" shows the numbers of accepted medical
school applications, and the total number from '70-'90. (Source: Association of
American Medical Colleges) (pg. A1)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993


                             1155 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

HEADLINE: Treatment for 'Bubble Boy Disease'

BYLINE: By SANDRA BLAKESLEE,  Special to The New York Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 17

BODY:

   Two babies born with defective immune systems have been injected with
genetically altered blood cells in an effort to cure the fatal condition,
scientists said today.

   The gene therapy used cells taken from the babies' umbilical cords. An
alternative treatment for the disorder, popularly known as "bubble boy disease,"
exists but requires expensive injections all the patient's life.

    A 10-year-old girl received a different version of the new treatment over
the weekend using her own blood.

   "Clearly if this procedure is shown to be effective on these three children,
it will open the door" to a new form of gene therapy, said Dr. Michael Blaese,
chief of the National Cancer Institute's cellular immunology section. Inherited
diseases like sickle cell anemia and hemophilia might be cured in newborns, he
said, while adult diseases like cancer and AIDS may also be treated with the
technique.

   The two infants were born in California hospitals. One baby, Andrew Gobea,
was delivered Tuesday at Childrens Hospital in Los Angeles and received the
altered blood cells on Saturday night under the supervision of Dr. Donald B.
Kohn, director of the hospital's gene therapy program. The other, Zachary
Riggens, was born by Caesarean section on Friday at the University of California
at San Francisco Medical Center and received his cells this evening from Dr.
Diane Wara, a pediatric immunologist.

Siblings Had Disease

    Because both sets of parents had previously borne children with the disease,
doctors conducted prenatal tests on the infants and knew they carried two copies
of the defective gene. The parents each carry a single copy and do not have the
disease.

   The older child, whose name was not released, was given three successive
treatments last week by Dr. Blaese in Bethesda, Md.

   The children all suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, which
is caused by the absence an enzyme crucial to maintaining the body's immune
system. When white blood cells lack the enzyme, adenosine deaminase, the body
cannot fight infections of any sort. About 100 children are born with the
disease each year.

   The most famous SCID patient, a boy named David, lived for 12 years in a
germ-free plastic bubble. He died in 1984 when doctors injected his bone marrow
with donated blood cells and the treatment failed.

   The new technique is based on the fact that human bone marrow contains a
small number of immortal blood cells, called stem cells, that give rise to all
the body's blood cells, including the red cells that carry oxygen and the white
cells that confer immunity. The stem cells of SCID children lack the gene for
the enyzme and thus all their white blood cells or T-lymphocytes lack it as
well.

   In the new treatment, doctors removed umbilical cord blood and isolated a
small amount of blood containing stem cells. They treated the older child with
growth factors that coaxed stem cells from her bone marrow, causing them to
circulate in her bloodstream. Her blood was then treated with the same
extraction technique to pull out stem cells.

   In the treatment, the doctors expose the stem cells to a crippled virus --
one that cannot cause illness -- carrying healthy copies of the missing gene.
After a three-day wait, some stem cells should have taken up the healthy gene in
exactly the right spot so that the enzyme will be produced normally. Later the
treated stem cells are injected back into the patients, with the hope that some
will take permanent residence in their bone marrow.

   Doctors will know in several weeks if the infants are making normal white
blood cells, Dr. Kohn said. But the cure will not be considered permanent until
the cells are normal for up to a year.

   Other children with SCID are currently receiving enyzme replacement therapy,
involving regular injections of white blood cells, which are removed and given
the missing gene.  This therapy, which costs over $100,000 a year, is temporary
because the treated white cells die after several months. The 10-year-old girl
treated with her own stem cells was in this group, Dr. Blaese said.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993


                             1156 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      MAY 18, 1993, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: Baby Undergoes Pioneering Therapy
 Doctors hope cell injection will cure disorder

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    With the utmost, delicate care, physicians injected a tiny amount of a baby
boy's own altered blood cells back into his body yesterday to complete the first
step in their pioneering attempt at gene therapy to cure a rare hereditary
disorder.

   Zachary Riggins, only four days old, was born without a functioning immune
system, leaving him prey to any chance infection -- dangers that other infants
or adults might easily shrug off, but that in Zachary's case could kill him.

   His genetic defect is called severe combined immune deficiency, or SCID, and
his normally protective white blood cells cannot produce an enzyme known as ADA,
or adenosine deaminase, that is essential for the cells to resist infection.

   DOCTORS OPTIMISTIC

   But now, after 20 years of basic genetic engineering research, laboratory
science has come to Zachary's bedside at the University of California in San
Francisco. The infant received a new infusion of genes and both doctors and the
baby's parents were ''hopeful and optimistic'' that the tiny patient will grow
to normal adulthood.

   Zachary's defect had been diagnosed well before he was born Friday. Under the
care of Dr. Diane Wara, a UCSF pediatrician and immunologist, doctors removed
220 cubic centimeters of blood from his umbilical cord Saturday.

   The cord blood was immediately flown to Los Angeles Children's Hospital,
where specialists processed it to remove its uniquely rich supply of precious
stem cells. Those cells are exceptionally long- lived, and they mature into all
the varied cells of the blood and immune system.

   Then, using a technique pioneered by Dr. Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., gene therapy specialists at the Los Angeles
institution provided the stem cells with a supply of genetically engineered new
genes that should induce the production of the missing ADA enzyme inside
Zachary's body.

   The genes were inserted into his stem cells by infecting them with harmless
viruses whose own genetic machinery Blaese had engineered in the laboratory to
become gene carriers.

   SHORT PROCEDURE

   Yesterday, Zachary's newly endowed stem cells were flown back to UCSF from
the laboratory in Los Angeles, and the precious cargo was injected into the
boy's right foot in a four-minute procedure while he slept in the arms of his
mother, Lori Riggins of Exeter in Tulare County.

   The infant's father, Rich Riggins, was there too, watching, almost without
breathing, every precise move of the injection.

   It was, in effect, a blood transfusion -- just like a routine one, but with
both Zachary's future and some fervent hopes of medical science riding on it.

   It will be four to six months before the success of this gene therapy is
known, Wara said. And even if the initial outcome is positive, it will be 10
more years before it is known whether the altered genes of Zachary's stem cells
can continue producing the essential enzyme that will make his immune system
viable as he grows to adulthood, she cautioned.

   SECOND CASE

   The case is one of two in the world's first effort to use gene therapy in
newborns. The two cases this weekend are also the first to exploit the unique
character of stem cells derived from the rich supply in the umbilical cord
blood, the earliest forerunners of the entire human immune system.

   Another newborn, Andrew Gobea, whose parents live in the Imperial Valley, was
treated over the weekend in Los Angeles by the same team, working in a
collaborative effort with the UCSF specialists.

   Zachary must remain in his sterile isolation room at UCSF for several weeks,
and will then return to a sterile room at home for the next few months, Wara
said.

   To the Riggins family, this experience is far different than that of their
oldest son Rhett, who is now 2 1/2 and who was also born with the same SCID-ADA
defect.

   Rhett has been treated all his life with twice weekly injections of a
substance called PEG-ADA, which is prepared from a bovine version of the same
enzyme. So far he is ''wonderfully normal and doing splendidly,'' Wara said. But
those injections will have to continue all his life, she said.

   COSTLY TREATMENT

   And the cost is forbidding. As Rich Riggins explained: The enzyme supplies
cost more than $ 100,000 a year, and although the family's health insurance
policy is a good one, it has a maximum benefit of a little more than $ 1
million. That means the insurance will run out when Rhett is between 5 and 10,
and the costs will continue.

   ''It's always in the back of our minds,'' said Riggins, who manages a retail
hardware store in Exeter.

   ''We've always known that for Rhett it's been just a treatment, not a cure,''
said Lori Riggins, who with her husband has been deeply grateful for the support
of her neighbors and local church groups. ''When Dr. Wara told us about this
gene therapy possibility, it was really exciting to contemplate the idea that
Zachary might grow up well, and be able to go on with his life without being
dependent on us.''

   To Wara, the gene therapy experiment goes even beyond the possibility of an
independent life for Zachary.



                             1157 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                 May 18, 1993, Tuesday, North Suncoast Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; HEALTH & MEDICINE; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1054 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may save kids

SOURCE: Compiled from Times Wires

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:


   Doctors hope a new type of gene therapy will cure an infant born without a
working immune system, allowing him to live a normal life, and possibly lead  to
similar treatments for more common diseases.

   Andrew Gobea, born May 11, slept through the two-minute procedure Saturday
at a Los Angeles hospital.

   He was drinking formula and sleeping soundly in a bassinet Monday in a
sterile hospital room, which could be his home for up to six months while
doctors wait to see whether the treatment worked.

   Andrew is the first infant to undergo a procedure to cure a genetic  disorder
known as severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID, which is caused  by the
absence of an enzyme crucial to maintaining the body's immune system.  When
white blood cells lack the enzyme, adenosine deaminase, the body cannot  fight
infections of any sort. About 100 children are born with the disease  each year.

   The most famous SCID patient, a boy named David, lived for 12 years in a
germ-free plastic bubble. He died in 1984 when doctors injected his bone  marrow
with donated blood cells and the treatment failed.

   If untreated, babies often die before their first birthday after  contracting
common childhood ailments. Another infant had the procedure Monday  in San
Francisco.

   Doctors have created a line of genetically engineered genes that they hope
may permanently correct the deadly defect by providing each infant with a
continual supply of the enzyme essential for their bodies to fight off
infections.

   The babies have been injected with genetically altered blood cells, cells
taken from the babies' umbilical cords. An alternative treatment for the
disorder exists but requires expensive injections throughout the patient's
life.

   A 10-year-old girl received a different version of the new treatment over
the weekend in Maryland using her own blood.

   "Clearly if this procedure is shown to be effective on these three  children,
it will open the door" to a new form of gene therapy, said Dr.  Michael Blaese,
chief of the National Cancer Institute's cellular immunology  section. Inherited
diseases like sickle cell anemia and hemophilia might be  cured in newborns, he
said, while adult diseases like cancer and AIDS may also  be treated with the
technique.

   Blaese developed the procedure at the National Institutes of Health in
Bethesda, Md.

   For Andrew's parents, the treatment was part of a long painful experience.

   Their first child, Chastity Gobea, was diagnosed with the disorder at only  2
months after she went to the doctor for treatment of an infected umbilical
cord, they said.

   The baby underwent marrow transplants, with her father, Leonard Gobea, as
donor, and chemotherapy that made her hair fall out, before she died at age 5
months in 1990.

   The couple decided to have another baby, knowing the child faced a 1-in-4
chance of inheriting the disorder. After Crystal became pregnant, a test
confirmed the couple's worst fears.

   After talking to doctors, they decided to try the gene therapy while the
child was a newborn.

   "We didn't want him to be a guinea pig or anything," said Ms. Emery.  "But we
didn't want to go through what we went through before."

   Andrew received the altered blood cells Saturday night at Childrens  Hospital
Los Angeles under the supervision of Dr. Donald B. Kohn, director of  the
hospital's gene therapy program. The other infant, Zachary Riggens, was  born by
Caesarean section Friday at the University of California at San  Francisco
Medical Center and received his cells Monday from Dr. Diane Wara, a  pediatric
immunologist.

   The older child, whose name was not released, was given three successive
treatments last week by Blaese in Bethesda, Md.

   In past efforts at this type of therapy for the same disease, Dr. Blaese  has
treated two older children with the genetically engineered genes.

   In those cases he inserted the genes directly into mature T-cells, one of
the many cells of the immune system. Although those cells are short-lived,  that
experiment is apparently successful so far, as both children are healthy  more
than two years later.

   The crucial difference in the case of the two infants, as Blaese said in  San
Francisco Sunday, is that they are being treated so soon after birth when  their
own immune systems - however defective - are still extremely immature.

   The new technique is based on the fact that human bone marrow contains a
small number of immortal blood cells, called stem cells, that give rise to all
the body's blood cells, including the red cells that carry oxygen and the  white
cells that confer immunity. The stem cells of SCID children lack the  gene for
the enzyme and thus all their white blood cells or T-lymphocytes lack  it as
well.

   In the new treatment, doctors removed umbilical cord blood and isolated a
small amount of blood containing stem cells. They treated the older child with
growth factors that coaxed stem cells from her bone marrow, causing them to
circulate in her bloodstream. Her blood was then treated with the same
extraction technique to pull out stem cells.

   In the treatment, the doctors expose the stem cells to a crippled virus -
one that cannot cause illness - carrying healthy copies of the missing gene.
After a three-day wait, some stem cells should have taken up the healthy gene
in exactly the right spot so that the enzyme will be produced normally. Later
the treated stem cells are injected back into the patients, with the hope that
some will take permanent residence in their bone marrow.

   Doctors will know in several weeks if the infants are making normal white
blood cells, Kohn said. But the cure will not be considered permanent until  the
cells are normal for up to a year.

   Other children with SCID currently are receiving enzyme replacement  therapy,
involving regular injections of white blood cells, which are removed  and then
given the missing gene. This therapy, which costs over $ 100,000 a  year, is
temporary because the treated white cells die after several months.  The
10-year-old girl treated with her own stem cells was in this group, Blaese
said.

- Information from Associated Press, the San Francisco Chronicle and New York
Times was used in this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993


                             1158 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                   May 18, 1993, Tuesday, FIVE STAR   EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 06A

HEADLINE: (PHOTO ONLY)  GENE THERAPY

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo By AP -  Lori and Rich Riggins of Exeter, Calif., cuddling

 their newborn son Zachary on Sunday at the University of California  Medical
Center in San Francisco. On Monday, Zachary, 3 days old,  became the second
infant to receive a gene therapy aimed at curing a  rare defect that leaves
bodies without functioning immune systems.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             1159 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                    May 18, 1993, TUESDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 11C

LENGTH: 178 words

HEADLINE: RETIREES SEEK SUPPORT IN BENEFITS FIGHT

BODY:


   A group of about 25 salaried retirees from McDonnell Douglas Corp. in St.
Louis is enlisting other retirees and spouses concerned about the future of
their health benefits.  The group has set a meeting for 1:30 p.m. May 26 at the
International Association of Machinists District Lodge 837 Hall at 212 Utz Lane
in Hazelwood. The hall is across from the Ford Motor Co. plant near Lindbergh
Boulevard.  Last year, McDonnell canceled its company-funded medical plan for
salaried retirees. Retirees were offered instead a lump-sum payment from a
surplus in their pension funds to put toward a trust funding health benefits
through 1996.  The retirees will discuss what they can do to fight McDonnell's
action, said John Kraska, chairman of the group's coordinating committee.
Kraska, a former general superintendent at McDonnell's aircraft factory near
Lambert Field, retired in 1980 after 32 years at the company.  Last year, a
group of McDonnell salaried retirees in California sued the company over the
change in their medical plan. That case is pending.

GRAPHIC: Photo By AP - Lori and Rich Riggins of Exeter, Calif., cuddling their
newborn son Zachary on Sunday at the University of California Medical Center in
San Francisco. On Monday, Zachary, 3 days old, became the second infant to
receive a gene therapy aimed at curing a rare defect that leaves bodies without
functioning immune systems.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1993


                             1160 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 18, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 292 words

HEADLINE: Heading off genetic disorders in their infancy

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    Gene therapy treatments have come to the cradle.

   Monday afternoon, a five-day-old boy became the second baby in three days to
get cells genetically altered to fight a rare, inherited immune system defect.

   Zachary Riggins, born Friday, was treated at the University of California-San
Francisco Medical Center. Andrew Gobea, now a week old, got the same therapy
Saturday at Children's Hospital, Los Angeles. A 10-year-old girl received a
similar treatment Thursday at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.

   "This really is a historic week in the evolution of (gene therapy)," says Dr.
Michael Blaese, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda. Success "opens up the door
for (treating) a host of disorders," including sickle cell disease. Future
targets: AIDS and cancer.

   These children are among the 100 born in the USA each year with severe
combined immunodeficiency. They lack a gene making adenosine deaminase (ADA), an
immune system enzyme.

   Researchers harvested cells from the placenta after birth and inserted the
ADA gene in the cells. The babies got the cells in a transfusion-like procedure.
Three to six months from now, physicians should know if the treatments worked.

   "We're hoping for a long-term cure," says UCSF pediatric immunologist Dr.
Diane Wara. By treating newborns, "hopefully we can prevent them from getting
infections," says Dr. Don Kohn, Children's Hospital, who oversaw both cell
corrections.

   Past gene therapy trials added working ADA genes to white blood cells. But
"fixing" self-renewing stem cells instead - Blaese calls them "the grandmother
of all cells" because they make all the body's blood and immune cells - leaves
other cells "basically fixed for the rest of (a person's) life," he says.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, AP


                             1161 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                              May 17, 1993, Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL NEWS; Section A; Page 4

LENGTH: 48 words

HEADLINE: Infant quietly makes history

BODY:

   Five-day-old Andrew Gobea is visited Sunday by his parents, Crystal Emery and
Leonard Gobea, after gene therapy at Childrens Hospital in Los Angeles. Andrew,
who has an immune system disorder, is the first to undergo a procedure that may
cure more common diseases. /Associated Press

GRAPHIC: Stand alone photo of child getting gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1993


                             1162 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 1993 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)



                       May 17, 1993, Monday, City Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: NEWBORN UNDERGOES LANDMARK GENE THERAPY PROCEDURE

BYLINE: By MARC YABLONKA, Reuters

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

    A 5-day-old baby with a defective immune system has become the first newborn
to undergo gene therapy, a revolutionary procedure that doctors hope will save
his life, hospital officials said Sunday.

   Surgeons at Children's Hospital in Los Angeles Saturday injected 6-pound,
12-ounce Andrew Gobea with a small amount of gene-altered cells taken from blood
drawn from his mother's placenta just after birth.

   A hospital spokeswoman said the baby was in good condition following the
highly experimental operation. He will be kept isolated in a germ-free plastic
bubble for three to six months, the time it will take doctors to determine
whether the procedure was successful.

   Dr. Donald Kohn, director of the hospital's gene therapy program, said he
hoped the therapy eventually would be used to treat other infants with genetic
disorders that can be diagnosed in the womb, including AIDS, hemophilia and
sickle cell anemia.

   The baby was born with a form of severe combined immunodeficiency that if
left untreated, kills most of its victims before they reach their first
birthday.

   The problem, commonly known as "bubble baby disease," is a lack of adenosine
deaminase, an enzyme that enables the immune system to fight infection.

   The most famous victim was David, the so-called "boy in the bubble," who
lived in isolation in a Houston hospital for 12 years before his death in 1984.

   Only 100 babies are born with the disease each year.

   The drug used to treat it can cost $ 250,000 a year, and bone marrow
transplants are also a common treatment.

   But the procedures do not always work.

   Andrew's sister died of the condition three years ago after a bone marrow
transplant when she was only 5 months old.

   Doctors diagnosed Andrew's problem when he was still in the womb.
Immediately after he was born, Kohn said, blood was drawn from the mother's
placenta and the "stem cells" -- the parent cells of other blood cells -- were
isolated.

   The stem cells were then mixed with a mouse leukemia virus that had been
altered to contain the adenosine deaminase gene and "growth factors" to help the
cells multiply, doctors said. The genetic mix was then injected into the baby in
a two-minute operation.

   "We all feel very good, but we're very nervous," said Crystal Emery, the
baby's 19-year-old mother. The baby's father, Leonard Gobea, is a 20-year-old
part-time steam-driller. They live near San Diego.

   A second baby is scheduled to undergo the treatment Tuesday in the hospital
at the University of California at San Francisco, doctors said.

GRAPHIC: Associated Press, Crystal Emery and Leonard Gobea hold their 5-day-old
son, Andrew, during a Sunday visit.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993


                             1163 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                    May 17, 1993, MONDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: Baby Gets Genes In Historic Therapy

BYLINE: Sheryl Stolberg

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:
Andrew Gobea does not know it, but at 1 p.m. Saturday, he made medical history.
The procedure, which took place in a sterile room at Childrens Hospital Los
Angeles, lasted just two minutes. Andrew, 4 days old, slept through it all.

   The 6-pound, 12-ounce baby boy with thick black hair was born Tuesday with an
immune system that did not work. On Saturday, a doctor infused him with a
teaspoon's worth of genes that are intended to cure the defect that, if left
untreated, kills most of its victims before they reach their first birthday.

   The treatment makes Andrew the first newborn to undergo the cutting-edge
medicine known as gene therapy. It also employs for the first time a novel twist
on previous attempts at genetic engineering: the use of blood drawn from the
umbilical cord that was snipped from the baby at birth.

   For Andrew, the experimental operation means a chance to live a normal life,
without drugs that cost as much as $ 250,000 a year. For his parents - who three
years ago lost an infant daughter to Severe Combined Immune Deficiency, the same
disease that plagues their newborn boy - it means the chance to have a surviving
child.

   For a team of four pediatric immunologists and hematologists at Childrens,
Saturday's effort was the culmination of six years of painstaking investigation,
of late nights in the laboratory, frustrating wrong turns and, finally, the rare
heady rush that comes when science moves out from under the microscope and into
the operating room.

   When Leonard Gobea asked if he could help inject the gene-altered cells into
his son, Dr. Donald Kohn took the unusual step of allowing him to press on the
syringe, which was attached to an intravenous line.

   It will likely be another six months before doctors know if Andrew's
treatment has worked. Andrew was drinking formula and sleeping soundly Sunday.

   "We wear two hats," said Kohn, the gene therapy expert who headed the
experiment. "We want to do the right thing for our patients, and we want for
this family to have a healthy baby. But we're also researchers, and we want to
further our research goals."

   The couple's first child, Chastity, lived five months. Her death brought news
to her parents: Each carries a defective gene that causes ADA deficiency, a form
of Severe Combined Immune Deficiency.

   Gene therapy, which offers the best hope, is in its infancy. Just 47 gene
therapy projects, most of them designed to treat cancer patients, are now either
approved or under way worldwide, according to Dr. W. French Anderson, a
geneticist who is a pioneer in the field.

   Contributing: Associated Press

GRAPHIC: See related story page 6.; Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993


                             1164 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 17, 1993, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: STATE, Pg. C7, IN BRIEF

LENGTH: 133 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PROMOTED

BYLINE: THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:


   Scientists at the University of Pennsylvania say a new form of gene therapy
may prevent liver disease from developing in cystic fibrosis patients.

   About 20 to 50 percent of adult cystic fibrosis patients develop sometimes
fatal liver disease, and more are likely to do so as medical advances allow them
to live longer.

   Some 30,000 Americans have the deadly hereditary disease, which causes thick
mucus to clog the body's lungs, liver and pancreas, eventually destroying vital
tissues and organs.

   In experiments on rats, the Penn researchers showed that a gene that counters
cystic fibrosis could be inserted into the bile duct, where it was able to
direct the liver to function properly.

   The findings were reported Saturday in the Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1165 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      May 17, 1993, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. C4

LENGTH: 1250 words

HEADLINE: LOOKING FOR HOPE;
CURE FOR BLINDING EYE DISEASE ELUDES RESEARCHERS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   The letters come to the newsroom every few months. At the top, a 29-cent
stamp is attached with a paper clip. At the bottom is Raymond Adams' signature,
a scrawl that grows wilder each time.

   The typewritten messages vary little. Adams, 75, has an eye disease called
macular degeneration and he is looking for hope. ''Have you run across any
recent information regarding research involving this condition?'' the
Farmington, N.M., man writes. ''Might there, perhaps, really be light at the end
of the tunnel?''

   An estimated 10 million people have macular degeneration, a progressive
disease of the retina that is as yet uncurable. Dr. Thomas Friberg, acting
chairman of ophthalmology at the University of Pittsburgh and chief of its
retina service, said macular degeneration was the leading cause of blindness in
people over age 65.

   About 10 percent of Americans between ages 65 and 74 have some degree of
macular degeneration and that rate jumps to 30 percent over age 75.

   Researchers at Pitt are looking for ways to identify people who have
inherited an increased risk of macular degeneration and for ways of preventing
and slowing the disease process through nutritional supplements.

   Once the disease appears, however, eye doctors can't do much more than
prescribe visual aids in most cases.

   That is unacceptable to Adams, a retired newspaperman. I began receiving his
letters years ago while I was a reporter in Albuquerque, N.M. I have received
them since joining the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette three years ago. But I never have
been able to give him information that would justify those 29-cent stamps.

   The letters keep coming, however, and I am hardly the only recipient. The
letters flood newsrooms at newspapers, television and radio stations across the
country and find their way to doctors at Pitt, Johns Hopkins University and
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute in Miami, as well as researchers in Japan, China,
Switzerland -- any place where Adams suspects research is under way.

   He's been sending the letters -- 40 or 50 a week -- since he was diagnosed in
1985.

   ''I woke up one morning and tried to read something and I couldn't,'' he
recalled.

   In Farmington, near the Four Corners where New Mexico abuts Colorado, Arizona
and Utah, the crystal air, abundant sunshine and uncluttered landscape allow you
to see 60 miles or more. But Adams says macular degeneration keeps him in a
permanent haze. ''Even on a bright day, everything's cloudy.''

   Macular degeneration affects the macula, the portion of the eye's retina
responsible for distinguishing fine detail. A person whose macula is damaged
still has peripheral vision, but the central part of any image is a big blur.

   When Adams was diagnosed, he was forced to retire from his copy editing job
at the Farmington Daily Times. Two years later, when his vision deteriorated
further, he had to give up his driver's license.

   ''Vision's been so important to me throughout my life,'' Adams said. ''It was
a pretty hard blow.''

   The macula is about the size of a capital O, but it contains the retina's
largest concentration of cones, the light-sensitive cells that provide the
sharpest images. The cells responsible for night vision, called rods, are
primarily outside the macula.

   These light-sensitive cells contain stacks of photoreceptor discs and
pigments that must be replenished daily. Underneath the macula is a layer of
nurse cells that feed the cones and carry away wastes.

   In the most common form of macular degeneration, the so-called ''dry'' form,
debris from spent photoreceptor discs builds up in the cellular structure of the
retina, forming yellow deposits that interfere with the cones and the underlying
nurse cells, Friberg said. For Adams and the millions of others with the dry
form, there is no treatment.

   About 10 percent of cases are a ''wet'' form, in which blood vessels that
normally nourish the back of the eye infiltrate the nurse cells and enter into
the macula itself. The wet form can sometimes develop in people who have had the
dry form.

   The wet form can cause more severe vision loss than the dry form, but a few
treatments are available. In ''very, very rare circumstances,'' Friberg said,
surgery to remove abnormal blood vessels can be attempted. More commonly, lasers
are used to seal off leaky vessels or to clear out debris, reducing further loss
of vision.

   ''We're trying to prevent them from ever getting to that stage,'' said
Friberg, who is the principal investigator locally in the National Eye
Institute's Age-Related Eye Disease Study. As one of 10 centers nationwide in
the decade-long study, Pitt is enrolling 450 people ages 59-75 to test whether
vitamin and mineral supplements can slow or halt the progression of macular
degeneration.

   In particular, some researchers have suggested that beta carotene, vitamins C
and E and the minerals zinc and selenium may help protect the eyes from macular
degeneration.

   Dark green vegetables such as broccoli, spinach and kale and vegetables and
fruits with an orangish hue, such as pumpkins, carrots, squash, peaches,
nectarines, mangoes and cantalopes contain large amounts of these nutrients.

   Dr. Michael Gorin, another Pitt ophthalmologist, said the idea behind the
nutritional supplements was based on the theory that macular degeneration may be
the result of damage caused by free radicals -- highly reactive, unstable
molecules of oxygen.

   Free radicals might also explain other apparent risk factors for macular
degeneration -- smoking and exposure to light, Gorin said. Light exposure
generates free radicals that cause damage unless they are neutralized by
''antioxidants'' such as beta carotene and vitamins C and E. ''Smoking is a very
powerful destroyer of these antioxidants,'' he added.

   Another risk factor may be genetic susceptibility. ''I think it's far more
genetic than we realize,'' said Gorin, who has an appointment to the Graduate
School of Public Health's human genetics department, as well as the medical
school's ophthalmology department.

   Pittsburgh's large elderly population and the large number of extended
families here makes the city an ideal place to study inherited patterns of
macular degeneration, Gorin said. He has enrolled 60 families thus far in his
study and has joined forces with colleagues in San Francisco in hopes of
gathering the 150 families he needs.

   Detecting family linkages is made difficult because most forms of macular
degeneration strike late in life and because not all people are badly affected.
Some people who might have a genetic susceptibility might not live long enough
to develop the disease; others may have mild cases that are never diagnosed.

   ''If you can actually identify the genes, you can begin to understand the
biology of what's going on,'' Gorin said, noting that he has documented a family
history of macular degeneration in 10 percent to 20 percent of the families thus
far. Identifying the genes may also aid in early detection and in targeting
preventive diets on those persons with the greatest risks.

   Prevention has little relevance for Adams and his letter-writing campaign
thus far has produced only fleeting encouragement. He suspects macular
transplants, new drugs or gene therapy might eventually help, but are unlikely
to be available in time to aid him.

   He will not stop writing, however. ''I keep hoping I'll run across
something,'' he said. ''I'm going to do it as long as I can maneuver a
typewriter.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, DRAWING, John Beale/Post-Gazette:
Pittsburgh Blind Association employee Mary Znidarsic demonstrates a range of
magnifiers available to patients with macular degeneration., To one with
advanced macular degeneration, the center of vision is hazy or darkened, as
suggested in this photo illustration., Grid test/Cover one eye and, at normal
reading distance, look at the dot in the center of the grid. Contact a doctor if
;you see irregularities, such as wavy or fuzzy lines, missing areas, or dark
spots. Repeat with the other eye., Blind spot

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1166 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                      MAY 17, 1993, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 819 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Work On Babies Begins
 Doctor asks to apply technique to AIDS

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

DATELINE: Los Angeles

BODY:

    Physicians and scientists began a pioneering experiment in gene therapy
yesterday aimed at curing two newborn babies with a rare hereditary defect that
has left their tiny bodies without functioning immune systems.

   In the first attempt of its kind, the doctors have created a line of
genetically engineered genes that they hope may permanently correct the deadly
defect by providing each infant with a continual supply of the enzyme essential
for their bodies to fight off infections.

   And even as the experiment began this weekend, the doctor who heads the team
disclosed yesterday that he has applied to the National Institutes of Health for
permission to try a similar technique in an attack on the AIDS virus.

   The two newborn babies -- one from California's Imperial Valley and the other
from Exeter in Tulare County-- have inherited a genetic defect known as Severe
Combined Immune Deficiency Disease, or SCID, that prevents their bodies from
making an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or ADA.

   RESEARCH MODEL

   Fewer than 100 babies are born with the defect in the United States each
year, but the technique already is serving as a model for research dealing with
many hereditary diseases that are far more widespread, the doctors said.

   The two teams of pediatricians, geneticists and immunologists who are seeking
to reverse the genetic defects in the two infants are working at Los Angeles
Children's Hospital, where tiny Andrew Gobea, at 6 pounds, 12 ounces, lies in a
germ-free room behind a protective transparent plastic shield, and at the
University of California at San Francisco, where Zachary Riggins of Exeter, 9
pounds 9 ounces, was born last Friday.

   Andrew's parents are Crystal Emery, 19, and Leonard Gobea, a 20-year-old
unemployed sandblaster. Both live in small Imperial Valley towns. They are not
married but were junior high school sweethearts, and two years ago they had a
daughter named Chastity who lived only five months because she was afflicted by
same defective gene.

   On Saturday, Andrew received an injection of his own umbilical cord blood
treated with the genetically engineered cells that may endow him with a true
immune system.

   UMBILICAL CORD BLOOD

   And today, in a sterile room at UCSF, Zachary Riggins will have his turn:
Doctors from the medical center in San Francisco flew about 220 cubic
centimeters of his umbilical cord blood to Los Angeles on Saturday, and that
blood will be flown back to San Francisco today after the cells are treated with
the genetically engineered genes.

   Zachary's parents are Rich and Lori Riggins. Riggins manages a hardware
store. The Rigginses have another child, Rhett, who is now 2 1/2, and he also
suffers from the SCID defect. If Zachary's experimental treatment is successful,
his parents hope that Rhett too may later be cured by the gene- therapy
technique.

   ''For us,'' Zachary's mother said yesterday, ''there's the possibility this
new treatment can help both our boys -- and many other children with many other
diseases, too.''

   OLDER CHILDREN TREATED

   In past efforts at this type of therapy for the same disease, Dr.  Michael
Blaese, the pioneering researcher who developed it at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., has treated two older children with the genetically
engineered genes. In those cases he inserted the genes directly into mature
T-cells, one of the many cells of the immune system.  And although those cells
are short-lived, that experiment is apparently successful so far, as both
children are healthy more than two years later.

   The crucial difference in the case of the two infants, as Blaese said in San
Francisco yesterday, is that they are being treated so soon after birth when
their own immune systems -- however defective -- are still extremely immature.

   And instead of focusing on T-cells, the gene therapy team is inserting the
genes into a group of extremely immature cells known as stem cells.  Normally
formed in the bone marrow, it is only within hours after birth that ample
supplies of stem cells can be harvested from the umbilicus by a series of
complex and difficult procedures.

   The cells are long-lasting, they reproduce prolifically, and as they mature
with their new genes they may give rise to a wide range of different cells that
make up a functioning immune system.

   Dr. Diane Wara, the UCSF pediatrician and immunologist who has long worked
with HIV-infected mothers and their babies in San Francisco, has been in charge
of the Riggins child, and she flew to Los Angeles yesterday to oversee the
proceedings.

   Dr. Donald B. Kohn, who heads the gene therapy team at Los Angeles Children's
Hospital, told reporters yesterday that it will be three to six months before
constant monitoring of the genetic status of both baby boys can tell whether
their new genes are actually inducing the production of the complete ADA enzyme
in adequate quantities.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO,Two-day-old Zachary Riggins of Exeter (Tulare County), on an
operating table at the University of California at San Francisco , BY PAUL
FUSCO, SPECIAL TO THE CHRONICLE


                             1167 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      May 17, 1993, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: MINGLING MUSIC MAKERS

BYLINE: David Brezing

BODY:

    Buy a new record this Saturday, and you might pay the artist directly.
That's when recording artists will staff cash registers at selected record
stores in three cities. CounterAID, designed to raise funds for and awareness of
AIDS causes, will feature Barry Manilow, PM Dawn, L7, Toad the Wet Sprocket and
others in New York stores. In Los Angeles, look for the Lemonheads, the Beastie
Boys, TLC and Sonic Youth. Lucinda Williams and others will be in Nashville.

   VOTES FOR 'DAVE': The presidential spoof Dave is winning a constituency at
the box office. The Kevin Kline comedy was No. 1 its second weekend, kicking
Dragon: The Bruce Lee Story into second place. Dave, which moved into more
theaters, took in an estimated $ 8.6 million on 1,566 screens; Dragon grossed an
estimated $ 6.1 million on 1,938 screens. The black Western Posse opened at No.
3 ($ 5.1 million on 949 screens). Fourth: Indecent Proposal ($ 3.9 million on
1,922 screens). Neil Simon's Lost in Yonkers premiered in fifth place, $ 3
million on 1,110 screens.

   BLOWIN' SMOKE: A sign that the '80s aren't quite over: Tonight in New York,
1,500 guests will attend the $ 100-a-plate "Big Smoke" sponsored by Cigar
Aficionado magazine. For three hours they'll puff some of the world's most
expensive cigars, quaff cognacs, single malt scotches, champagnes and port, and
sample foods from 10 pricey restaurants. Organizers say the event has been sold
out for weeks; similar extravaganzas will be in Chicago, Miami, Washington,
D.C., Los Angeles, San Francisco and Las Vegas.

   MOTOWN TRAILBLAZER DIES: Motown pioneer Marv Johnson, 54, died Sunday after
having a stroke Friday backstage at a performance in South Carolina. The R&B
singer and songwriter was the smooth baritone behind producer Berry Gordy Jr.'s
first release, Come to Me, in 1959. A modest hit, it led to two top 10 singles,
You Got What It Takes and I Love The Way You Love. The songs helped launch a new
sound with black roots that also appealed to white listeners.

   BREAKTHROUGHS: An infant at Children's Hospital Los Angeles may have gotten a
new lease on a healthy life. Five-day-old Andrew Gobea, who suffers from severe
combined immunodeficiency - "bubble baby disease" - was injected with blood from
his umbilical cord in a gene therapy procedure doctors hope may treat sickle
cell anemia, Gaucher's disease and AIDS. If it works, Andrew won't need a
bone-marrow procedure later, said Dr. Donald B. Kohn, who performed the therapy.
It'll take up to six months to tell if the injection has an effect.

   WELL BLIMEY!: The Di that was Di really wasn't Di, nor was Charles, Charles
says a forensic linguistics expert. Reports last week said Britain's MI5
recorded an argument between the Prince of Wales and his estranged princess at
the country home but expert Andrew Morton, hired by the The Observer, disputes
the claim. "The words claimed to be from 'Charles' and 'Diana' show clear signs
of being composite," said Morton. The Sunday Times of London also said Charles
called the transcript a hoax.

   TED TURNER'S ADVICE: CNN mogul Ted Turner's commencement address at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Sunday included advice to get
counseling immediately if they ever encounter marraige troubles. "That could
have saved a marriage or two of mine earlier," said the man who is now with wife
No. 3, Jane Fonda. "Of course, I wouldn't have had the opportunity to meet the
right woman," he added. "That's another thing: Don't lose heart because at 50
you might get lucky."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, color, USA TODAY


                             1168 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      May 16, 1993, Sunday, 4 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy on newborn sets medical precedent

BYLINE: SHERYL STOLBERG; Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

   LOS ANGELES -- Andrew Gobea does not know it, but at 1 p.m.
Saturday he made medical history.  The procedure, which took place
behind a plastic curtain in a sterile room at Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles, lasted just two minutes.  Andrew, four days old, slept
through it all, his tiny fingers curled under his right ear, a look
of peaceful repose on his face.

   The 6-pound, 12-ounce baby with thick black hair was born
Tuesday evening with an immune system that does not work.  On
Saturday, a doctor infused the infant with a teaspoon's worth of
genes that are intended to cure the defect that, if left untreated,
kills most of its young victims by the time they reach their first
birthday.

   The treatment makes Andrew the first newborn ever to undergo
a cutting-edge brand of medicine known as gene therapy.  It also
employs, for the first time, a novel twist on previous attempts at
genetic engineering: the use of blood drawn from the umbilical cord
that was snipped from the baby at birth.

   For Andrew, the highly experimental operation means a chance
to live a normal life, without drugs that cost as much as $ 250,000
a year.  For his parents -- who three years ago lost an infant
daughter to Severe Combined Immune Deficiency, the same disease
that plagues their newborn boy -- it means the chance to have a
surviving child.

   For a team of four pediatric immunologists and hematologists
at Childrens, Saturday's effort was the culmination of six years of
painstaking investigation, of late nights in the laboratory and
frustrating wrong turns and finally, the rare heady rush that comes
when science moves out from under the microscope and into the
operating room.

   And for thousands of other infants who will be born with
genetic disorders that can be diagnosed in the womb -- hemophilia,
sickle cell anemia, Gaucher's Disease among others -- it represents
a step toward treatment immediately after birth, and hence freedom
from the debilitating effects of those diseases.

   It will likely be another six months before doctors know if
Andrew's treatment has worked.  During that time, he will also be
given twice-weekly injections of a drug containing an enzyme to
shore up his immune system.  Until doctors are certain that drug is
working, he will remain in isolation at Childrens.

   ""We want to do the right thing for our patients, and we
want for this family to have a healthy baby,'' said Dr. Donald
Kohn, the gene therapy expert who headed the experiment.  But we're
also researchers, and we want to further our research goals. ''

   It was those two forces -- the hope of Crystal Emery and
Leonard Gobea to have a healthy baby, and the desire of Kohn and
his colleagues to push the limits of the gene therapy -- that set
the new parents and the doctors on a converging course that began
months before Andrew's birth.

   They had their first child when they were 16 and 17.  Chastity
Gobea lived five months.  The first sign she was sick came at age
two weeks, when her navel would not heal.  Then there were two bouts
with pneumonia.  By the time doctors discovered her genetic
disorder, it was too late.

   Her death brought news to her parents: each carries a
defective gene that causes ADA deficiency, a form of Severe
Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID).  The letters ADA stand for
adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that enables the immune system to
fight infection.

   SCID is extremely rare; each year just 100 Americans are born
with the disease.  The most famous victim was David, the ""boy in a
bubble,'' who lived in isolation in a Houston hospital for 12 years
before his death in 1984.  ADA deficiency is the most common form of
SCID, accounting for 25 percent of all SCID cases.

   ADA deficiency lends itself well to gene therapy, primarily
because the disease can be corrected with just a small percentage
of functioning genes.  The world's first approved gene therapy
experiment -- conducted in 1990 by Anderson and Dr. Michael Blaese
at the National Institutes of Health -- was performed on two ADA
deficient girls, ages 9 and 4, who had been treated with
experimental drugs before the therapy.

   The experiment on Andrew Gobea is being conducted in
conjunction with NIH.  Blaese, who was present Saturday, agreed to
serve as a collaborator so that the government would give the
experiment emergency approval in time for Andrew's birth.  In
conjunction with San Francisco doctors, the team will repeat the
procedure early this week on a baby boy born Friday in that city.

   It took Children's Hospital technicians nearly six hours of
intense work to separate the stem cells from the rest of Andrew's
blood.


LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993


                             1169 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Times Mirror Company; Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times

                       May 16, 1993, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 1; Column 5; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 2128 words

HEADLINE: BABY 1ST TO RECEIVE GENE TREATMENT;
MEDICINE: CHILDRENS HOSPITAL TEAM USES THE THERAPY ON A NEWBORN IN HISTORIC
SURGERY. DOCTORS HOPE TO CURE HIS RARE IMMUNE DISORDER BEFORE DISEASE SETS IN.

BYLINE: By SHERYL STOLBERG, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Andrew Gobea cannot possibly know it, but on Saturday he made medical
history. The procedure, which took place behind a plastic curtain in a sterile
room at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, lasted just two minutes. Andrew, four
days old, slept through it all, his tiny fingers curled under his right ear, a
look of peaceful repose on his face.

   The 6-lb., 12-oz. baby with thick black hair and hands that his dad says are
destined to make him a baseball pitcher was born Tuesday evening with an immune
system that does not work. On Saturday, a doctor infused the infant with a
teaspoon's worth of genes that are intended to cure the disease that, if left
untreated, kills most of its young victims by the time they would reach their
first birthday.

   The treatment makes Andrew the first newborn ever to undergo a leading-edge
brand of medicine known as gene therapy. It also employs, for the first time, a
novel twist on previous attempts at genetic engineering: the use of blood drawn
from the umbilical cord that was snipped from the baby at birth.

   For Andrew, the highly experimental operation means a chance to live a normal
life, without drugs that cost as much as $250,000 a year. For his parents -- who
three years ago lost an infant daughter to severe combined immune deficiency,
the same disease that plagues their newborn boy -- it means the chance to raise
the child they have dreamed about for so long.

   For a team of four pediatric immunologists and hematologists at Childrens,
Saturday's effort was the culmination of six years of painstaking investigation,
of late nights in the laboratory and frustrating wrong turns and finally, the
rare, heady rush that comes when science moves out from under the microscope and
into the operating room.

   And for thousands of other infants who will be born with genetic disorders
that can be diagnosed in the womb -- hemophilia, sickle cell anemia and
Gaucher's disease, among others -- it represents a step toward treatment
immediately after birth, and hence freedom from the debilitating effects of
those diseases.

   The occasion was as emotional as it was revolutionary. When Leonard Gobea
asked if he could help inject the gene-altered cells into his son, Dr. Donald
Kohn took the unusual step of allowing him to press on the syringe, which was
attached to an intravenous line. "It's not rocket science," the doctor said
afterward. "It's just pushing a little plunger. He wanted to be a part of doing
it, and I thought that was great."

   It will likely be another six months before doctors know if Andrew's
treatment has worked. During that time, he will also be given twice-weekly
injections of a drug containing an enzyme to shore up his immune system. Until
doctors are certain that drug is working, he will remain in isolation at
Childrens.

   "We wear two hats," said Kohn, the gene therapy expert who headed the
experiment. "We want to do the right thing for our patients, and we want for
this family to have a healthy baby. But we're also researchers, and we want to
further our research goals."

   It was those two forces -- the hope of Crystal Emery and Leonard Gobea to
have a healthy baby, and the desire of Kohn and his colleagues to push the
limits of the gene therapy -- that set the couple and the doctors on a collision
course that began months before Andrew's birth.

   They are young, Emery and Gobea. She is 19 and he is 20. They are not
married. She lives with her parents in the Imperial Valley town of El Centro; he
with his parents in Holtville.

   He is a part-time steam driller and sandblaster who dropped out of high
school. She wears a small diamond on her left ring finger, but marriage and a
home of their own must wait, Gobea said, until he gets better situated with a
job.

   They have been dating since they were in junior high, and after all these
years they say they might as well be husband and wife. They had their first
child -- a planned birth, they are quick to say -- when they were 16 and 17.

   Why? "I just want a baby," Emery said simply. "I don't know -- you can't put
something like that in words. But just to know that a little baby depends on
you, you get to take care of it, it loves you."

   Chastity Gobea lived five short months. The first sign she was sick came at
age 2 weeks, when her umbilical cord would not heal. Then there were two bouts
with pneumonia. By the time doctors discovered her genetic disorder, it was too
late. She is buried in El Centro, in a cemetery called Evergreen.

   Her father wears her name tattooed in black letters on his left hand. "I
still have a lot of trouble understanding about Chastity," he said sadly.

   Her death brought news to her parents: each carries a defective gene that
causes ADA deficiency, a form of severe combined immune deficiency (SCID). The
letters ADA stand for adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that enables the immune
system to fight infection.

   Emery and Gobea each have one gene that manufactures the enzyme, and one that
does not. In one of those unfortunate quirks of genetics -- the odds were one in
four -- Chastity was born with two defective genes. So was Andrew, although he
was helped in a sense by his sister's death because doctors knew enough to test
him in the womb.

   SCID is extremely rare; each year just 100 Americans are born with the
disease. The most famous victim was David, the "boy in a bubble," who lived in
isolation in a Houston hospital for 12 years before his death in 1984. ADA
deficiency is the most common form of SCID, accounting for 25% of all SCID
cases.

   The drug used to treat the disorder, which was approved for use three years
ago, is expensive -- weekly or twice-weekly shots that cost about $2,200 each --
and does not always work. Bone marrow transplants are also a common treatment,
but they too are not always successful. Chastity Gobea died after receiving one.

   So scientists have been concentrating on another route: gene therapy.

   Gene therapy is still in its infancy. Just 47 gene therapy projects, most of
them designed to treat cancer patients, are now either approved or under way
worldwide, according to Dr. W. French Anderson, a USC geneticist who is a
pioneer in the field.

   Although the technology for gene therapy is sophisticated, the techniques
remain crude. Most gene therapy experiments employ a class of viruses known as
retroviruses to carry missing genes into target cells. But scientists have yet
to perfect methods for transferring the genes into cells, and once inside, the
genes do not always work.

   ADA deficiency lends itself well to gene therapy, primarily because the
disease can be corrected with just a small percentage of functioning genes. The
world's first approved gene therapy experiment -- conducted in 1990 by Anderson
and Dr. Michael Blaese at the National Institutes of Health -- was performed on
two ADA-deficient girls, ages 9 and 4, who had been treated with experimental
drugs before the therapy.

   The experiment on Andrew Gobea is being conducted in conjunction with NIH.
Blaese, who was present Saturday, agreed to serve as a collaborator so that the
government would give the experiment emergency approval in time for Andrew's
birth. In conjunction with San Francisco doctors, the team will repeat the
procedure early this week on a baby boy born Friday in that city.

   Andrew's drama began Tuesday, at 6:25 p.m., at the Hospital of the Good
Samaritan, just west of downtown Los Angeles. There, in a peach-colored room on
the eighth floor, Emery gave birth to Andrew after five hours of labor, with one
quick pelvic push.

   Right away, the obstetrician snipped his umbilical cord and began drawing
blood. It was crucial that as much as possible be obtained. Kohn and his
colleagues were hoping for 100 cubic centimeters -- about four-tenths of a cup.
They got half that.

   "I did the best I could," Dr. Kathryn Shaw, huffing and puffing, told Kohn
and Dr. Kenneth Weinberg as she handed them a rack of a dozen test tubes, only
four of which were filled. "I stomped on it, wrung it out, hung it up to dry.
Literally."

   If the doctors were disappointed, they refused to show it. After a quick peek
at the baby as he was being cradled in his father's arms, they sped back to
their lab with the test tubes.

   "Congratulations," a colleague said. "You are now the proud fathers of 50 ccs
of blood."

   Kohn, Weinberg and the others could have waited until Andrew was several
months old to obtain blood from his bone marrow. But extracting the marrow would
have been painful for Andrew, and using umbilical cord blood meant the therapy
could take place immediately.

   With the blood drawn, a long night of laboratory work lay ahead, as
technicians began the intricate process of isolating Andrew's "stem cells" --
the parent cells of all other blood cells. For weeks, they had been practicing
on a prototype machine borrowed from a Seattle-based firm, 17 practice runs in
all.

   Most gene therapy experiments target white blood cells; the therapy must be
repeated every several months when the white cells carrying the new gene die.
But stem cells stay alive in the marrow, continually spawning new cells. Thus,
if Andrew's therapy works, he will be cured.

   But experts say the process is fraught with obstacles. Stem cells are very
rare in the blood, comprising less than one-tenth of 1% of all blood cells, and
are difficult to isolate. And for reasons that scientists do not entirely
understand, genes introduced into stem cells do not function as well as those
introduced into white blood cells.

   It took Childrens Hospital technicians nearly six hours of careful, intense
work to separate the stem cells from the rest of Andrew's blood. They began with
500 million blood cells and ended with 3 million -- a tiny pellet at the bottom
of a test tube. But the number of true stem cells remains a mystery to the
doctors, part of the guessing game that made Saturday's experiment just that --
an experiment.

   Once the cells were isolated, there were two more additions to the genetic
brew: a mouse leukemia virus that had been altered to contain the ADA gene, and
"growth factors" to help the cells divide.

   At midnight, the mixture was put in an incubator, where it spent the rest of
the week, waiting for Andrew.

   In the meantime, Emery and Gobea were getting to know their new son. He has
his father's feet, they decided, and his grandfather's nose and little black
sideburns that they think make him resemble Elvis.

   At 1:04 p.m. Saturday Kohn suited up in a mask and surgical gloves and yellow
hospital gown to inject the gene-altered blood into an intravenous line in
Andrew's right foot. Andrew's parents watched tearfully. The father told the
doctor that he hoped the procedure would work. "We probably won't know until he
is crawling," Kohn replied.

   Now Andrew's blood will be checked weekly to see if the drugs are working and
if the genes are turning up in new cells.

   "I just want to take him home," Gobea said, "and get him ready to throw a
ball."

Gene Therapy Experiment

   Doctors at Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles performed a gene therapy
experiment Saturday that marked two firsts: The first time a baby has been a
gene therapy patient, and the first time umbilical cord blood has been used in
such an experiment.

   Here is how it worked:

   1) Andrew Gobea is born Tuesday at 6:25 p.m. at the Hospital of the Good
Samaritan. Obstetrician snips umbilical cord, draws blood from the cord and
deposits it in four test tubes. Doctors from Childrens Hospital take tubes of
umbilical cord blood back to their laboratory.

   2) Laboratory technicians transfer blood into flask and mix with antibodies
that bind themselves to so-called "stem cells," the parent cells that give rise
to all other blood cells. The antibodies attach to a protein called CD34 on the
surface of the stem cells.

   3) The blood is run through a special machine that separates CD34 cells from
other blood cells. Only a small portion of the cells -- 3 million of a total of
500 million -- have the CD34 protein. And only about a tenth of those CD34 cells
are true stem cells.

   4) Laboratory technicians add two substances to the CD34 cells -- a mouse
virus that has been altered to carry a gene that will correct Andrew's immune
deficiency, and three "growth factors" designed to help the cells grow and
divide so that the virus can "infect" them with the genes.

   5) The mixture is put in an incubator for three days, during which doctors
hope the virus that carries the gene will infect the stem cells.

   6) On Saturday, Andrew is given the new cells intravenously. It will take up
to six months for doctors to see whether the stem cells have spawned other cells
that carry the correct gene, and whether the gene is functioning properly.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Four-day-old Andrew Gobea receives infusion of new genes. ;
Photo, COLOR, Parents Crystal Emery, Leonard Gobea hold Andrew before procedure.
TAMMY LECHNER / Los Angeles Times; Photo, In photos above (Step 3 of the
process), blood is run through a machine that separates the stem cells from
other cells in Andrew Gobea's umbilical cord blood. At right are the isolated
stem cells. Below (Step 4), a medical technician adds mouse leukemia virus
containing a necessary gene to stem cells. The mixture incubates for three days
before being infused into Andrew.  Childrens Hospital, Los Angeles


                             1170 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 16, 1993, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 901 words

HEADLINE: NEWBORN'S GENE REPAIR GIVES HOPE COMPLETE IMMUNE DEFECT MAY BE ENDED
BY ADDING TO PARENT 'STEM CELLS' IN BLOOD

BYLINE: SHERYL STOLBERG, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   Andrew Gobea does not know it, but at 1 p.m. yesterday he made medical
history. The procedure, which took place behind a plastic curtain in a sterile
room at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, lasted just two minutes. Andrew, 4 days
old, slept through it all, his tiny fingers curled under his right ear, a look
of peaceful repose on his face.

   The 6-lb., 12-oz. baby with thick black hair was born Tuesday evening with an
immune system that does not work. Yesterday, a doctor infused the infant with a
teaspoon's worth of genes that are intended to cure the defect that, if left
untreated, kills most of its victims before they reach their first birthday.

   The treatment makes Andrew the first newborn ever to undergo a cutting-edge
brand of medicine known as gene therapy. It also employs, for the first time, a
novel twist on previous attempts at genetic engineering: the use of blood drawn
from the umbilical cord that was snipped from the baby at birth to isolate
Andrew's ''stem cells'' -- the parents of all other blood cells.

   For Andrew, the highly experimental operation means a chance to live a normal
life, without drugs that cost as much as $ 250,000 a year. For his parents --
who three years ago lost an infant daughter to Severe Combined Immune
Deficiency, the same disease that plagues their newborn boy -- it means the
chance to have a surviving child.

   For a team of four pediatric immunologists and hematologists at Childrens,
yesterday's effort was the culmination of six years of painstaking
investigation, of late nights in the laboratory and frustrating wrong turns and
finally, the rare heady rush that comes when science moves out from under the
microscope and into the operating room.

   And for thousands of other infants who will be born with genetic disorders
that can be diagnosed in the womb -- hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, Gaucher's
Disease among others -- it represents a step toward treatment immediately after
birth, and freedom from the debilitating effects of those diseases.

   It was as emotional as it was revolutionary; when Leonard Gobea asked if he
could help inject the gene-altered cells into his son, Dr. Donald Kohn took the
unusual step of allowing him to press on the syringe, which was attached to an
intravenous line. ''It's not rocket science,'' the doctor explained afterward.
''It's just pushing a little plunger. He wanted to be a part of doing it, and I
thought that was great.''

   It will likely be another six months before doctors know if Andrew's
treatment has worked. During that time, he will also be given twice-weekly
injections of a drug containing an enzyme to shore up his immune system. Until
doctors are certain that drug is working, he will remain in isolation at
Childrens.

   In conjunction with San Francisco doctors, the team will repeat the procedure
early this week on a baby boy born Friday in that city.

   They are a young couple, Crystal Emery and Gobea. She is 19 and he is 20.
They are not married. She lives with her parents in the Imperial Valley town of
El Centro near the Mexican border; he with his parents a few miles away in
Holtville.

   He is a part-time steam-driller and sand-blaster who dropped out of high
school. She wears a small diamond on her left ring finger, but marriage and a
home of their own must wait, Gobea says, until he gets better situated with a
job.

   They have been dating since they were in junior high, and after all these
years they say they might as well be husband and wife. They had their first
child when they were 16 and 17.

   Chastity Gobea lived five months. The first sign she was sick came at age two
weeks, when her navel would not heal. Then there were two bouts with pneumonia.
By the time doctors discovered her genetic disorder, it was too late.

   Her death brought news to her parents: each carries a defective gene that
causes ADA deficiency, a form of Severe Combined Immune Deficiency. The letters
ADA stand for adenosine deaminase, an enzyme that enables the immune system to
fight infection.

   SCID is extremely rare; each year just 100 Americans are born with the
disease. The most famous victim was David, the ''boy in a bubble,'' who lived in
isolation in a Houston hospital for 12 years before his death in 1984. ADA
deficiency is the most common form of SCID, accounting for 25 percent.

   ADA deficiency lends itself well to gene therapy, primarily because the
disease can be corrected with just a small percentage of functioning genes. The
world's first approved gene therapy experiment -- conducted in 1990 by Drs. W.
French Anderson and Michael Blaese at the National Institutes of Health -- was
performed on two ADA deficient girls, ages 9 and 4, who had been treated with
experimental drugs prior to the therapy.

   Most gene therapy experiments target white blood cells; the therapy must be
repeated every few months when the white cells carrying the new gene die. But
stem cells stay alive in the marrow, continually spawning new cells. Thus if
Andrew's therapy works, he will be cured.

   It took technicians nearly six hours of intense work to separate the stem
cells from the rest of Andrew's blood. They began with 500 million blood cells
and ended with 3 million -- about one teaspoon's worth. But the number of true
stem cells remains a mystery to the doctors, part of a guessing game that made
yesterday's experiment just that -- an experiment.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1171 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                     MAY 15, 1993, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: Infants With Rare Disease Receive Pioneer Therapy
 S.F., L.A. newborns inherited defective genes

BYLINE: David Perlman, Chronicle Science Editor

BODY:

    For the first time in history, two newborns with a rare and deadly genetic
disorder are undergoing gene therapy this weekend in hope that their defect can
be reversed and each can be given a functioning immune system to shield them
from fatal infections.

   Within hours of their births, a transcontinental team of specialists was
mobilized to undertake the pioneering effort to treat the rare disorder, known
as severe combined immune deficiency.

   One of the babies was born at the University of California at San Francisco
early yesterday morning; the other was delivered at Los Angeles Childrens
Hospital on Thursday. The diagnoses were made by amniocentesis before they were
born.

   Directing the effort at UCSF is Dr. Diane Wara, a pediatrician who
specializes in immune system problems. Dr. R. Michael Blaese of the National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md., who is one of the first researchers to
attempt human gene therapy, flew to Los Angeles last night to perform the
delicate experiment. In Los Angeles, Dr.  Robertson Parkman, another pediatric
immunologist, was caring for the fragile newborn whom Dr. James Goldberg had
delivered there.

   As Wara explained last night, both babies inherited a defective gene that
prevents their bodies from producing an enzyme called adenosine deaminase, or
ADA, and without a correctly functioning version of that gene their immune
systems cannot work to protect their bodies against infection.

   The disorder is the one that killed a courageous Texas boy named David, who
from the day of his birth lived isolated inside a sterile plastic bubble
designed to defend him against any chance of infection. David died of lymphatic
cancer after an attempted bone marrow transplant in 1984 at age 12.

   Blaese is one of the foremost gene therapy researchers in the world, and
after many years of difficult experiments with his colleague, Dr. W. French
Anderson at Bethesda, his group there developed genetic engineering methods to
create working copies of the ADA gene through recombinant DNA technology. In the
laboratory, Blaese and Anderson learned to insert the engineered genes that
carry the code for the ADA enzyme into harmless viruses.

   Less than three years ago, after countless animal experiments, Blaese used
the engineered viruses as carriers to insert functioning ADA genes into the
immune system cells of two young children with the lethal defect. Both children
are alive and well today, and their immune systems are working.

   But neither Blaese nor anyone else has tried to cure newborn infants with the
ADA deficiency, and in the attempt this weekend he will try to insert his
recombinant genes, linked to the viruses into immature cells that are formed
inside the bone marrow of the infants.

   Known as stem cells, those cells can live indefinitely, and as they mature
they develop into all the varied cells of the complete human immune system and
blood. In newborns, stem cells can be retrieved from the blood that flows in the
umbilical cord.

   As soon as Dr. Daniel Landers, an obstetrician and geneticist, delivered the
infant boy by Caesarean section yesterday, the team removed 200 cubic
centimeters of his cord blood, and Dr. Melissa Elder of UCSF flew the blood to
Los Angeles, where Blaese will attempt the gene therapy on both infants today.

   The San Francisco baby has an older brother who was born 2 1/2 years ago, and
he, too, is a victim of the same genetic defect. He is being treated with a drug
called PEG-ADA which is derived from cows and provides him with the enzyme he
needs. But he must have repeated injections, and the cost runs to more than $
130,000 a year.

   The entire gene therapy effort, now being tried for the first time in the two
infants, is truly an experiment, and as Wara said last night, ''If it does
correct the defect in the babies, it will almost be a miracle.'' But if this
first attempt does not succeed, the scientist-physicians can surely try again,
she said.

   And if, eventually, it does succeed, the gene therapy technique being tried
for these two infants may well open the way for other attacks on hereditary
diseases. There are other forms of severe combined immune deficiency that could
yield, and the prospect opens for correcting such far more widespread disorders
as sickle cell anemia and the diseases known as the thalassemias, Wara said.


                             1172 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         May 12, 1993 Wednesday, THIRD

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 639 words

HEADLINE: CITY OF HOPE CEO RESPONDS TO FUND-RAISER CRITIC

BODY:

   Los Angeles

   As president and chief executive officer of the City of Hope, I felt it was
very important to respond immediately and personally to the April 19 letter from
Fredrick Sahuc ("Event siphons money from local AIDS groups") regarding the City
of Hope's "Workout for Hope," which raised much needed money for AIDS research.

   Geographically, the City of Hope and its Beckman Research Institute are
located in Southern California. But the work we perform and the medical and
scientific advances that have resulted from our research and treatment programs
know no state or national boundaries.

   In 1982, the City of Hope established an AIDS research program focusing on
three areas which are crucial if we are to someday conquer this devastating
illness - basic research, clinical research and education. Through these
programs our scientists have made important advancements.

   At a time when most AIDS research centers were studying methods to improve
chemotherapy of AIDS and to develop a vaccine for AIDS, the City of Hope became
one of the first centers to develop a gene-based approach to AIDS. This led to a
potential method of gene therapy for AIDS and played a role in leading other
centers toward this area of research.

   In 1987, the City of Hope became one of the first federally funded centers
for the development of gene therapy for AIDS, now considered a critical part of
the approach to halt HIV-1 infection. In 1992, the City of Hope saw its greatest
progress towards the development of a treatment for AIDS when promising new
methods for gene therapy were developed and tested. We anticipate that our
clinical trials using this gene therapy method for AIDS could begin as early as
1994.

   The type of approach to treatment under development at the City of Hope can
only be done in certain medical centers because it utilizes marrow
transplantation as a basic mechanism for restoring immunity to the person with
AIDS. Because we have one of the largest bone marrow transplantation centers in
the country, the City of Hope is making a major contribution toward this goal,
and research done here will provide a method for eventually treating patients
not only here, but also in other areas throughout the country.

   In 1990, the City of Hope discovered a synthetic ribozyme - commonly referred
to as "molecular scissors" - which, in the laboratory, is able to clip out the
genetic message of the HIV virus, preventing its infection of other cells.
Today, City of Hope researchers continue to make significant strides toward
developing ribozymes into a promising treatment strategy for AIDS.

   The City of Hope's research is widely respected and has been a focal point at
two international AIDS symposiums. In 1992, the City of Hope co-sponsored an
international symposium on AIDS research and treatment, which brought together
leading investigators from Australia, Asia, Europe and North America.

   The City of Hope is also part of the National Cooperative Drug Development
Group for AIDS which is a consortium of approximately 24 centers which are
developing drugs for AIDS under the umbrella organization of the Division of
AIDS in the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases at the
National Institutes of Health.

   While the City of Hope does not have a facility in your community to care for
today's AIDS patients, our AIDS research programs hold promise for developing
advanced treatments for those who may suffer from AIDS in the future - in New
Orleans and cities throughout the nation and, indeed, the world.

   We are deeply grateful to those who have supported the City of Hope through
"Workout for Hope" and other programs. We are also deeply committed to helping
to find relief for people afflicted with this terrible disease.

   Dr. Sanford M. Shapero

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993


                             1173 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     May 9, 1993, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2066 words

HEADLINE: DOING BATTLE WITH DOWN SYNDROME

BYLINE: BILL HELTZEL, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   In 1959, Dr. Jerome Lejeune made one of the great discoveries in genetic
research.

   It has haunted him ever since.

   Lejeune found that people with Down syndrome -- the most common genetic
disorder known -- carry an extra copy of a chromosome.

   Because he is passionately opposed to abortion, though, he has suffered from
knowing that his discovery led to the use of prenatal tests that encouraged many
women to get abortions.

   Ever since, Lejeune has been searching for a cure for Down syndrome,
especially for some way to reverse the mental retardation that is the hallmark
of the disorder.

   And for the past decade, much of Lejeune's research money has come from a
small group based in Monroeville, 4,000 miles from his laboratory in Paris.

   The International Foundation for Genetic Research, known informally as the
Michael Fund, has been supporting Lejeune ever since his position on abortion
led the French Socialist government to cut off research grants to his University
of Paris lab in 1982.

   The Michael Fund believes so strongly in Lejeune's work that it predicted in
1985 that he would find a cure within 10 years. That hasn't happened yet, but
the fund's executive director, Randy Engel, repeated recently that scientists
are ''on the brink of a cure'' for Down syndrome.

   Lejeune himself is much less emphatic about his research, and several
genetics experts say talk of a cure is unrealistic.

   The fund's claims about Lejeune raise certain questions.

   In an attempt to help him, is the group exaggerating how much scientists know
about Down syndrome?

   Is the group motivated by the desire to advance scientific knowledge, or is
it driven primarily by anti-abortion politics?

   The answers are not clear-cut, but it is evident that the Michael Fund's
officials believe that any scientific research that could potentially lead to
the abortion of Down's fetuses is morally indefensible.

The roots of the fund

   Engel, the Michael Fund's guiding spirit, established the organization in
1979 and named it after the son of a friend who was active in the anti- abortion
movement.

   Michael, who has Down syndrome, is now 24. During the week, he lives in a
residential program in Greensburg. On weekends, he stays with his mother, who
asked that his last name not be used.

   Michael's life has spanned an era of profound changes. When he was born in
1969, abortion was illegal. By the time he was 4, abortion had been declared
legal by the U.S. Supreme Court in most cases, and prenatal testing had made it
possible for couples to determine if their fetus had the Down's chromosome, and
to get an abortion if they wished.

   Engel set up the Michael Fund as an alternative to the March of Dimes, the
major mainstream group that raises money for the treatment of birth defects,
because she felt its support for prenatal testing made it ''pro-abortion.''

   The March of Dimes no longer supports research on prenatal testing, said Dick
Levaitt, director of science information. ''We don't get involved in debates on
that subject,'' he said.

   There has been another major development since Michael was born. Advances in
medicine, education and social programs have greatly enhanced the quality of
life for people with Down syndrome.

   Down's children once were likely to be institutionalized, and they tended to
die young. Now, many of them live at home and 80 percent of those who reach
adulthood live to at least age 55. They are being taught to read and do math.
They attend regular schools and get vocational training that enable them to work
in a competitive job market.

   ''People with Down syndrome are doing things today that were never dreamt of
five to 10 years ago,'' said pediatrician Carl Cooley, the father of a Down's
girl and associate director of clinical services at the Dartmouth Center for
Genetics and Child Development in New Hampshire.

   Michael himself has been active in the Boy Scouts. He bowls and attends
dances. He is being trained to work in a restaurant.

   For Michael, even a genetic breakthrough would probably be too late to
reverse his condition.

   While his mother shares Lejeune's anti-abortion views and has great hopes for
his research, she puts her faith in better educational opportunities.

   ''That's where I see real positive things happening. That is where the hope
is for me in Michael's continued development. Not in cures or treatments. Not at
this point. I'm happy with Michael as he is.''

   The Michael Fund itself does not focus on these quality-of-life advances,
though. It is aiming its hopes at Lejeune finding an effective treatment to
reverse the condition.

   In the last 12 years, the Michael Fund has contributed more than $ 250,000 to
his work, or about half of his support.

   It is only a fraction of the total research money going into Down's work. The
National Institute of Child Health and Development, a federal agency, spent $
6.6 million on Down syndrome research last year alone.

A complicated condition

   Severe chromosomal defects, like those in Down's, usually are incompatible
with life, and in fact, most Down's fetuses abort spontaneously.

   Still, Down syndrome occurs once in every 800 to 1,000 live births, or about
5,000 a year, making it the most common chromosomal disorder. There are an
estimated 250,000 people with Down syndrome in the United States.

   The problem begins when pairs of the 21st chromosome stick together in either
the woman's egg or the man's sperm. Normally, the man and woman each contribute
23 chromosomes to their child, for a total of 46. The Down's child has three
copies of the 21st chromosome, or a total of 47 chromosomes.

   This overdose of genetic material causes a broad-based attack on the body's
systems. The dominant characteristic is mental retardation, but Down's also
affects the skeleton, muscles and metabolism. Down's individuals are prone to
heart disease, leukemia and the senility of Alzheimer's disease.

   Many genetic disorders involve a single defective gene. For example, in
cystic fibrosis, a malfunctioning gene causes the lungs to produce abnormal
amounts of mucus. If doctors could repair the gene, they could eliminate the
condition.

   The challenge of overcoming Down syndrome with genetic therapy lies in the
disorder's complexity.

   The extra chromosome has roughly 1,000 genes, and while only a few of them
are believed to be responsible for Down syndrome, researchers don't know yet
which ones are involved.

   Each gene produces a specific chemical that carries out a specific function.
In Down's, because there is an entire extra chromosome in every cell of the
body, it is not a matter of certain genes being defective, but of having 50
percent too many normally functioning genes.

   In Down syndrome, any attempt to tamper with the genes would carry a special
risk, because doctors would have to find a way to shut off the action of the
suspect genes in just one copy of the three chromosomes.

   Shutting off the gene in two or three copies could create a whole new set of
problems. ''You would have to precisely engineer it,'' said Dr. Aravinda
Chakravarti, a University of Pittsburgh geneticist.

   Timing also would be crucial. Presumably, Chakravarti said, Down syndrome
begins at conception and progresses during the development of the embryo. Many
consequences are evident at birth, and so treatment would have to begin as early
as possible, probably in the womb.

   The details of just one gene -- what it produces, how to regulate it, when to
regulate it -- take years of testing. Since Down syndrome may involve several
genes, Chakravarti said, ''you can't begin to think of how to introduce some
treatment regimen that would turn off a whole series of genes.''

   All of this makes genetic researchers extremely reluctant to predict a cure
for Down's.

   Instead, they talk about ameliorating symptoms. ''One could counteract those
genes and that might lead to a treatment, but I don't think it would lead to a
cure,'' said Sigfried Peuschel, a father of a Down's child and a pediatrician
specializing in Down Syndrome at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence.

   ''A cure means you get rid of all the effects of Down syndrome, and that
means the mental retardation and physical problems. Treatment would mean helping
the children achieve more and be healthier.''

Lejeune's approach

   Lejeune does use the term ''cure.''

   Yet he is more cautious about making predictions than the Michael Fund is
when it promotes his research.

   Rather than wait the years it might take to devise an actual gene therapy for
Down's, Lejeune said he was looking for drugs or other substances that could
block the mental retardation.

   ''I try to see if the cells from babies with Down syndrome are more sensitive
to some drug that is able to block or accelerate some of the pathways,
chemically speaking, which are necessary for the functioning of neurons,'' the
nerve cells that make up the brain and nervous system.

   ''What we do is intellectually more advanced and economically much less
costly'' than other genetic research, Lejeune contended in a recent interview.

   ''We see whether we can diminish (the effects of the extra chromosome) with a
proper regimen of vitamins or drugs or therapy.''

   He has not developed any effective treatment yet, however, and is careful not
to guess how long it might take.

   In a 1990 article in the American Journal of Medical Genetics, he wrote:
''Nobody knows the length of the road to be covered before reaching the
achievement we are all longing for.''

   While he believes there may soon be a treatment to allow Down syndrome
children to achieve normal intelligence, he said: ''My belief is not a
prediction. It's a personal feeling that is not demonstrable by empirical
findings.

   ''And what I am talking about is a treatment. I am always careful not to give
false hopes to parents, on the one hand. But also, I tell them that we are not
desperate.''

   Other scientists are skeptical of his claims, yet respectful of Lejeune's
many accomplishments in genetics.

   ''If one claims a cure in 10 years, to me that is unrealistic. However, in
science, as you know, we are always ready for surprises,'' said Stylianos
Antorarakis, a Johns Hopkins geneticist.

   ''Essentially, what Lejeune is doing is vitamin therapy,'' said Alfred
Baumeister, a Vanderbilt University psychologist who specializes in mental
retardation. ''I'm not saying we should stop that type of research, but it seems
to me unlikely to yield immediate dividends in the time frame of these (Michael
Fund) people.

   ''It's driven by hopes, not science. But it is very hard to quarrel with
somebody of such distinction as Lejeune. He speaks with great conviction. He's
absolutely convinced he's on the right track.''

   Mainstream experts in Down syndrome said the Human Genome Project offered the
best hope for a breakthrough, although it would probably take years.

   The project, a 15-year, $ 3-billion attempt to map all 100,000 human genes,
is under way.

   Baumeister said it made sense that such basic genetic research held the key.
''The question is, where is the most logical place to start? To me, it's at the
point where the disease process begins.''

   The Michael Fund's Engel, though, opposes the Genome Project because she
believes there is an underlying emphasis on eugenics, the attempt to improve the
population through abortions and selective breeding.

   ''It could be a remarkable program ... but as the program is currently
designed, it is really not geared toward cures and treatments. What they are
looking for are genetic markers for prenatal detection, so they can eliminate
(fetuses) in utero.''

   Lejeune also worries about how the Genome Project might be applied. ''I am
strongly against the philosophy that says, 'If we find something wrong, we will
kill the baby.' That's what people who are looking at those markers have in
mind.''

   Still, Lejeune concedes that his own research is considered a backwater. ''We
are a very little team. Walking in those tracks is not very fashionable.''

   In 2 1/2 years, he will no longer be able to use his University of Paris
laboratory because he will face mandatory retirement at age 70. He feels an
urgency to find answers.

   ''We have to win. Otherwise, the babies will be killed. It is no longer an
academic problem. It is a question of life and death.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), John Beale/Post-Gazette: Michael washes dishes at school.,
Dr. Jerome Lejeune -- More cautious about making predictions than the Michael
Fund is when it promotes his research.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1174 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                           Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                       May 7, 1993, Friday, City Edition

SECTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE; Entertainment; Pg. 7B

DISTRIBUTION: TAMPA BAY AND STATE

LENGTH: 694 words

HEADLINE: The voice of caring

BYLINE: MARY EVERTZ

DATELINE: ST. PETERSBURG

BODY:


   With all the majesty she gave to the countless roles she played, Beverly
Sills, the internationally acclaimed opera star and prima donna, stepped onto
the stage at Eckerd College on Wednesday.

   For almost four decades, the American diva dazzled audiences around the
world with her scintillating performances. Since her retirement from the stage
in 1979, Sills has done more to bring opera to the American public than any
other artist.

   Sills ranks as one of the country's leading motivational speakers, and is  an
indefatigable fund-raiser for the arts and for medical research.

   Sills was in St. Petersburg as part of Eckerd's Distinguished Speakers
series. Dubbed "An Evening With Beverly Sills," it was one of 15 lectures  she
will give this year, to audiences ranging from university students to  residents
of a retirement community. She gives these,  she said in an  interview before
her speech, to raise money for her causes.  A groundbreaker

   Sills' work on and off the stage has marked a series of firsts. She is the
most heralded American opera star, the highest paid in her day and the first
opera star to be featured on the covers of Time, Life and Newsweek magazines.

   Sills was also the first opera star to go on the talk show circuit, where
this principal performer with the New York City Opera would chat with
late-night hosts such as Johnny Carson and sing.

   Sills introduced supertitles to U.S. audiences, the overhead translations  of
the opera's libretto, and performed in the first opera for public  television,
Janacek's The Cunning Little Vixen.

   As chairman of the Mother's March on Birth Defects for the March of Dimes
the past 13 years, she has raised almost $ 90-million. She also has been a
tireless worker for the arts. "My calls to have breakfast with CEOs have  become
notorious," she said. Sills thinks it is the private sector's  responsibility to
fund the arts first: "It is very difficult to ask the  government for money for
the arts when so many people are homeless and without  health care."

   As the mother of two handicapped children, Sills has become involved in  "
gene therapy." She recently has written an article on the subject for  Newsweek.
Sills also serves on the boards of American Express, Time-Warner and  R.H. Macy
& Co. And she is managing director of the Metropolitan Opera. In  1980, she
received the Presidential Medal of Freedom and in 1985 a Kennedy  Center honor.


A captive audience

   The stage of Eckerd College's Fox Hall is a far cry from the great opera
houses of the world: London's Covent Garden, Milan's La Scala, New York's
Metropolitan. Still, she charmed the standing-room-only crowd of more than 800
people.

   Sills retired at age 50, while she was the world's highest-paid opera  singer
and star of the New York City Opera. "I wanted to get out while people  were
still fighting to buy tickets," she said.

   As the finale for her singing career, Sills performed on national
television, along with personalities as diverse as Ethel Merman, Burt Reynolds
and Walter Cronkite. Less than 12 hours later, she started as the general
director of the New York City Opera.

   When Sills took over, the group was $ 5-million in the red. It was solidly
in the black when she gave up the post in 1989.

   Sills thinks that although audience attendance is flourishing, the future  of
opera is not. "It's not in very good shape. The field is dominated by two
tenors (Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti), both in their 50s. I don't see
a replacement for Birgit Nilsson, so the Wagnerian repertory is languishing.
With no apparent replacement for Leontyne Price, the Strauss is struggling."

   But Sills certainly isn't. She was born 64 years ago this month in  Brooklyn,
N.Y., as Belle Miriam "Bubbles" Silverman, the third child of  Morris and
Shirley Silverman. "I was born at home," she said. "The doctor  was there, and I
came out with a bubble in my mouth. He had to pop it. The  doctor said "This is
an omen. You have to call this one "Bubbles.' So they  did."

   And she's been floating to new heights ever since.

GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, CHERIE DIEZ; BEVERLY SILLS

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1993


                             1175 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 5, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: `KO' MOUSE ENTERS RING TO FIGHT DISEASE

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Wednesday, May 5, 1993 `KO' MOUSE ENTERS RING TO FIGHT DISEASE

   Summary: OHSU researchers develop an animal with altered genes to  beat
human ills

   A team of Oregon researchers has created one of the newest animals being
used to study human disease.

   Dr. Markus Grompe, a pediatrician and molecular geneticist, heads the
laboratory at Oregon Health Sciences University that recently developed
Oregon's first so-called ``knockout'' mouse.

   The new technology gets its name from scientists knocking out a portion of  a
specially developed mouse's normal gene to simulate a human disease. The
process capitalizes on the fact that 90 percent of mice and humans genes are
virtually identical.

   ``It is obvious that if you have an animal that has the same disease as a
human being you can then test whatever therapy you envision doing on the
animal,'' Grompe said.

   The emergence of knockout-mouse technology coincides with the explosion in
transgenic mouse models of human disease, in which a gene that was not there
before is added to the mouse genome -- all the genetic material in the
chromosomes of an organism.

   ``Researchers have known for a number of years how to add genes, now we can
take out genes as well,'' Grompe said.

   Since 1989, dozens of knockout mice, each missing a different gene, have
been created in about 10 laboratories in the world, Grompe said. Knockout mice
have been developed to mimic several human diseases, including cancer and
immune system malfunctions.

   One of the best examples of the new technology comes from researchers at  the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, who knocked out the mouse
equivalent of the gene that -- when it is defective -- causes cystic fibrosis
in humans. The mice subsequently developed some of the same symptoms as human
cystic fibrosis patients, enabling researchers to do experiments in the animal
before moving on to human trials.

   The Oregon team's line of knockout mice provide researchers with a new way
to study treatments for a rare metabolic disease called tyrosinemia. But the
long-term goal is of broader scope, to get a better understanding of inborn
liver diseases.

   About 30 to 40 new cases of tyrosinemia occur in the United States each  year
and about one every two years in Oregon. However, there are areas in the  world
where tyrosinemia is prominent, most notably in Quebec, Canada, where 5  to 7
percent of the population are carriers.

   In 1991, a French Canadian group cloned the human gene for tyrosinemia and
Grompe's group soon afterward cloned the mouse gene that differs only slightly
from the human gene.

   Briefly, knockout technology works this way: Scientists first find the  human
gene that, when defective, causes a particular disease. Then they find  the
corresponding normal gene in the mouse and make it defective by knocking  out a
portion of the normal gene. Using biotechnology techniques, it took  Grompe's
team several generations of mice and about a year to develop a line  of knockout
mice to model tyrosinemia.

   Grompe chose to study tyrosinemia because his overall interest is in gene
therapy -- replacing or repairing a faulty gene -- for liver diseases.
Tyrosinemia seemed to be the perfect disease for the work because the only  cure
for it is liver transplantation, he said.

   Tyrosinemia is an inborn defect in the metabolism of the amino acid
tyrosine. As a result, toxic substances accumulate, causing illness.

   The pathway for the degradation of tyrosine in normal mice and humans is
essentialy the same. And most of the biochemical and genetic processes in  mouse
and humans are identical, and ``it is sort of like our window to  understanding
ourselves,'' Grompe said.

   In the United States, tyrosinemia is so rare that it is not usually
suspected or recognized until a child becomes very ill with vomiting and fails
to thrive, Grompe said.

   When that happens, treatment possibilities include adjusting the child's
diet to lower tyrosine, but patients essentially have severe liver disease  from
birth. This eventually progresses to cirrhosis of the liver and -- in  half the
cases -- liver cancer. The current thinking is that liver  transplantation
early, before the children develop liver cancer, is the only  way to save lives,
he said.

   ``If they are not transplanted they all die by age 10 of cancer or liver
failure,'' Grompe said.

   One reason he wanted to study tyrosinemia was to have a model of liver
cancer so he could try to develop treatments that would prevent the disease,  he
said.

   ``If we can understand what causes liver cancer in these kids it might give
us some clues to liver cancer in general,'' Grompe said.

   He said that certain drug treatments, administered before or after birth,
might get rid of the life-threatening toxic substances that build up.

   The researchers hope to begin the drug experiments soon with available
substances, and they intend to make drugs to test.

   Future gene therapy for tyrosinemia might involve making a virus that had
the normal gene in it and then putting that virus into the liver of the sick
knockout mouse, probably in the newborn period.

   The hope would be that the normal gene would cure the liver.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by TIM JEWETT - of The Oregonian staff.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1176 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 5, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: Pg. B02

HEADLINE: DR. MARKUS GROMPE, A

GRAPHIC: PICTURE CAPTION, Wednesday, May 5, 1993 DR. MARKUS GROMPE, A
ILLUSTRATION: BW photo by TIM JEWETT/of The Oregonian Dr. Markus Grompe, a
pediatrician and molecular geneticist, looks over a genetically engineered mouse
in his OHSU lab. The development of a so-called ``knockout'' mouse will enable
researchers to study new drug and gene therapies. Status: Filed

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1177 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 5, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 870 words

HEADLINE: `KO' MOUSE ENTERS RING TO FIGHT DISEASE

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff <

BODY:

   Wednesday, May 5, 1993 `KO' MOUSE ENTERS RING TO FIGHT DISEASE

   Summary: OHSU researchers develop an animal with altered genes to  beat
human ills

   A team of Oregon researchers has created one of the newest animals being
used to study human disease.

   Dr. Markus Grompe, a pediatrician and molecular geneticist, heads the
laboratory at Oregon Health Sciences University that recently developed
Oregon's first so-called ``knockout'' mouse.

   The new technology gets its name from scientists knocking out a portion of  a
specially developed mouse's normal gene to simulate a human disease. The
process capitalizes on the fact that 90 percent of mice and humans genes are
virtually identical.

   ``It is obvious that if you have an animal that has the same disease as a
human being you can then test whatever therapy you envision doing on the
animal,'' Grompe said.

   The emergence of knockout-mouse technology coincides with the explosion in
transgenic mouse models of human disease, in which a gene that was not there
before is added to the mouse genome -- all the genetic material in the
chromosomes of an organism.

   ``Researchers have known for a number of years how to add genes, now we can
take out genes as well,'' Grompe said.

   Since 1989, dozens of knockout mice, each missing a different gene, have
been created in about 10 laboratories in the world, Grompe said. Knockout mice
have been developed to mimic several human diseases, including cancer and
immune system malfunctions.

   One of the best examples of the new technology comes from researchers at  the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, who knocked out the mouse
equivalent of the gene that -- when it is defective -- causes cystic fibrosis
in humans. The mice subsequently developed some of the same symptoms as human
cystic fibrosis patients, enabling researchers to do experiments in the animal
before moving on to human trials.

   The Oregon team's line of knockout mice provide researchers with a new way
to study treatments for a rare metabolic disease called tyrosinemia. But the
long-term goal is of broader scope, to get a better understanding of inborn
liver diseases.

   About 30 to 40 new cases of tyrosinemia occur in the United States each  year
and about one every two years in Oregon. However, there are areas in the  world
where tyrosinemia is prominent, most notably in Quebec, Canada, where 5  to 7
percent of the population are carriers.

   In 1991, a French Canadian group cloned the human gene for tyrosinemia and
Grompe's group soon afterward cloned the mouse gene that differs only slightly
from the human gene.

   Briefly, knockout technology works this way: Scientists first find the  human
gene that, when defective, causes a particular disease. Then they find  the
corresponding normal gene in the mouse and make it defective by knocking  out a
portion of the normal gene. Using biotechnology techniques, it took  Grompe's
team several generations of mice and about a year to develop a line  of knockout
mice to model tyrosinemia.

   Grompe chose to study tyrosinemia because his overall interest is in gene
therapy -- replacing or repairing a faulty gene -- for liver diseases.
Tyrosinemia seemed to be the perfect disease for the work because the only  cure
for it is liver transplantation, he said.

   Tyrosinemia is an inborn defect in the metabolism of the amino acid
tyrosine. As a result, toxic substances accumulate, causing illness.

   The pathway for the degradation of tyrosine in normal mice and humans is
essentialy the same. And most of the biochemical and genetic processes in  mouse
and humans are identical, and ``it is sort of like our window to  understanding
ourselves,'' Grompe said.

   In the United States, tyrosinemia is so rare that it is not usually
suspected or recognized until a child becomes very ill with vomiting and fails
to thrive, Grompe said.

   When that happens, treatment possibilities include adjusting the child's
diet to lower tyrosine, but patients essentially have severe liver disease  from
birth. This eventually progresses to cirrhosis of the liver and -- in  half the
cases -- liver cancer. The current thinking is that liver  transplantation
early, before the children develop liver cancer, is the only  way to save lives,
he said.

   ``If they are not transplanted they all die by age 10 of cancer or liver
failure,'' Grompe said.

   One reason he wanted to study tyrosinemia was to have a model of liver
cancer so he could try to develop treatments that would prevent the disease,  he
said.

   ``If we can understand what causes liver cancer in these kids it might give
us some clues to liver cancer in general,'' Grompe said.

   He said that certain drug treatments, administered before or after birth,
might get rid of the life-threatening toxic substances that build up.

   The researchers hope to begin the drug experiments soon with available
substances, and they intend to make drugs to test.

   Future gene therapy for tyrosinemia might involve making a virus that had
the normal gene in it and then putting that virus into the liver of the sick
knockout mouse, probably in the newborn period.

   The hope would be that the normal gene would cure the liver.

   ILLUSTRATION: Photo by TIM JEWETT - of The Oregonian staff.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1178 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                             May 5, 1993 Wednesday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: Pg. B02

HEADLINE: DR. MARKUS GROMPE, A

GRAPHIC: PICTURE CAPTION, Wednesday, May 5, 1993 DR. MARKUS GROMPE, A
ILLUSTRATION: BW photo by TIM JEWETT/of The Oregonian Dr. Markus Grompe, a
pediatrician and molecular geneticist, looks over a genetically engineered mouse
in his OHSU lab. The development of a so-called ``knockout'' mouse will enable
researchers to study new drug and gene therapies. Status: Filed

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1179 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 1993 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                            April 29, 1993, Thursday

SECTION: EXTRA; Section J; Page 2

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: NEWS BRIEFS Parisian store to open 2 days earlybusiness; openings;
legislation; courts; awards; real/estate

BODY:

   Because construction is ahead of schedule, the Parisian store at Gwinnett
Place Mall will open two days earlier than expected, on Aug. 2.

   Therefore, the fashion specialty store's "A Day to Share," a fund- raising
opportunity for civic organizations, has been moved to July 31.

   Participating groups will sell $ 10 tickets for a day of preview shopping and
special events.

   Each ticket can be redeemed for $ 10 toward any regular price purchase of $
50 or more.

   The tickets are available through many local civic and service groups. Call
814-3346.

   Court clerks' association elects Yates vice president. Gwinnett Superior
Court clerk Gary Yates recently was elected first vice president of the Superior
Court Clerks Association of Georgia.

   Mr. Yates has been the association's second vice president and served on the
executive board and as vice chairman of the legislative committee.

   He formerly was chairman of the Superior Court Clerks Training Council, for
which he taught sessions on criminal proceedings.

   The Training Council makes recommendations on curriculum, instruction for
certification and continuing judicial education of Superior Court clerks to the
University of Georgia Institute of Continuing Judicial Education.

   Mr. Yates has served as Gwinnett's Superior Court clerk since 1985.

   He was elected during the annual Spring Training for Superior Court Clerks
this month in Augusta.

   Patterson named manager by Rock-Tenn. Robert B. Patterson was named manager
of planning and development at Rock-Tenn Co.'s mill group.

   He will analyze mill acquisitions, external affairs, planning and
organizational development.

   The Brown University graduate earned a master's degree at Stanford University
and has worked for CBS in New York, Robinson-Humphrey and McKinsey & Co.

   Overstreet, Meltzers receive Golden Rule Awards. Three Gwinnett residents
received Golden Rule Awards at the 12th annual luncheon at the Hyatt Regency
Hotel.

   Co-sponsored by J.C. Penney Co. and the United Way of Metropolitan Atlanta,
the awards recognize people and organizations who exemplify the spirit of
volunteerism.

   Danny Overstreet won an award in the adult category for his work as a founder
of Barrier-Free Gwinnett Inc.

   A wheelchair user for more than 30 years, Mr. Overstreet designs and builds
ramps for the homes of disabled people and helps make public buildings more
accessible.

   The group category award went to A Second Chance Thrift Shop, founded by
Harriett and Mac Meltzer of Norcross.

   The shop provides job training, support and transitional employment to people
with physical and mental disabilities.

   The Meltzers work as volunteers six days a week and have recruited others to
serve as job coaches for the employees in training.

   A $ 1,000 contribution to the winner's organization goes with each Golden
Rule Award, and the local winners are now eligible to win one of the three
national Golden Rule Awards.

   Some 149 other nominees received a merit certificate, key chain and
congratulatory letter from President Clinton.

   Realtors signing up teams for Cystic Fibrosis Sports Challenge. The Gwinnett
Board of Realtors has already signed up 11 teams to compete in this year's
Cystic Fibrosis Sports Challenge, and members are looking for more to ensure the
county's standing as the largest single group involved.

   The June 5 benefit for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will be patterned after
an Olympics for corporate competitors, with an opening ceremony, an awards
ceremony and a silent auction afterward at the Three Dollar Cafe.

   It will be held at Georgia Tech's Bobby Dodd Stadium.

   Five men and five women will make up each team. Each person must compete in
every category.

   The teams will pay a $ 600 entry fee to compete in a morning of events,
including an obstacle course, running relay, tug-of-war, standing long-jump
relay, softball throw and basketball shoot.

   This year the honorary chairmen will be Bobby Cremins, Georgia Tech's head
basketball coach, and television sports reporter Kristy Deer of WSB-TV.

   The goal is to have 100 teams compete.

   This will be one of several charitable endeavors the real estate board will
undertake this year, said Ms. Loftus, an agent for Buckhead Brokers.

   She and Joan Johnson are co-chairwomen for the board's You'll Make a
Difference Committee.

   Medical progress in combating cystic fibrosis has been encouraging in recent
years. Researchers have identified the defective gene responsible for the
disease, and gene therapy trials began at the beginning of the year.

   Staff writer Celia Sibley compiled this report.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993


                             1180 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                          Copyright 1993 The Oregonian
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Oregonian (Portland, Oregon)

                            April 29, 1993 Thursday
                                 FOURTH Edition

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B02

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCES PREDICTED IN EYE-CARE RESEARCH

BYLINE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN, of the Oregonian Staff <

DATELINE: UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif.

BODY:

   Thursday, April 29, 1993 ADVANCES PREDICTED IN EYE-CARE RESEARCH

   Summary:    Experts say cataract, pigmentosa cures may soon be on the horizon

   The director of the National Eye Institute predicts that advances in eye
research will significantly help prevent vision impairment and blindness in  the
next decade.

   Dr. Carl Kupfer, NEI director, said at a conference this week that
scientific research will lead to reductions in the nation's health-care costs.
He made his comments at a science writers' seminar sponsored by Research to
Prevent Blindness Inc.

   Kupfer said the federal government would save $2.5 billion annually on
cataract surgery if drugs under development against cataract, a clouding of  the
lens of the eye, prove capable of delaying lens-replacement surgery for 10
years.

   About 1 1/2  million cataract operations are performed each year in the
United States, and by the year 2020, there will be a need for 2.3 million
cataract operations each year, Kupfer said.

   However, he predicted that by the year 2000, if new drugs effectively slow
down cataract development, the need for cataract operations would decrease by
45 percent annually.

   The lens of the eye contains a high concentration of protein that normally
keeps the tissue transparent and capable of focusing light on the back of the
eye, but over a liftime various factors may slowly degrade lens proteins and
cause them to aggregate, creating a progressive clouding of the lens, Kupfer
said.

   And while years of research have yielded stunning detail about the  structure
of proteins inside the lens and how these proteins keep the lens  transparent,
scientists still do not know what causes cataracts to form.

   However, cataract research recently took a giant step foward when  scientists
reported that a protein called crystallin appears to keep watch  over other
proteins in the lens and keeps them from aggregating.

   ``If we can learn to protect and preserve the level of alpha crystallins in
the aging eye's lens, we may be able to delay cataract development,'' Kupfer
said.

   He also predicted that by the year 2000, researchers will begin conducting
human studies to determine if gene therapy can slow down many forms of
retinitis pigmentosa, a group of untreatable diseases of retinal diseases that
affect about 100,000 Americans.

   Retinitis pigmentosa causes a progressive degeneration of the light-sensing
cells in the retina of the eye. Most people with retinitis pigmentosa have  lost
all of their vision sometime between the ages of 20 and 40 years of age,  and
between the ages of 50 and 80 they typically lose their remaining sight.

   The explosion in biotechnology has now made it possible for investigators  to
isolate a defective gene that causes retinitis pigmentosa by studying blood
samples taken from members of families that have the disease, Kupfer said.

   One National Eye Institute grantee is using a mouse with an abnormal gene  to
show that the defective gene could cause retinal degeneration similar to  that
seen in humans.

   Kupfer said the finding moved retinitis pigmentosa research closer to
defining the mechanism of retinal cell degeneration and to developing  molecular
and genetic methods that will alter the course of degenerative  disease.

   In two other predictions, Kupfer said that by the year 2000 scientists will
make major strides in refining and applying retinal cell transplantation to
save the vision of those with age-related macular degeneration, a condition
that is the leading cause of blindness in older Americans, affecting about 1.7
million people.

   And he said that drugs will become available to slow diabetic retinopathy,  a
potentially blinding complication of diabetes that affects about 7 million
Americans.

   Kupfer said that the coming years will see the ``graying'' of the American
population and an increase in potentially blinding age-related diseases such  as
cataract, glaucoma and macular degeneration.

   ``For example , there are now over 32 million Americans age 65 and older,
but by the year 2030, this figure will nearly double to about 66 million
Americans . . . this number is greater than the current combined populations  of
metropolitan New York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, Detroit, Houston, Boston,
Washington, D.C., and Philadelphia.''

   The National Eye Institute is the lead federal agency in conducting and
supporting vision research, funding about 75 percent of all vision research in
the United States. Research to Prevent Blindness is the world's leading
voluntary organization in support of eye research.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                             1181 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 27, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: Five-generation search leads to glaucoma gene

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES

BODY:

    Scientists for the first time have mapped the location of a gene that causes
glaucoma, a breakthrough that could produce new techniques for preventing and
treating the common eye disease.

   About 2 million U.S. adults have glaucoma, the second leading cause of
blindness. Key symptom: loss of peripheral vision, sometimes unnoticed until the
disease is advanced.

   Although genetic studies have been sparse, there's a strong likelihood "well
over half" of people with glaucoma are likely to have the hereditary form, says
Edward Stone, University of Iowa Medical School, Iowa City. Stone spoke at a
science writers seminar.

   His team tracked the gene to a small segment of one chromosome by studying
five generations of one Midwestern family with 22 living members who carry the
gene. The next step is searching the segment to pinpoint the exact location of
the gene, likely to be done within two years, says Stone.

   "Every time you do one of these gene searches, what you find could be a major
player in causing the disease," he adds. Studies are continuing with four other
families, "and the technology is moving ahead so rapidly that soon we may have
other genes involved."

   Identifying and cloning glaucoma-causing genes could lead to earlier
detection, genetic therapies and more effective treatments, he says.


                             1182 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section 9; Page 12; Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

HEADLINE: ENGAGEMENTS;
Sharon Stampfer, M. D. Weitzman

BODY:

   August wedding plans have been announced by Dr. and Mrs. Morris Stampfer of
New Rochelle, N.Y., for their daughter, Sharon Gail Stampfer, and Dr. Matthew
Darrell Weitzman, a son of Dr. and Mrs. David Weitzman of Cardiff, Wales.

   Ms. Stampfer, 23, is an administrative assistant at the American Institute of
Architects, a trade organization in Washington. She graduated from Barnard
College. Her father is a cardiologist in New Rochelle and an associate clinical
professor of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Her mother, Doris L. Stampfer, is the chairwoman of mathematics for the Byram
Hills school district in Armonk, N.Y.

    Dr. Weitzman, 27, is a postdoctoral fellow in gene therapy at the National
Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md. He graduated from the University of Leeds
in England, and received a Ph.D. in molecular virology from the Oxford
Polytechnic Institute in England.

   His mother, Avis Weitzman, is the director of the preschool of the Cardiff
United Synagogue in Cardiff. His father, who retired as vice principal of the
Cardiff Institute for Higher Education, is a curriculum consultant for higher
education in Cardiff.

CORRECTION-DATE: May 2, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

   A report last Sunday about the engagement of Sharon Gail Stampfer to Dr.
Matthew Darrell Weitzman misidentified Ms. Stampfer's mother. She is Deborah L.
Stampfer.


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993


                             1183 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 24, 1993 Saturday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:1,4; B-4:2,3

LENGTH: 624 words

HEADLINE: UCSD keeps brain cells alive outside the brain

BYLINE: DAVID GRAHAM, Staff Writer

BODY:

   Scientists at UCSD have demonstrated a way to keep brain cells alive
indefinitely outside the brain, opening the door to possible therapies that
might eliminate the need for controversial fetal brain tissue transplants. When
brain cells, or neurons, are removed from the brain they typically die under lab
conditions within a month, but by treating the cells with a growth factor from
the brain, neuroscientist Fred Gage was able to keep them alive and replicating.
The cells, harvested from rats, had lived five months when Gage reported his
work recently in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. "This
development allows us to grow neurons in the petri dish, move them to a new dish
where they will keep on growing and dividing, or to freeze and store them for
months, and then thaw them and put in a solution so they grow again," Gage said.

   "During this entire process, neurons retain many of their normal features."
Brain cells capable of reproducing in the lab might be valuable for
transplantation back into the brain to treat conditions such as Parkinson's
disease.

   The lab-grown cells could be used in place of fetal brain tissue transplants
to deliver therapeutic substances to the brain, Gage said. Fetal brain tissue is
rich in the chemical dopamine that is lacking in the brains of people with
Parkinson's disease, which involves a progressive loss of motor control.

   But harvesting it for medical research is politically controversial.
Scientists might insert genes involved in producing dopamine or other substances
into the laboratory neurons and implant them in a patient's brain. It is these
neurons' ability to reproduce that makes them viable for gene therapy because
genes are carried into the cells by a virus, and the virus needs the cellular
machinery of a dividing cell or it cannot penetrate it, scientists said. "This
work is very important for longer-term use in gene therapy for Parkinson's and
other neurological disease involving cell death," said Pamela Mellon, a UCSD
neuroscientist who studies neuron growth but was not involved in Gage's study.
"Being able to have brain cells and introduce new genes in a very key step." In
concept, such gene therapy in people would likely involve taking human fetal
brain cells and growing a continuing supply of them in the lab so that they
could be armed with whatever gene is desired and delivered in therapy, Mellon
said. Gage's discovery, using neurons from the hippocampus region of the brain
of rats, is different from previous attempts that used genes from cancer cells.
Mellon previously had succeeded in keeping neurons alive in the lab by using
genes that are involved in causing cancer to promote the neurons' survival and
reproduction.

   That approach raised questions about how the cancer gene might affect the
cells' other normal behaviors. Gage now hopes to find nourishing substances that
would keep other types of neurons alive, too, in order to broaden the types of
brain cells available for research and potential treatments. To keep the
hippocampal neurons alive, Gage nourished the neurons harvested from fetal rats
with basic fibroblast growth factor, which regulates growth and development of
embryonic brain cells.

   The cells not only lived, but grew and divided. Freezing and manipulating the
cells, as scientists do in their research, did not hinder their survival, he
said. Because the cells are from the brain, they might be expected when
genetically engineered to fare better in brain transplants than muscle cells
that have been used in brain experiments in animals, Gage said.

   He is performing transplants with the hippocampal neurons in animals now. The
other authors of the research are Jasodhara Ray, Daniel Peterson and Malcome
Schinstine.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1184 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 23, 1993, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. A2

LENGTH: 556 words

HEADLINE: A DEFICIENCY OF INFORMATION;
DOCTORS DISCOVERING IMMUNE DEFICIENCIES NOT SO RARE AS THOUGHT

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Many children and some adults who suffer such seemingly unrelated ailments as
repeated ear infections, protracted diarrhea or anemia may have more in common
than bad luck.

   They may have immune deficiencies.

   Doctors once considered immune deficiencies, which leave the body susceptible
to disease, to be rare. But it now appears about half a million Americans and
perhaps 1,000 people in the Pittsburgh area have such deficiencies, said Dr.
Philip Fireman, director of allergy, immunology and rheumatology at Children's
Hospital.

   ''I no longer use the word 'rare,' '' he said yesterday at a conference on
immunodeficiency sponsored by the hospital and the University of Pittsburgh.

   But physician knowledge of immune deficiency varies widely, and Fireman said
he feared that many cases might go undiagnosed, subjecting patients to repeated,
sometimes crippling infections and shortened life spans.

   More than 50 types of immune disorders have been identified in the past 40
years, ranging from relatively mild conditions to fatal diseases such as AIDS.
In most cases, treatments are available, Fireman said.

   Progress in the use of gene therapy offers hope for some of the most serious
cases, said Dr. Thomas Fleisher, chief of immunology services at the National
Institutes of Health.

   Children born without a gene for adenosine deaminase, or ADA, an enzyme for
eliminating certain waste products from cells, normally face overwhelming
infections within the first few months of life unless they can receive a bone
marrow transplant from a sibling with the same tissue type.

   But since September 1990, investigators have been regularly retrieving white
blood cells from two ADA-deficient children, adding the ADA gene to the cells
and reinfusing the cells into the children. Laboratory measures show this first
attempt at gene therapy has boosted the children's immune systems, Fleisher
said.

   ''Both are attending public school for the first time,'' he added.

   Research breakthroughs suggest that it may be possible to introduce the ADA
gene into the bone marrow, where blood cells are created, eliminating the need
to reinfuse the children with genetically altered cells every six weeks,
Fleisher said.

   About 100 cases of ADA deficiency have been identified, Fleisher said.

   Far more common and easier to treat are people who have deficiencies of white
blood cells that produce antibodies, which are proteins that attack germs and
other invaders. These represent about half of all immune deficiencies, Fireman
said.

   Such patients often were treated in the past with antibodies -- gamma
globulin -- injected into muscles. Those intramuscular injections were painful
and of limited effectiveness, because the amount of gamma globulin that could be
injected was insufficient, Fireman said. Today, patients receive intravenous
infusions of gamma globulin that eliminate those shortcomings.

   Immune deficiencies are usually diagnosed in children and are about five
times more common in boys than girls, Fireman said.

   Diagnosis at birth is difficult because babies are protected for several
months by antibodies from their mothers. ''Many of these babies look pretty
healthy for the first three to six months of life,'' he noted.

   Repeated colds and bouts of pneumonia are warning signs of immune deficiency.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1185 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 1993 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times



                  April 20, 1993, TUESDAY , LATE SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 244 words

HEADLINE: 1st Humans Get Dose of Cystic Fibrosis Gene Therapy

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:


   The first human gene therapy experiment targeting a common genetic disorder,
cystic fibrosis, is under way.

   Ironically, these tests may be the first time the common cold virus can do
people some good. Researchers at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
used a modified cold virus like a "delivery van" to transport a normal cystic
fibrosis gene into the airways of a 23-year-old man with the disease, said
principal investigator Dr. Ronald G. Crystal of Cornell University Medical
Center-New York.

   Patients with cystic fibrosis lack a gene that promotes normal airway
function. Having abnormal cystic fibrosis genes causes thick mucus and
lung-damaging buildup.

   Viruses that cause colds and pneumonia already know how to infect airway
cells. Crystal decided to modify a cold virus, making it ineffective at
spreading colds and putting the normal gene inside. He intended to use the virus
"like a Trojan horse or ferry" to get normal genes into the airways.

   In this study, approved last Friday by the Food and Drug Administration, a
patient first gets some nose drops - a test dose with multiple modified viruses.
Twenty-four hours later, a larger dose is delivered by tube into the lungs. Ten
patients will get the treatment.

   The goal: to see whether the new gene makes any normal protein or changes the
patients' symptoms. If safe and effective, the drug could be made into an
aerosol that patients might someday use at home.

GRAPHIC: Gannett News Service

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1993


                             1186 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 20, 1993, Tuesday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; National briefs; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 445 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

BYLINE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   $ 60 million to Columbia

    NEW YORK -- In the largest cash gift given to Columbia
University, businessman John Kluge announced he has donated $ 60
million for a financial aid endowment for minority scholarships at
Columbia College.

   Kluge, a 1937 graduate of the college and chairman of
Metro-media Co., also made two gifts of $ 25 million in 1990 and
1987.

   14% of women battered

   WASHINGTON -- Fourteen percent of U.S. women say they have
been battered by husbands or boyfriends, according to a survey that
found a ""pervasive amount of violence in private relationships. ''

   ""More women are seriously injured by beatings than by car
accidents, muggings and rape combined,'' said Esta Soler, executive
director of the Family Violence Prevention Fund, a San
Francisco-based advocacy group that financed the survey.

   Based on telephone interviews with 1,900 Americans 18 and
older, the survey found that 34 percent of Americans say they have
witnessed an episode of domestic violence.

   Soler's survey, which has a statistical margin of error of
plus or minus 3 percent, found that half of all women believe
battering is not uncommon in relationships with men.

   Cystic fibrosis research

   WASHINGTON -- Researchers have begun transferring normal
genes into cystic fibrosis patients in an experiment they hope will
lead to a cure for the most common fatal genetic disease in the
United States.

   The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute announced that a
pioneering effort using a modified cold virus to treat cystic
fibrosis with a type of gene therapy started on Saturday, the day
after the experimental procedure was approved.

   A version of an adenovirus, a common cold virus, modified to
carry a normal human gene was dripped into the nose and airways of
an unidentified 23-year-old man who has cystic fibrosis.

   ""The patient is fine.  There were no adverse effects, no
fever,'' said Dr. Ronald Crystal, a Cornell University researcher
who developed the gene therapy technique while working at the
National Institutes of Health.  The experiment is being conducted at
the NIH clinical center.

   Parasite in tap water

    MILWAUKEE -- Up to 400,000 people -- half of those served by
the municipal water system -- might have been sickened by a
parasite that got into tap water, the health commissioner said.

   Paul Nannis, the city's top health official, was in
Washington to speak before the House Energy and Commerce
subcommittee on health and the environment.

   He said preliminary estimates on the number of people hit
with diarrhea and nausea by the protozoan cryptosporidium earlier
this month ranged from 211,000 to 400,000.


LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1993


                             1187 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Begins For Fatal Lung Disease

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   FULFILLING hopes that had gathered locomotive force in the past several
months, a 23-year-old man this weekend became the first patient to receive human
gene therapy against cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disorder
in the nation.

   On Saturday, sequestered in a room at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., the man was given a dose of the radical new therapy
through his nasal passages, inhaling a harmless cold virus that had been
genetically altered to enclose a healthy copy of the cystic fibrosis gene the
patient lacked.

    The next morning, he weathered a second and more complex round of the
treatment, receiving droplets of the altered virus drizzled for seven minutes
through a thin tube inserted down his trachea and into the lower lobe of his
left lung. By Sunday evening, he was up and about and cheerfully eating pizza,
his favorite food, seeming to suffer no side effects from the highly
experimental treatment.

   Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, who performed the therapy at the institute, although
he has recently moved to New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York,
announced the event yesterday. "I'm very excited, and I think this helps unfurl
a new era in medicine," he said, adding that he had even saved the syringe used
to administer the gene therapy into the man's lung.

   Dr. James Wilson of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, said: "In my view, this is an extremely important
milestone. I congratulate Ron for having the singular purpose of mind to have
moved forward with these studies."

   Dr. Wilson's group, along with three other research teams, had been competing
with Dr. Crystal for the honor of being the first to apply gene therapy against
cystic fibrosis.

   But scientists warned that the weekend feat was only the first step in what
is sure to be a long series of clinical trials.

   "This is a critical first," said Dr. Robert J. Beall, executive vice
president for medical affairs at the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "It's the first
patient, and it's the first time we've tried to go back and develop a treatment
that gets to the cause of the disease, rather than just treating its symptoms."

   But as fast the field is moving forward, he warned, "we have yet to save a
life."

   The man who served as the pioneer patient is not likely to benefit clinically
from the initial treatment, but will help scientists determine if the method has
a chance of working and how long its effects last. Over the next several weeks,
Dr. Crystal and his colleagues will be checking to see if the essential gene was
delivered to the cells of the patient's traumatized airway passages, if the gene
switched on once it entered the cells, and if that gene began to reverse the
extreme mucus buildup that characterizes cystic fibrosis and accounts for its
lethality.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer from cystic fibrosis, and 1 in 20 people are
silent carriers of the disease trait. People with the disease often die before
the age of 30, after their lungs have been destroyed by recurrent bacterial
infections.

   In the new experiments, Dr. Crystal rallied the services of the adenovirus, a
microbe that normally causes cold-like symptoms in people but that the
scientists had manipulated to prevent it from being able to reproduce and thus
to touch off disease. Instead, the adenovirus merely serves as a molecular
delivery van, infiltrating airway tissue with its prized cargo in tow, a gene
called the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator.

   This gene normally labors to control the flow of chloride through the body's
cells. Lacking a working version of the gene, cystic fibrosis patients suffer
severe salt imbalances that cause abnormal mucus excretions, destruction of the
pancreas and other symptoms.

   Dr. Crystal said animal experiments suggested that the manipulated
adenoviruses had to slip into only 10 percent of a patient's pulmonary cells to
be effective. Evidence indicates that surrounding cells, even if left uninfected
and without an operating cystic fibrosis gene of their own, will respond to the
beneficent impact of their newly improved neighbors, and begin pulsing in unison
to clear mucus buildup from the lungs.

   In the initial phase of the trial, nine other adults will be given adenovirus
droplets in gradually increasing doses. Much remains to be learned, but Dr.
Crystal predicted that if the method came into widespread use, patients would
require repeated doses of it, perhaps every two to three months. Among the
biggest worries is that patients' immune systems will eventually react against
the adenovirus, rejecting the microbe before it can install the needed gene.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1993


                             1188 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 20, 1993, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 329 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS THERAPY BEGINS

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   Fulfilling hopes that had gathered locomotive force in the past several
months, a 23-year-old man last weekend became the first patient to receive human
gene therapy against cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disorder
in the nation.

   On Saturday, sequestered in a room at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., the man was given a dose of the radical new therapy
through his nasal passages, inhaling a harmless cold virus that had been
genetically altered to enclose a healthy copy of the cystic fibrosis gene the
patient lacked.

   The next morning, he weathered a second and more complex round of the
treatment, receiving droplets of the altered virus drizzled for seven minutes
through a thin tube inserted down his trachea and into the lower lobe of his
left lung.

   By Sunday evening, he was up and about and cheerfully eating pizza, his
favorite food, seeming to suffer no side effects from the highly experimental
treatment.

   Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, who performed the therapy at the institute, although
he has recently moved to Cornell Medical College in New York, announced the
event yesterday.

   But scientists warned that the weekend feat was only the first step in what
is sure to be a long series of clinical trials.

   The man who served as the pioneer patient is not likely to benefit clinically
from the initial treatment, but will help scientists determine if the method has
a chance of working and how long its effects last.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer from cystic fibrosis, and 1 in 20 are silent
carriers of the disease trait. People with the disease often die before the age
of 30, after their lungs have been destroyed by recurrent bacterial infections.

   In the new experiments, Crystal rallied the services of the adenovirus, a
microbe that normally causes cold-like symptoms in people but that the
scientists had manipulated to prevent it from being able to reproduce and thus
to touch off disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1189 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 20, 1993, Tuesday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A5

LENGTH: 339 words

HEADLINE: CYSTIC FIBROSIS THERAPY BEGINS

BYLINE: NATALIE ANGIER, NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:


   Fulfilling hopes that had gathered locomotive force in the past several
months, a 23-year-old man last weekend became the first patient to receive human
gene therapy against cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disorder
in the nation.

   On Saturday, sequestered in a room at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., the man was given a dose of the radical new therapy
through his nasal passages, inhaling a harmless cold virus that had been
genetically altered to enclose a healthy copy of the cystic fibrosis gene the
patient lacked.

   The next morning, he weathered a second and more complex round of the
treatment, receiving droplets of the altered virus drizzled for seven minutes
through a thin tube inserted down his trachea and into the lower lobe of his
left lung.

   By Sunday evening, he was up and about and cheerfully eating pizza, his
favorite food, seeming to suffer no side effects from the highly experimental
treatment.

   The man who served as the pioneer patient is not likely to benefit clinically
from the initial treatment, but will help scientists determine if the method has
a chance of working and how long its effects last.

   Over the next several weeks, Crystal and his colleagues will be checking to
see if the essential gene was delivered to the cells of the patient's
traumatized airway passages, if the gene switched on once it entered the cells,
and if that gene began to reverse the extreme mucus buildup that characterizes
cystic fibrosis and accounts for its lethality.

   About 30,000 Americans suffer from cystic fibrosis, and 1 in 20 are silent
carriers of the disease trait. People with the disease often die before the age
of 30, after their lungs have been destroyed by recurrent bacterial infections.

   In the new experiments, Crystal rallied the services of the adenovirus, a
microbe that normally causes cold-like symptoms in people but that the
scientists had manipulated to prevent it from being able to reproduce and thus
to touch off disease.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1190 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)



                      April 20, 1993 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 4D

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: PATIENT TESTING GENE THERAPY ;
DOCTORS HOPE FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS CURE

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Researchers have begun transferring normal genes into cystic fibrosis
patients in an experiment they hope will lead to a cure for the most common
fatal genetic disease in the United States.

   The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute announced yesterday that a
pioneering effort using a modified cold virus to treat cystic fibrosis with a
type of gene therapy started Saturday, the day after the experimental procedure
was approved.

   A version of an adenovirus, a common cold virus, modified to carry a normal
human gene was dripped into the nose and airways of a 23-year-old man who has
cystic fibrosis.

   "The patient is fine. There were no adverse effects. No fever," said Dr.
Ronald Crystal, a Cornell University researcher who developed the gene therapy
technique while working at the National Institutes of Health. "He had a big
pizza for dinner last night."

   Crystal said identification of the patient was being withheld. A second
patient is in isolation awaiting a second try of the technique in about a week,
he said.

   The NIH and the Food and Drug Administration on Friday approved Crystal's
application to treat 10 cystic fibrosis patients with the experimental
technique. The experiment is being conducted at the NIH clinical center.

   "This pioneering research marks the first use of gene therapy for a common
genetic disorder," said Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Heart, Lung
and Blood Institute. "If this approach works, we may finally see a cure for this
lethal disease."

   For the experiment, a cold virus was disabled so it could not cause
infection. It then was modified to contain a normal human gene, which is
defective in cystic fibrosis patients. A solution of the virus was put into the
nose of the CF patient and then dripped into his left lung using a bronchial
tube.

   Cystic fibrosis patients inherit a defect in what is called the cystic
transmembrane conductance regulator gene. This flawed gene interferes with
production of a protein that controls the flow of salt through cells lining the
airways. As a result, heavy mucous builds up in the lungs, leading to
inflammation, progressive lung deterioration and eventually death.

   The therapy is designed to correct the work of the flawed gene by using the
modified cold virus to insert a normal gene into cells of the airways. The cold
virus will infect the lung cells, but will not reproduce itself to cause a
spreading infection.

   "We hope the virus will transfer the normal gene into the center of the cells
to compensate for the abnormal gene that these people have," said Crystal.

   He said the transferred gene will be in the nucleus of the target cells, but
will not become incorporated permanently into the chromosomes. Crystal said this
means that the therapy may have to be repeated periodically.

   Crystal said the same dose will be used on a second patient within a week.
Eight other patients will receive the therapy, at increasing doses, later in the
year.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1993


                             1191 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 1993 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 20, 1993 Tuesday, THIRD

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: RADICAL NEW GENE THERAPY TRIED;
MAN BATTLES CYSTIC FIBROSIS

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER 1993, The New York Times

BODY:

   Fulfilling hopes that had gathered locomotive force in the past several
months, a 23-year-old man this weekend became the first patient to receive human
gene therapy against cystic fibrosis, the most common lethal hereditary disorder
in the nation.

   Saturday, sequestered in a room at the National Heart, Lung and Blood
Institute in Bethesda, Md., the man was given a dose of the radical new therapy
through his nasal passages, inhaling a harmless cold virus that had been
genetically altered to enclose a healthy copy of the cystic fibrosis gene the
patient lacked.

   The next morning, he weathered a second and more complex round of the
treatment, receiving droplets of the altered virus drizzled for seven minutes
through a thin tube inserted down his trachea and into the lower lobe of his
left lung. By Sunday evening, he was up and about and cheerfully eating pizza,
his favorite food, seeming to suffer no side effects from the highly
experimental treatment.

   Ronald Crystal, the doctor who performed the therapy at the institute
although he has recently moved to Cornell Medical College in New York, announced
the event Sunday. "I'm very excited, and I think this helps unfurl a new era in
medicine." He said he saved the syringe used to administer the gene therapy into
the man's lung.

   James Wilson, a doctor at the Human Gene Therapy Center at the University of
Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, said: "In my view, this is an extremely important
milestone. I congratulate Ron for having the singular purpose of mind to have
moved forward with these studies."

   Wilson's group, along with three other research teams, had been competing
with Crystal for the honor of being the first to apply gene therapy against
cystic fibrosis.

   But scientists warned the weekend feat was only the first step in what is
sure to be a long series of clinical trials.

   "This is a critical first," said Robert Beall, a doctor and executive vice
president for medical affairs at the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "It's the first
patient, and it's the first time we've tried to go back and develop a treatment
that gets to the cause of the disease, rather than just treating its symptoms."

   But as fast as the field is moving forward, he warned, "we have yet to save a
life."

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993


                             1192 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 1993 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 20, 1993, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 158 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy attempted for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: Mike Snider

BODY:

    The first human gene therapy experiment targeting cystic fibrosis is under
way.

   CF patients have a flawed gene that causes lung-damaging buildup of thick
mucus. Researchers at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute last weekend
used a modified cold virus to act as a "delivery van" and transport a normal CF
gene into the airways of a 23-year-old man with CF, says principal investigator
Dr. Ronald G. Crystal, Cornell University Medical Center, New York.

   Crystal altered the virus so that it can't spread actual colds and put a
normal CF gene inside, using it "like a Trojan Horse or ferry," he says.

   In mice, the therapy improved airways. In this study, patients' lungs are fed
a virus-filled solution. Nine more patients will get the therapy soon.

   Approved Friday by the Food and Drug Administration, this study, if found
safe and effective, could lead to treatment trials and even to an easy-to-use
aerosol, Crystal says.


                             1193 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: HEALTH; PAGE Z8

LENGTH: 1202 words

HEADLINE: France Defines the Ethics of High-Tech Medicine Law Drafted by Female
Jurist Covers Fertility Treatment, Organ Donation, Gene Therapy

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: Robin Herman, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:

   At 45 years old, Noemlle Lenoir is the first and only female jurist on the
nine-member French supreme court, called the Constitutional Council, which she
joined last year. "The rest of them are in their seventies," she says. "I know I
don't have 'the look.' I can't change now."

   With medical progress outstripping the Napoleonic code, she is France's
leading government expert on biomedical ethics and chief architect of sweeping
new legislation on the social implications of cutting-edge medical technologies.

   While new techniques for test-tube procreation, transplantation of organs and
alteration of human genes had entered the medical repertoire and were becoming
popular, there were few guidelines.

   "There was pressure from doctors; most of the time, they didn't know what to
do," she says. "Politicians were aware of the risk of scandals," and malpractice
actions, once almost unheard of, were on the rise.

   Before joining the court, Lenoir, then a supreme court administrator and
professional magistrate, was asked by the government to report on the state of
bioethics and determine whether new legislation was needed. The bill she helped
craft, if approved as expected this spring, will become the most comprehensive
bioethics legislation in any nation.

   The bill's opening statement stands as a philosophical guide for court
decisions in situations as yet unimagined: "Every human being has the right of
respect for his body. The law guarantees the dignity of the human body . . . it
protects the integrity of the human species." The law also assures the
"inviolabilite'" and "indisponibilite'" of the human body -- that is, no part of
the body can be taken without an individual's consent and the human body cannot
be sold, even with consent.

   In addition, the law tackles head-on moral dilemmas posed by the latest
procreative and lifesaving techniques and draws a line on who should use them.
Among the bill's provisions:

   " Surrogate motherhood arrangements are banned, with criminal penalties for
intermediaries but not for the pregnant woman. In France, any pregnant woman may
give up her infant for adoption after the birth but cannot assign the child to
anyone else.  The government takes charge of all such "abandoned" infants and
arranges adoptions.

   In the United States, private agencies and lawyers openly connect couples
with women willing to carry to term and give birth to an infant who may or may
not be related to them. In disputes, courts have been considering both the
contract and the best interests of the child. About 17 states have laws
addressing surrogacy; most of these prohibit paid surrogacy. Through private
adoption, which is widely permitted however, people can choose who will adopt a
child they relinquish.

   " In vitro fertilization and other fertility treatments are to be strictly
for medical reasons, reserved only for heterosexual couples with infertility
problems and who are of reproductive age. Couples need not be married.
Unattached or postmenopausal women or homosexual couples are not to be medically
assisted in procreation. Use of preserved sperm or eggs from a deceased partner
is prohibited.

   U.S. infertility specialists may treat anyone.

   " Sperm and egg donation are to remain permanently anonymous -- a child has
no right to know the identity of a donor, although medical history will be
available when the child reaches age 18.

   In the United States, the trend is toward more openness as people conceived
during fertility procedures sometimes search for more information about their
origins. Sperm banks generally preserve anonymity but often provide donors'
medical histories in advance.

   " The sale of organs, tissue or blood is outlawed. People who enroll in
medical experiments may not be paid for participation or for samples of their
body products.

   U.S. federal law forbids the sale of transplantable human organs, but people
may be paid for their blood plasma.

   " In the area of gene therapy, genes are to be manipulated only to improve a
patient's health, not to change the genetic blueprint of future generations.

   The U.S. National Institutes of Health has the same guideline for federally
funded research.

   " Information from genetic tests may be used only for medical therapy or
research, thus precluding its use by employers to screen job applicants or by
insurance companies to assign risk categories.

   American researchers are concerned about the confidentiality and possible
misuse of genetic information, but there is no national law banning testing for
non-medical uses.

   " Human genes may not be patented.

   In the United States, biotech companies and the federal government are racing
to decode and patent valuable genes.

   In France, the pending bioethics bill is silent on the still controversial
question of when life begins.

   Some of the proposed French regulations may strike Americans as paternalistic
and as an infringement of rights. The decision to conceal identities of sperm
donors, for example, is because "it didn't seem reasonable to give a child two
fathers and one mother," says Lenoir.  Anonymity "is our concept for adoption as
well. The idea is to consider the child as the child of his parents, to give
predominance to the affective parents, not to the biological."

   In contrast, Americans give biological background greater weight. Direct
contact between biological and adoptive families has become more accepted
through private adoption and "open" adoption, in which contact is continued
among all involved parties.

   Drafting a bioethical law and enforcing it is much simpler in France, where
the health system is run by the government.

   U.S. Rep. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.), who has concentrated on some of the ethical
issues of fertility treatment, says the "biggest obstacle" to tackling such
questions is that U.S. policymakers do not recognize their importance.
"Comparing us to the French," Wyden says, "their policymakers are so far out in
front in terms of even discussing these issues."

   Lenoir visited the United States last month, under the auspices of the U.S.
Information Agency, to see first-hand this country's entrepreneurial approach to
biological progress. She toured infertility and genetic testing clinics,
hospital centers, government gene research centers and Capitol Hill.

   "I think these days medicine is on a slippery slope, with more and more
people asking doctors to try things," she says.  She cites medically assisted
postmenopausal pregnancies and posthumous insemination -- impregnation with a
deceased partner's frozen sperm -- as examples. France's pending legislation,
according to Lenoir, "is a way to say doctors cannot do everything" in a society
where social resources are limited and doctors must make a profit on these
life-affecting situations.

   The French focus on bioethical issues in law is not entirely new. France's
National Advisory Committee on Ethics in Health and Life Sciences was formed in
1983. Its advice is sought by physicians, researchers, legislators and jurists,
but it is not legally binding.

   The new legislation would make ethics a matter of law. The bill has passed
the French Assembly. The French Senate will vote later this spring.


GRAPHIC: PHOTO, FRENCH SUPREME COURT JUSTICE NOELLE LENOIR SAYS MEDICINE IS "ON
A SLIPPERY SLOPE" AS DOCTORS TRY ETHICALLY UNCERTAIN PROCEDURES. COURTESY OF THE
FRENCH CONSTITUTION COUNCIL

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1194 of 1820 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 1993 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 19, 1993 Monday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-7

LENGTH: 858 words

HEADLINE: When newspapers grant anonymity . . .

BYLINE: Gina Lubrano, READERS REPRESENTATIVE

BODY:

   Newspapers sometimes do a balancing act when it comes to the public's right
to know and a person's right to privacy. This became obvious recently when a
reader suffering from brain cancer questioned why the newspaper has not
identified the 51-year-old woman who has been receiving unproven gene therapy to
treat a brain tumor. The reader suspects it is because the woman, who has been
named in other publications, is married to a businessman attorney with clout and
that because of it, the newspaper is protecting the patient and her family. That
is simply not true. The story about the compassionate use of unproven gene
therapy to treat the woman first appeared in the Union-Tribune Dec. 13. The
newspaper had already been working on the story, but needed information from
either the victim or her spokesman. "We thought it was important to be able to
talk to the patient or her husband," said Ellen Bevier, an assistant metro
editor who was in charge of the story.

   The only way to do that "when we broke the story Dec. 13 was to grant the
husband's request for anonymity.

   Otherwise, he wasn't going to talk to us." The newspaper agreed to the
husband's wishes for privacy, got the interview that it needed, and broke the
story that has been widely reported.

   The case has changed federal health policy regarding compassionate use of
gene therapy and has prompted other cancer patients to seek information about
it. Although the woman's name has been used by other publications and the
husband once was considering going on national television with the story, the
Union-Tribune has honored its agreement not to identify the patient or her
family.

   That agreement will remain in effect until circumstances change or until the
full story can be told, said Gerald L. Warren, Union-Tribune editor. It does not
have anything to do with the family's social status.

   The same promise for anonymity would be binding regardless of who is
involved. The newspaper is obligated to keep its promise.

   The Society of Professional Journalists, in its recently published ethics
handbook, points out that it is important "to recognize that the primary ethical
obligation of journalism is to inform the public by seeking truth and reporting
it as fully as possible.

   That obligation must then be balanced against the obligation to respect
individuals and their privacy." The handbook also advises that once a reporter
promises confidentiality: "Keep your promise." It's good advice. o o o Four San
Diego men who are mourning the death of a friend and a colleague in a drowning
accident in Baja California were offended when they saw how the tragedy was
reported in the Union-Tribune. The facts were all wrong.

   Why weren't they consulted, the men wanted to know.

   They were witnesses and could have provided accurate information. The problem
is a common one when articles are written from reports by "official sources."

   The stories are only as accurate as the source and, as is inevitable, some
are more accurate than others. In the majority of the cases involving accidents
or crimes, reporters are not present at the scene.

   The information usually is gathered from law enforcement officials, the
medical examiner or other officials, or from reports.

   Sometimes victims who survive are interviewed.

   If witnesses are identified, reporters attempt to interview them. By using
these methods, reporters usually are able to construct a fairly accurate account
of an incident.

   Sometimes crime suspects or even witnesses will dispute official reports.

   When it's the crime suspect who says a story is wrong, the determination of
who's right and who's wrong usually is left to a jury.

   If witnesses dispute what has happened, reporters usually include their
version as well as the official version. In the case of the death of Michael
Huang, the reporter was not at the scene.

   When he attempted to get information from the coroner or medical examiner, he
was referred to an agent with the district attorney's office in Baja. Based on
information he received, the reporter wrote a story identifying the victim as a
student at the University of Southern California who lived in Alamo, Calif.

   The death was reported in a story that told about the drowning "amid holiday
safety drive" in Baja California. The incorrect information and other aspects of
the story prompted a letter signed by four of Huang's friends, who include a
physician with the Cancer Center at the University of California at San Diego, a
UCSD medical student and two others affiliated with the Cancer Center. They
corrected the Union-Tribune report, saying that Huang was studying for a
master's degree in biology at UCSD, not USC. He lived in San Diego, but his
family is from Walnut Creek, not Alamo as reported. The friends questioned why
they were not contacted.

   The answer is as expected.

   Their names were not made available to the reporter. o o o Gina Lubrano's
column commenting on the media appears Mondays.

   It is the policy of The San Diego Union-Tribune to correct all errors.

   To discuss accuracy or fairness in the news, please write Gina Lubrano,
readers representative, Box 191, San Diego, CA 92112-4106, or telephone
293-1525.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2007


                             1195 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: No One Is Really Immune

BYLINE: By Harold Varmus;  Harold Varmus is a professor of microbiology at the
University of California, San Francisco, and the author, with Robert Weinberg,
of "Genes and the Biology of Cancer." With J. Michael Bishop, he received the
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1989.

BODY:


   A DANCING MATRIX
Voyages Along the Viral Frontier.
By Robin Marantz Henig.
Illustrated. 269 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.

   THE advent of AIDS has demolished the popular but poorly substantiated belief
that modern vaccines and antibiotics can control infectious diseases. Yet
epidemiologists and physicians have known all along that infectious diseases
never really went away. Tuberculosis, malaria and childhood gastroenteritis,
they know, remain the leading causes of death worldwide, despite the signal
triumphs of the medical profession over smallpox, polio and certain bacterial
pneumonias.

   Scholarly interest in infectious diseases has been reinvigorated not only by
new enemies, like the human immunodeficiency virus, the hepatitis C virus and
the bacteria that cause Legionnaires' disease and Lyme disease, but also by some
old enemies that have acquired resistance to conventional therapies (like the
bacillus that causes tuberculosis); by known viruses that reappear in altered
genetic forms to spread unchecked by prior immunity (such as the influenza
virus); and by rare rural pathogens that arrive unheralded in susceptible urban
populations (like the Lassa fever virus).

   The viruses that cause some of the most devastating and intriguing of these
so-called emerging infections are the subjects of Robin Marantz Henig's
provocative and intelligent book "A Dancing Matrix." (The title is adopted from
Lewis Thomas's lyrical musings from "The Lives of a Cell" on the travels of
viruses between hosts.)

   There is an implicit irony about the depth of our knowledge of viruses.
Molecular biologists have now described these relatively simple infectious
agents in wondrous detail, chemically and genetically. Indeed, for some viruses,
we know every letter in the genetic message, every step in the process of
multiplication and every atom's position in the virus particle. But we remain
woefully ill informed about the biological behavior that makes these viruses
important to most people: how they kill cells, cause diseases, get from one host
organism to another, produce the patterns of infection recorded by
epidemiologists, and how their growth could be blocked by drugs.

   Ms. Henig, a medical journalist who has written books about premature babies,
adoption and aging, has read widely in the recent literature about emerging
infections, listened to many of the new field's most articulate spokesmen, and
put together a useful and highly readable account of its central tenets,
conjectures and anecdotes. Although "A Dancing Matrix" lacks the authority,
precision and breadth of last year's report from the Institute of Medicine of
the National Academy of Sciences ("Emerging Infections: Microbial Threats to
Health in the United States"), it is more accessible to lay readers. And
although it lacks the stylistic flair and dramatic intensity of Richard
Preston's essay last year in The New Yorker about the importation of the Ebola
Reston virus in monkeys shipped from the Philippines to Maryland, the scope of
Ms. Henig's book is broader.

   Ms. Henig evaluates the many factors that increase a virus's chances of
emerging in strange new settings -- the deforestation and urbanization that
bring virus-carrying rodents and people together; the farming methods that allow
viruses from birds and mammals to mingle; the international trade that
unwittingly transports virus-bearing insects from country to country
(mosquitoes, for example, sometimes breed in water stagnating in imported used
tires); and the medical practices (organ transplants) and sexual practices of
human beings. All of these, she shows, play a role in the emergence (and
re-emergence) of viral diseases, for all of them augment the number of pathways
viruses can take to get to new populations.

   Even some of the most exotic viruses (Hantaan, Ebola, Lassa, Junin, Machupo)
have already appeared in this country, and there is no virus in the world more
than a long plane flight away. Yet, as Ms. Henig's book makes clear, we have
taken dangerously few of the precautions that might forestall future epidemics.

   For all its strengths, "A Dancing Matrix" is not free from the problems that
often plague science journalism. Ms. Henig includes lengthy descriptions of
certain scientists' unorthodox, weakly substantiated and previously unpublished
notions. She also incorporates too many topics -- such as virus-mediated gene
therapy -- that are decidedly peripheral to the questions at hand. She is
repeatedly and pointlessly condescending when she discusses molecular (rather
than epidemiological) approaches to viruses, despite the fact that molecular
biologists are responsible for much of the recent progress in virology. And by
focusing on secondhand observers and commentators, rather than on the scientists
who actually did the dangerous fieldwork and laboratory experiments, she misses
opportunities to make the science more engaging. In a cameo appearance by D.
Carleton Gajdusek -- the biologist who, while studying the cannibalistic
practices of the Fore tribe in New Guinea, discovered that one can contract a
neurological disease by handling another person's infected brain -- readers only
hear him carping about the narrow-mindedness of his molecularly inclined
trainees.

   Is there another, more devastating viral illness waiting in the wings while
we busily attempt to counter the ravages of AIDS? Sensibly, Ms. Henig does not
try to answer this question. But she does suggest that we could put ourselves in
a better position to answer it. Having shown that emerging infections can be
explained without resorting to Andromeda strains and power-mad scientists, she
pleads for intensified global surveillance of viruses and insects, for new
studies of viral ecology, and for greater attention to the microbial
consequences of travel, trade, construction, medicine and sex. If her message
helps galvanize the public into supporting these costly measures, we may in due
course save money and misery.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993


                             1196 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 1993 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle



                    APRIL 15, 1993, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C2; BUSINESS DIGEST

LENGTH: 71 words

HEADLINE: BAY AREA
 Systemix Teaming Up With Swiss Company

BODY:

    Palo Alto-based Systemix Inc. announced that it will team up with a Swiss
pharmaceutical company to research and develop gene therapies against the human
immunodeficiency virus.

   Terms of the agreement between Systemix and Sandoz Pharmaceutical Corp.  were
not disclosed. Separately, Mountain View-based Protein Design Labs said that it
acquired four anti-viral antibodies and related technology from Sandoz.



                             1197 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2188 words

HEADLINE: Chemists Learn Why Vegetables Are Good for You

BYLINE: By NATALIE ANGIER

BODY:

   CACHED away in the soul of every red-blooded American who fondly recalls when
carnivory was a virtue, and supper wasn't supper without a centerpiece of pork
chops or prime rib, lies the frail hope that all the recent emphasis on fruits,
grains and vegetables, vegetables, vegetables, will somehow turn out to be a
terrible mistake.

   Well, abandon that hope, ye who harbor it. The truth is that the more
researchers understand about the ingredients found in fruits, vegetables, beans
and herbs, the more impressed they are with the power of those compounds to
retard the bodily breakdown that results in cancer and other chronic diseases.
Nutritionists and epidemiologists have long observed that people who eat a
plant-rich diet suffer lower rates of cancer than do meat loyalists, and now
scientists are beginning to figure out why.

    Beyond the well-known benefits of vitamins and fiber, plant foods are plush
with chemicals that have no nutritional value and are not necessary for
immediate survival yet may impede cancer at a variety of stages in its slow,
savage evolution.

   Most of the experiments performed so far have been done on animals or
isolated cells, and no specific ingredient from fruits or vegetables has been
proved in long-term human trials to prevent or retard cancer. But biologists are
encouraged that many laboratory results are in harmony with the empirical
studies of long-lived populations.

   And just when researchers thought they had a reasonable grasp of the basic
anti-cancer compounds that might be found in a healthy diet, they discover a
novel pathway through which ingredients in plants may help foil disease.

   In the current issue of The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
scientists from Children's University Hospital in Heidelberg, Germany, report
that they have isolated a compound called genistein from the urine of people who
eat a traditional Japanese diet, heavy on soybeans and vegetables. Through
test-tube experiments with a synthetic version of the chemical, Dr. Lothar
Schweigerer, his student Theodore Fotsis and their colleagues, have discovered
that genistein blocks an event called angiogenesis, the growth of new blood
vessels.

   That talent could have significant implications for both the prevention and
treatment of many types of solid tumors, including malignancies of the breast,
prostate and brain. Scientists had previously determined that if a tumor was to
expand beyond a millimeter or two in size, or four-hundredths to
eight-hundredths of an inch, it first must foster the growth of new capillaries
around it. Once it is fully vascularized, the malignancy then receives the
oxygen and nourishment it needs to keep swelling, eventually invading the blood
and lymph system and seeding fatal metastatic colonies elsewhere in the body.

   By inhibiting capillary growth, genistein just may keep nascent tumors from
growing beyond harmless dimensions.

   Genistein is found in high concentrations in soybeans and to a somewhat
lesser degree in cruciferous vegetables like cabbage. In those on a traditional
Japanese diet, the scientists found, the urine level of the compound is at least
30 times that of Westerners. Dr. Schweigerer also speculated that such a diet
could explain why, when Japanese men leave their country for several years to
work in the United States or Europe, their rate of invasive prostate cancer
rises sharply. He proposed that any tiny prostate tumors that had been kept in
check by daily intake of, say, miso soup, would finally be free to grow once the
Japanese men had assumed a more Western, genistein-poor culinary style. But he
stressed that this was merely a theory, unsupported by data.

   Nevertheless, if genistein proves its mettle through testing in animals, the
compound may be useful, not only as a dietary measure to prevent cancer, but in
a concentrated form to treat tumors already in progress.

   "This is a fascinating report," said Dr. Judah Folkmann of Harvard Medical
School, who has worked out many of the details of how tumors become vascularized
as they grow. "It's a novel finding. Nobody has ever suggested before that you
could find in the urine certain dietary factors that inhibit the proliferation
of blood vessels, and I think this work will get wide attention."

Therapy With Few Side Effects

    Dr. Folkmann and others view blocking angiogenesis as an ideal sort of
therapy, one that would attack the malignancy while leaving normal tissue
intact. Apart from the sinister demands of tumors, new blood vessels grow in the
adult body only after fairly rare events like extreme injury, heart attack or
the implantation of an embryo in the uterus, and thus any compound that blocked
angiogenesis would have few side effects. Four such blockers are now being
tested against conditions like Kaposi's sarcoma, a highly vascularized tumor
common in AIDS patients. Genistein would be the first compound isolated from
food to be added to the list.

   Encouraged as they are by the findings of anti-carcinogens in foods,
researchers admit that the field of food analysis is in its infancy. Food is
chemically daunting, with every stalk of broccoli or slice of melon composed of
hundreds or thousands of individual yet interacting chemicals. Some plant
products may contain chemicals that promote cancer along with compounds that
inhibit the disease, and it can be difficult to sort out which class of
chemicals predominates in a given food.

   Beyond its inherent difficulties, nutrition has been viewedas an area prone
to faddishness and charlatanism, another reason traditional researchers have
tended to avoid it..

   "Serious scientists have stayed away from the field because it gets tied up
with all the supplementation people and the anti-aging crowd," said Dr. Barry
Halliwell of the University of California at Davis, who studies antioxidant
chemistry. "All the hype has made good scientists wary."

   Nor has there been much encouragement for studies aimed at the prevention of
cancer rather than its treatment. On average only about 5 percent of the
approximately $1.8 billion annual budget of the National Cancer Institute has
been earmarked for disease prevention, with far more going toward expensive and
high-profile studies like those on gene therapy, which, if it works, will take
years before it is of use to many cancer patients.

   "It's predicted that we'll end up spending $1 billion dollars on taxol, a
drug that on average adds about five months to the life of an ovarian cancer
patient," said Dr. James Duke, an economic botanist at the Department of
Agriculture. "I think the country would be a lot better off if we spent $1
billion on cancer prevention." And that sort of investment demands greater
knowledge of the things people put in their mouths.

   To be sure, some of the benefits of a herbivorous diet are what it helps one
avoid: by taking in lots of fruits and vegetables, a person is less likely to
fill up on fatty foods. "There are not a whole lot of good things you can say
about eating animal fat," said Dr. Daniel Nixon of the American Cancer Society,
in Atlanta. What is more, vegetables have fewer calories than do meats and
cheeses, and restricting calorie intake has been shown in animal studies to
sharply reduce the incidence of cancer.

Suppressing Cancer Growth

    The positive benefits of vegetables are many. In the course of metabolizing
energy and using oxygen, the body's cells constantly generate hazardous
molecules called free radicals, which can mutate genes and set the foundation
for cancer. Most of the radicals are sopped up by the body's native antioxidant
enzymes, but yellow and green vegetables, as well as melons and citrus fruits,
contain a wealth of antioxidant compounds, including vitamins C, E and beta
carotene, the precursor to vitamin A.

   Dr. Allan H. Conney, director of the Laboratory for Cancer Research at
Rutgers University, has also found in animal experiments that rosemary, green
tea and curcamin, the chemical responsible for curry's yellow pigment, all
suppress cancer growth, and he says he has evidence that they do so by acting as
antioxidants, neutralizing free radicals before they reach the cell's kingpin
DNA.

   Dr. H. Leon Bradlow of the Strang-Cornell Cancer Research Laboratory in New
York has explored how plant chemicals influence estrogen metabolism and thus how
diet might inhibit breast cancer. Scientists know that estradiol, the precursor
to estrogen, can take one of two metabolic pathways, turning into either a
16-hydroxylated or a 2-hydroxylated form of estrogen. The 16 form is stimulatory
and more dangerously reactive: women with a high risk of breast cancer show
elevated levels of the 16 type in their blood, and researchers have determined
that tissue from breast tumors contains more of the 16-hydroxylated form than
does surrounding, noncancerous breast tissue.

   By contrast, the 2-hydrolyxated form is relatively inert and has been found
to be elevated in women who are vigorous athletes -- exercise is believed to
reduce the risk of breast cancer -- and in those who eat many cruciferous
vegetables like broccoli, brussels sprouts and cabbage.

   Isolating ingredients from these leafy green vegetables, Dr. Bradlow and his
colleagues have shown that one chemical in particular, indole-3-carbinol, will
induce estradiol to follow the harmless metabolic route toward 2-hydroxylation.
A study is now underway in which 60 women are taking daily capsules of 400
milligrams of indole carbinol, equivalent to the amount in half a head of
cabbage. Within several weeks, their levels of the harmless 2-hydroxylated
estrogen had risen to concentrations seen in marathon runners, and the levels
have stayed elevated throughout the months of the ongoing trial.

   The researchers will now be testing lower doses of the compound on larger
groups of women, but whether or not the difference in estrogen metabolism
affects breast cancer rates will take years to sort out.

Protective Enzymes

    Dr. Paul Talalay and his co-workers at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
who last year reported on the detection in broccoli of a robust anti-cancer
ingredient called sulforaphane, continue to focus on this class of protective
compounds. Sulforaphane and other so-called isocyothionates, found in
cruciferous vegetables, mustard, horseradish and many other plants, seem to
guard against cancer by stimulating the production of protective enzymes in the
body.  Such enzymes, also called phase 2 enzymes, detoxify carcinogens and
swiftly flush them out of the body.

   The scientists have been able to identify other enzyme inducers in foods
through a simple system that relies on cultured mouse liver cells and scans for
a spike in phase 2 enzyme activity. Applying the screening method not only to
different vegetables, but to diverse varieties of the same vegetable, they have
found that the amount of inducer ingredients varies tremendously from one sample
to the next, either because of natural genetic variations among strains, or
because of differences in how the vegetables were cultivated.

   "It's all well and good to say eat more vegetables, but the data are
extraordinarily soft on what we mean by that," Dr. Talalay said. "We're trying
to survey all these vegetables grown in all these different natural conditions,
and it's extremely slow going to get this straightened out."

   Nothing in food analysis is proving to be simple. Vitamin C, beyond its
antioxidant muscle, also inhibits the creation of nitrosamine in the stomach, a
potentially dangerous carcinogen. Beyond its suppression of blood vessel growth,
genistein deters the proliferation of cancer cells in test tube experiments. And
fiber, which has resuscitated the breakfast cereal industry (but also is at the
heart of fruits and vegetables), exerts an assortment of positive effects on the
body. It dilutes the concentration of carcinogenic compounds in the colon, so
the toxins have less of a chance of harming the delicate mucosal tissue there,
and it moves everything through the system faster.

   Studying fiber on a microscopic level, Dr. Banderu S. Reddy, chief of
nutritional carcinogenesis at the American Health Foundation in Valhalla, N.Y.,
has determined that it also alters the environment of the gut and colon. Through
a poorly understood mechanism, it discourages the growth of harmful bacteria
that release enzymes believed to promote cancer, probably by transforming
pre-carcinogenic chemicals in food into active agents of cancer. At the same
time, fiber bolsters the growth of benign bacteria, which themselves crowd out
the unsavory strains.

   Other scientists propose that fiber also encourages the creation of the
healthier form of estrogen, and thus may also impede breast cancer. Considered
together, the intricacy and synchronicity of the chemicals in plants argue
firmly against an undue reliance on vitamins and supplements to compensate for a
rotten diet of snacks and french fries. If scientists have yet to understand all
the subtleties of a Brussels sprout, how can anybody hope to recapitulate it in
a pill?

GRAPHIC: Diagrams: "The Real Virtues Of Edible Plants"

Scientists are finding that plant foods are rich in chemicals that may impede
tumors at several different stages of growth. Some substances appear to
counteract environmental factors and toxins that cause mutations in DNA, giving
rise to cancer.

Genistein. Genistein, found in the urine of people with diets rich in soy-based
foods like miso soup, blocks growth of new capillaries that supply some tumors.
It also deters proliferation of cancer cells.

Natural antioxidants. Antioxidants mop up free radicals, highly reactive atoms
or molecules that have lost an electron and are in relentless pursuit of others.
Free-radical damage to DNA can lead to cancer.

Valuable enzymes. Substances found in cabbage-like vegetables induce production
of Phase 2 enzymes, which detoxify carcinogens. Test-tube experiments using
mouse liver cells are identifying other enzyme inducers.

Drawings

Chart: "Potential Cancer Fighters in Foods"
Although no food or food combination has yet been clinically proven to prevent
or retard cancer in people, animal and test-tube research strongly suggests that
many components have specific biological actions that may prove helpful.
Scientists suspect that to treat tumors, compounds would have to be extracted or
synthesized and given in larger doses than those found naturally; on the other
hand, extracts or synthesis might overlook protective compounds in a healthful
varied diet.

Component: Allylic sulfides
Possible disease-fighting properties: May protect against carcinogens by
stimulating production of a detoxification enzyme, glutathione-S-transferase.
Food sources: Garlic and onion.

Component: Carotenoids, (Vitamin A precursors)
Possibel disease-fighting properties: Antioxidants and cell differentiation
agents (cancer cells are nondifferentiated.) .
Food sources: Parsley, carrots, winter squash, sweet potatoes, yams, cantaloupe,
apricots, spinach, kale, turnip greens, citrus fruits

Component: Catechins (tannins)
Possible disease-fighting properties: Antioxidants, linked to lower rates of
gastrointestinal cancer; mechanisms not understood.
Food sources: Green tea, berries

Component: Flavonoids
Possible disease-fighting properties: Block receptor sites for certain hormones
that promote cancers.
Food soruces: Most fruits and vegetables, including parsley, carrots, citrus
fruits, broccoli, cabbage, cucumbers, squash, yams, tomatoes, eggplant, peppers,
soy products, berries.

Component: Genestein
Possible disease-fighting properties: In test tubes, blocks angiogenesis, growth
of new blood vessels, essential for some tumors to grow and spread, and deter
proliferation of cancer cells.
Food sources: Found in urine of people with diets rich in soybeans and, to a
lesser extent, cabbage-family vegetables.

Component: Fiber
Possible disease-fighting properties: Dilutes carcinogenic compounds in colon
and speeds them through digestive system; discourages growth of harmful bacteria
while bolstering healthful ones; may encourage production of healthier form of
estrogen.
Food sources: Whole grains and many vegetables

Component: Indoles
Possible disease-fighting properties: Induce protective enzymes.
Food sources: Cabbage, brussels sprouts, kale

Component: Isothiocyanates
Possible disease-fighting properties: Induce protective enzymes.
Food sources: Mustard, horseradish, radishes

Component: Limonoids
Possible disease-fighting properties: Induce protective enzymes.
Food sources: Citrus fruits

Component: Linolenic acid
Possible disease-fighting properties: Regulates prostaglandin production.
Food sources: Many leafy vegetables and seeds, especially flaxseed.

Component: Lycopene
Possible disease-fighting properties: Antioxidant.
Food sources: Tomatoes, red grapefruit

Component: Monoterpenes
Possible disease-fighting properties: Some antioxidant properties; inhibit
cholesterol production in tumors; aid protective enzyme activity.
Food sources: Parsley, carrots, broccoli, cabbage, cucumbers, squash, yams,
tomatoes, eggplant, pepers, mint, basil, citrus fruits.

Component: Phenolic acids (tannins)
Possible disease-fighting properties: Some antioxidant properties; inhibit
formation of nitrosamine, a carcinogen, and affects enzyme activity.
Food sources: Parsley, carrots, broccoli, cabbage, tomatoes, eggplant, peppers,
citrus fruits, whole grains, berries.

Component: Plant sterols (Vitamin D precursors)
Possible disease-fighting properties: Differentiation agents.
Food sources: Broccoli, cabbage, cucumbers, squash, yams, tomatoes, eggplant,
peppers, soy products, whole grains.

Component: Vitamin C
Possible disease-fighting properties: Antioxidant; inhibits creation of
nitrosamine, a potentially dangerous carcinogen, in the stomach.
Food sources: Citrus fruits, tomatoes, green leafy vegetables, potatoes.

Component: Vitamin E
Possible disease-fighting properties: Antioxidant.
Food sources: Wheat germ, oatmeal, peanuts, nuts, brown rice

(Sources: Dr. Christoper W. W. Beecher; Eating Well Magazine) (pg. C9)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1993


                             1198 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 The Washington Post
                              The Washington Post



                     April 12, 1993, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; PAGE F12

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: Business Briefs

SERIES: Occasional

BYLINE: News Services and Staff Reports

BODY:

   Mobil Corp. said it would integrate all its new venture activity, including
the Strategic Ventures Group, into its operating groups.

   Chairman Allen E. Murray said Mobil took the step because emerging
opportunities in the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, Mexico and Venezuela
were developing more slowly than projected.

   Fairfax-based Mobil established the ventures group early last year to focus
the efforts of its operating groups on emerging opportunities in those parts of
the world.

   Arlington-based AES Corp. said its Argentine partnership successfully bid to
buy a power station for $ 66 million plus debt of $ 61 million.

   AES also will operate the Central Termica San Nicolas S.A. station which is
in San Nicolas, about 150 miles northwest of Buenos Aires.

   AES will own 35 percent of the plant and other partners will own 53 percent.
Employees will own 12 percent through a stock option plan.

   AES said its partners include Ormas, an Argentine engineering firm; CEA, an
affiliate of Public Service Enterprise Group, New Jersey; and an undisclosed
affiliate of an American utility company.

   Interim funding for AES's portion of the project will come from internal cash
flow and temporary credit through the company's corporate and investment banking
firms.

   AES will begin preparing a registration statement to publicly offer $ 75
million of its common stock and $ 75 million of notes. Proceeds will be used to
fund the purchase and for general corporate purposes.

   FiberCom Inc. of Roanoke won a $ 5.8 million contract to help develop a
flight entertainment system for United Airlines Inc.

   The system includes a video screen in front of each passenger and a joystick
and keypad in each armrest, and will allow the airline to offer up to eight
movies and numerous video games, said F. Selby Wellman, FiberCom's vice
president for sales and marketing.

   Telephone handsets in the control units will allow travelers to call home or
connect personal computers or transmit data to their offices.

   GEC Marconi Inflight Systems of Portsmouth, England, is developing the
system, scheduled to be installed on 34 Boeing 777s by mid-1995.

   As a subcontractor, FiberCom will provide 161 zone network telecommunication
units that will allow a central computer on the plane to be connected to
terminals at each seat.

   The units will be manufactured at the company's Roanoke plant.

   OSP Consultants Inc. of Sterling said that Chicago-based OSP Investments Inc.
has acquired 10 percent of the common stock of OSP Consultants, with the option
to acquire up to 40 percent.

   OSP Investments also has provided OSP Consultants a $ 600,000 convertible
debenture that may be redeemed in cash or stock in OSP Consultants.

   OSP Investments is a subsidiary of the Marmon Industrial Corp. of Chicago.

   Genetic Therapy Inc. of Gaithersburg said the Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee of the National Institutes of Health has approved two
company-sponsored human gene therapy trials, including one for the in vivo
administration of genetically altered vectors for the treatment of cystic
fibrosis.

   The trial, which must be approved by the Food and Drug Administration, will
be headed by Jeffrey A. Whitsett of the Children's Hospital Medical Center at
the University of Cincinnati. Genetic Therapy has obtained orphan drug
designation from the FDA for this adenoviral vector product.

   The Cheesecake Factory of Calabasas, Calif., obtained a location at
Bethesda's White Flint Mall -- a 7,700-square-foot space adjacent to a new
40,000-square-foot Borders Bookstore. It is scheduled to open in the first
quarter of 1994.

   Hughes STX Corp. of Lanham formed a new business unit, the Earth Resources
Group, to be headquartered in Sioux Falls, S.D.

   Jean Lawrence of Angel Watch Productions of Washington and Robert
Calambokidis received a six-month option on their feature screenplay, Swim for
the Horizon, from Citadel Pictures in Hollywood.?

   Announcements of news and developments affecting Washington area companies
should be sent to Regional Report, Business News Department, The Washington
Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C., 20071-5302.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1993


                             1199 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 1993 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 10, 1993, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A6

LENGTH: 1270 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC RESEARCH ESCALATES;
BUT LOCATING FLAWS CAN BE A LONG WAY FROM CURING DISEASE

BYLINE: BILL DIETRICH, SEATTLE TIMES

BODY:


   Medicine's gene researchers are a bit like a half-prepared roofing
contractor.

   With increasing confidence, they can find faulty genes, just as a contractor
might find a leak. Curing the disease, or stopping the drip, does not
automatically follow, however.

   The issue arises because the discovery of genes linked with disease is
occurring at an ever-accelerating pace.

   In a two-week period last month, scientists announced major gene-related
findings involving Huntington's disease, some forms of cancer and Lou Gehrig's
disease.

   Then, in yesterday's edition of the journal Cell, researchers reported that
genetic material from a boy who died after spending his entire life in a
protective bubble had helped scientists find the gene that caused his rare
disease, severe combined immune deficiency disease or SCID, which robs the body
of all defenses.

   The announcements are impressive. But what do they mean?

   The good news is that accelerating gene research, in part a byproduct of the
federal government's $ 3 billion Human Genome Project to map human DNA, is
beginning to detect the genes thought to be responsible for about 3,000 human
diseases.

   But finding a gene and curing a disease are two different things. ''For the
short term, it doesn't have a major impact on the treatment of disease,'' said
Jim Evans, a medical genetics researcher and doctor at the university.

   Scientists linked sickle-cell anemia to a recessive gene in 1948 but are
still struggling to find a cure. Scientists found a chromosome defect for Down
syndrome in 1959 and mapped a gene for Huntington's disease in 1983 but haven't
cured them, either.

   There are some success stories, such as the recent beginning of clinical
tests of new gene therapies for cystic fibrosis, Evans noted.

   The cloning of a blood-clotting gene allowed the clotting factor to be
manufactured artificially in a test tube, reducing the threat of AIDS to
hemophiliacs who need blood transfusions.

   And the gene for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or Lou Gehrig's disease,
appears to provide hints of how the disease might be treated.

   In the long run, gene research might produce the most significant advance in
medicine and health since the discovery of vaccines and antibiotics.

   ''It gives us a real piercing insight into the the fundamental causes of many
diseases,'' Evans said. ''The only way we will ever cure these diseases is by
knowing a lot about them. The first step is knowing which gene is responsible.''

   The first advance emerging from this research is often the ability to screen
patients and warn them of genetic defects.

   Correcting those defects may take longer. For example, scientists are hoping
to give hemophiliacs the blood clotting gene directly and end their disease, but
so far have not succeeded.

   ''Having localized and characterized a disease gene doesn't mean we can do
anything about it,'' said Leroy Hood, director of the University of Washington's
new department of molecular biotechnology. ''Every isolated gene is a unique
story'' that may require different therapies, he said.

   Nor does finding one gene necessarily complete the story. ''Most diseases
aren't going to be from just one gene,'' Hood said.

   Human genetics is moving rapidly on two broad fronts.

   Drug companies are using gene splicing, cloning and other tools of the
genetic revolution to come up with new products that fight or prevent disease by
manipulating the body's own genetic system: in essence, by changing a cell's own
internal DNA instruction manual to get it to do what doctors want.

   University, government and hospital labs like Hood's are trying to find which
genes produce which instructions. Some teams are zeroing in on specific
diseases, while others are working on the 15-year project to decipher and read
the human genome, the entire DNA blueprint that makes humans.

   As of January, scientists had mapped 3,427 of the estimated 100,000 human
genes, according to the federal government's National Center for Human Genome
Research. Even that small percentage helps greatly, Evans said. ''It is now much
less daunting than it was five years ago to hunt down a disease gene.''

   However, neither the National Center for Human Genome Research nor any
government agency or lab keep a running tab of genes that have been identified
with specific diseases to give taxpayers a sense of the progress being made.

   Hood and his colleagues are trying to accelerate the big picture of mapping
the entire genome by automating the process. He noted that it took 10 different
scientist teams and at least $ 150 million to find the cystic fibrosis gene. If
the Genome Project is completed, he would expect the cost of such a hunt to drop
to $ 200,000.

   This genetic blueprint scientists are trying to read is immensely complex. If
unraveled, the DNA strand inside each of your cells is about 7 feet long and
contains 3 billion pairs of microscopic nucleotide ''letters'': a volume equal
to the letters in several sets of the Encyclopedia Britannica. About 1 in every
500 of these letters differs from one person to another.

   These letters form what might be thought of as 100,000 sentences or
paragraphs, called genes, organized into 23 pairs of books, called chromosomes.

   Scientists have learned that many diseases stem from several defective genes,
not just one. For example, a predisposition to multiple sclerosis appears caused
by faulty receptor genes on chromosome 6, chromosome 7 and chromosome 14.

   Researchers are trying to erect signposts, called ''genetic markers,'' along
the DNA strand to help disease hunters find their way.

   Hood compared it to a road system. When the Genome Project is completed,
scientists trying to zero in on a disease should fairly easily be able to find
the correct area, like following a road to the correct town. They still might
have to hunt a bit to find the address of the exact house, or gene.

   Since there is no road system now, each team working on a specific disease is
blazing its own trail, at considerable expense.

   Scientists are only beginning to imagine strategies for correcting problems
once defective genes are found.

   Here are some possibilities Hood outlined:

   -- Using a technique called ''antisense'' to tell cells to do the opposite of
what a defective gene wants them to do. Scientists make a length of DNA that is
the mirror image of the defective ''sense'' RNA, the messenger that carries out
the DNA's instructions, canceling its effect.

   -- Using a technique called ''applied molecular evolution'' to get evolution
at the molecular level going in a test tube. It can produce in a month
evolutionary improvements that might take nature millions of years, Hood said.
Scientists select a cross-section of promising molecules and direct their
evolution toward binding with a problem protein associated with a disease. They
can thus neutralize the problem, said Mark Pearson, president of Darwin
Molecular Technologies Inc. of Seattle that is pioneering this technique.

   -- Making good genes artificially and replacing bad ones with them.

   -- Making good protein artificially and injecting it in the body to replace
defective proteins. This technique is already being used to treat kidney disease
and severe anemias.

   -- Replacing key primitive cells called stem cells, which later develop into
a number of different key blood cells. For example, leukemia victims could
receive heavier doses of radiation to more efficiently kill their cancer cells,
then get injections of stem cells that produce new kinds of replacement red and
white blood cells.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1995


                             1200 of 1820 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 1993 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 9, 1993, Friday, 2 STAR Edition

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 799 words

HEADLINE: In spirit of David: a key genetic finding

BYLINE: RUTH SoRELLE, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer; Staff

BODY:

   Nine years after his death, David, Houston's Bubble Boy,
continues to contribute -- this time as the source of genetic
material that helped identify the gene that caused his immune
deficiency.

   The discovery, announced in today's issue of Cell, a
professional scientific journal, paves the way for an eventual test
to identify the defect before and after birth as well as inform
women whether they carry the gene.

   The finding was made by a consortium of scientists from the
National Institutes of Health, Baylor College of Medicine and the
University of Minnesota.

   Years down the road, gene therapy could even provide a cure
before an infant is born.

   The disease, X-linked severe combined immune deficiency,
left David without protection against disease-causing organisms.

   (David's last name has never been revealed, and his family has
asked that the courtesy be continued.)

   His disease is the most common form of severe combined
immune deficiency, which occurs once in every 100,000 live births.

   Half of those cases are the X-linked form.

   The gene for X-linked SCID appears on the X-chromosome.

   Women can carry one form of the mutated, disease-causing gene on
one of their X-chromosomes without suffering from the ailment.

   However, when these women have a male child and pass that defective
gene to him, he has no normal gene because the paired chromosome is
a Y-chromosome lacking in that normal gene.

   David's mother, Carol Ann, was silent for a moment when told
about the finding.

   ""We are so proud,'' she said.  ""David's legacy continues.

   This helps somewhat with the sorrow. ''

   David died at the age of 12 of side effects from a bone
marrow transplant he received Oct. 20, 1983.  He had lived his
entire life in a sterile environment that the media dubbed ""the
bubble. ''

   Dr. William Shearer, the Baylor College of Medicine
physician who treated David during the last few years of his life,
called finding the gene ""a quantum leap in the field. ''

   ""It is so poignant that David's cells that we maintain in
the laboratory have shed light on this ultimate diagnosis,''
Shearer said.

   David ""is leading the way to discoveries that will help a
whole host of babies,'' Shearer said.

   Cells grown from David's tissues have been maintained at the
David Center at Texas Children's Hospital.

   Dr. Howard Rosenblatt, a Baylor doctor named as a co-author
on the Cell paper, said that the cells were maintained for just
such a possibility.

   ""That was the reason for getting a cell line out,''
Rosenblatt said.

   The gene causes a defect in a spot on the cell through which
it takes in an important hormone called interleukin-2 that
regulates the development of disease-fighting cells, chief among
them T-cells.

   The receptor is formed from proteins that three different
genes tell the cell to make.  In X-linked SCID, one of the genes is
defective and causes the receptor to have a shortened portion
called the gamma chain, said Rosenblatt.

   ""IL-2 (interleukin-2) might be able to bind (to the cell)
without an effective gamma chain, but it doesn't do anything to the
cell,'' Rosenblatt said.  ""The gamma chain is critical to signaling
the cells. ''

   Dr. Warren Leonard, chief of the National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute's section on pulmonary and molecular immunology,
led the team that made the discovery.

   He theorizes that the gamma chain on the IL-2 stimulates the
T-cells to mature while still in the place where they are formed,
the thymus.

   ""X-linked SCID patients don't have T-cells,'' he said.

   The finding may help David's sister find out if she carries
the gene and identify the risks to any children she might have.

   ""This affects my family immensely,'' said Carol Ann.  She
and her daughter will participate in testing programs that will
eventually allow doctors to develop ways to analyze patients'
genetic makeup.

   ""It gives us a tool for studying the immune system,'' said
Rosenblatt.

   ""If you don't know what the gene is, you can only look
indirectly for carrier status,'' he said.

   He said the finding is one of several recently in which
genes that cause disease have been located on the X-chromosome.

   ""It's a spinoff from our investment in technology for gene
mapping,'' he said.  Baylor is a site for one of the centers for the
Human Genome Project, a program to map all the genes in the human
blueprint.

   ""This discovery obviously helps us understand why the
disease occurs,'' said Leonard.  ""It also points the direction to
go in for the development of better prenatal and postnatal
diagnosis and carrier identification.

   ""It also points the direction for a genetic therapy,
although there is no gene therapy for this disease right now.  Such
a development could take years. ''

GRAPHIC: Mug: David, the bubble boy (color)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993
