
                              1 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   December 28, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME SHARES TUMBLE 8 PERCENT ON FDA DELAY

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of Genzyme Corp. fell as much as 8 percent yesterday, a day after the
company said the Food and Drug Administration had asked for additional
information on the company's treatment for Fabry disease.

   The delay of a decision on approval of the drug Fabrazyme sparked yet another
round of speculation among investors about whether Genzyme could beat
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. in the race to become the sole provider of a
breakthrough treatment for the rare genetic disorder.

      FDA rules require that only one drug be approved to treat a rare disease
such as Fabry, which affects only a few thousand people worldwide. The "orphan
drug" act gives a company 10 years to sell its drug unhindered by competition in
exchange for being the first to develop a drug to treat a rare disease.

   The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition for one of the Cambridge companies. Both firms submitted their
applications to the FDA in June.

   Analysts say the regulatory agency never before has been faced with two
applications submitted within weeks of each other for nearly identical drugs to
treat the same rare disease. And, they say, the situation puts pressure on the
FDA to approve the better drug or find a loophole that allows approval of both.

   But investors seemed to be hedging their bets following the news that the FDA
had questions about Genzyme's application. The company's shares fell on the
Nasdaq Stock Market while TKT's shares rose $3.31 to close at $35.44.

   A spokeswoman for TKT said the company had no news to announce at this time
but would release any material information it received from the FDA. Analysts
said they expect an FDA decision on TKT's drug Replagal by Jan. 6.

   "It's been tough to handicap it all along," said Bill Tanner, managing
director of SG Cowen Securities in Boston. "As we sit here now, I don't know
that it's any more clear."

   Robert LeBoyer, senior biotechnology analyst with Boston-based Leerink Swann
& Co., said the fact that the FDA has questions about Fabrazyme sheds little
light on what will eventually happen.

   "There's nothing here to say that there's been any change in the competitive
landscape," he said.

   Tanner and LeBoyer said it is not unusual for the FDA to ask for additional
information before reaching a decision. It isn't necessarily a sign that the
agency won't approve Genzyme's drug. And, they said, it isn't necessarily a sign
that TKT has won the race.

   Any number of things could still happen, they said. The FDA could request
additional information on Replagal, delaying the decision for both drugs. The
agency could approve Replagal and later approve Fabrazyme, allowing them to
share the orphan drug status and duke it out in the marketplace.

   Or it could opt to approve one drug and reject the other.

   But, Tanner said, he finds that possibility unlikely. Although the nature of
the two studies makes a side-by-side comparison difficult, he said, the two
drugs are nearly identical and should be equally safe and effective. And the
companies submitted the applications at about the same time.

   "I think we'd have to say that Genzyme is still in the race," Tanner said.
"This just prolongs the anticipation."

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2000


                              2 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           December 28, 2000 Thursday
                                 ESSEX EDITION

SECTION: TOWNS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 327 words

HEADLINE: Future scientist from Vietnam cherishes opportunities in U.S.

BYLINE: CARMEN JURI, STAR-LEDGER STAFF

BODY:

   * Name: Thu Tran    * Hometown:Montclair    * Age: 32    * Achievement:Tran,
a junior at Rutgers-Newark majoring in biology, received a Gates Millennium
Scholarship, allowing her to continue her studies toward her goal of becoming a
research scientist in the biomedical field. The one-year scholarship is for
$3,100 a semester.

    A native of Vietnam, Tran earned an associate's degree in
biology/pre-medicine last spring from Essex County College, where she compiled a
3.94 grade point average.

    Upon graduation, Tran may attend graduate school in the field of bioscience.
With a great interest in gene therapy, she would like to someday become a
researcher.

    Tran was inducted into Phi Theta Kappa, the honor society for two-year
college students.

     * Scholarship: The Gates Millennium Scholars Program, set up by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation, is in its first year with a goal of providing $1
billion over 20 years for thousands of low-income minority students. The program
is being administered by the United Negro College Fund, in partnership with the
Hispanic Scholarship Fund and the American Indian College Fund.

    The amount of each scholarship is based on the individual financial need of
the recipient.

     * Land of Opportunity: Tran said it was difficult for her to attend
university in her homeland because her family had no connections with the
communist government.

    "At the time, the communist government treated students different depending
on the background," Tran said. "If you're smart but your background is no good,
there's no opportunity to go to school."

    Having a "good" background, Tran said, meant some member of the family had
to work for the communist regime, or be a member of the army.

    "I think that in this country, there's more opportunity to succeed," said
Tran, who came from Vietnam in 1996.

    * Personal: Tran has many siblings across the country, including Ly-Le Tran,
a sister who lives in Montclair with her husband, Gary Beaudry.

GRAPHIC: 1. Thu Tran of Montclair, a junior majoring in biology at
Rutgers-Newark, plans to become a research scientist in the biomedical field.
The Essex County College graduate is continuing her studies thanks to a
scholarship set up by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                              3 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 27, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 1321 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
ON THE CUTTING EDGE EMERGING BIOSURGERY FIELD AIMS TO CHANGE PROCEDURES, HEALING
PROCESS

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Imagine surgery without scars. Knee replacements that leave behind no metal.
Heart surgery that harnesses the power of the human body to heal itself. Brain
surgery that replaces vital tissue lost to Parkinson's disease or cancer.

   In the not-too-distant future, scientists and industry observers say, these
will be realities. People's worn-out and damaged parts will be repaired using
biological materials that are absorbed naturally into the body.

      Doctors are already using absorbable glues instead of stitches to close
wounds and incisions, injectable liquids to stave off knee replacement
surgeries, and a small tube made of human bone instead of metal in spinal
surgeries.

   As scientists unravel the mysteries of human biology, companies are forming
to turn that knowledge into products that will improve surgery and overcome its
limitations. The emerging field, known as biosurgery, is a cross between
traditional medical devices and biotechnology.

   And it is one of the fastest-growing areas of the health-care industry, said
Robin R. Young, managing director of life sciences research at investment bank
Stephens Inc.

   By Young's count, the number of companies in the field has grown from seven
to 47 in just five years, the number of products from 26 to 103, and total
revenue from $50 million to more than $1 billion. By 2008, Young predicts,
biosurgery will be a $12 billion market with more than 60 companies and 345
products.

   "These are transforming technologies," Young said. "They will change how
surgeries are done. They will change how patients heal."

   In the past, he said, complications have been considered a necessary evil. If
surgery saved a patient's life, it was deemed a success even if it left behind
severe scarring or led to a lifetime of drug therapy.

   Today's surgeons, however, measure success differently. They strive for less
invasive procedures with shorter recovery times and fewer complications. And
eventually, Young said, they want to operate on patients without leaving any
traces behind - no scars, no metal or plastic parts, no residual aches and
pains.

   Young first became aware of biosurgery, and its possibilities, about four
years ago when he noticed that the sales of specially preserved human heart
valves by a small Georgia company named CryoLife Inc. was hurting the sales of
standard mechanical valves.

   Young was intrigued because the human valves were harder for surgeons to put
in and more expensive than mechanical valves. But it turned out they more
accurately mimicked the action of the original valves and reduced the risk of
blood clots that could lead to heart attacks, he said.

   "It was better for patients and that was the bottom line for surgeons," Young
said.

   Two Cambridge companies, among the leaders in biosurgery, are betting heavily
on the field's future. Genzyme Corp. recently merged two of its divisions and
acquired a company to form Genzyme Biosurgery. Curis Inc. was formed earlier
this year out of the merger of three companies.

   Figuring out the business of biosurgery, however, will have its challenges.
Genzyme, a giant in the biotech industry, has stumbled more than once as it has
ventured into the field. Its surgical products division, now merged into Genzyme
Biosurgery, repeatedly failed to meet Wall Street's expectations.

   "To be honest, we embarrassed ourselves," said Earl "Duke" Collier Jr.,
president of Genzyme Biosurgery. "We thought it would be like selling
pharmaceuticals. We learned the hard way that it's a totally different
business."

   Pharmaceuticals sales representatives are expected to make a dozen calls a
day, Collier said. They drop off literature and drug samples, talk to the doctor
or office staff, and then head off to the next doctor's office.

   Surgical products sales reps, on the other hand, are expected to go into the
operating room to talk to surgeons and answer highly technical questions. And
they are lucky if they can make a dozen sales calls in a week, Collier said.

   Surgeons, he said, are also a much more conservative group, and appropriately
so. Learning to use a new surgical product is much trickier than prescribing a
new pharmaceutical product. And before surgeons adopt the product, they want to
be sure it is going to improve the result or eliminate a serious complication.

   Education and hands-on training become a critical part of a company's sales
and management strategy. In that way, Collier said, biosurgical products have
more in common with traditional medical devices.

   But on the research, development, and manufacturing side, biosurgery is more
like the biotech industry. The science and manufacturing processes are based
more in biology than in engineering mechanical replacements for human parts.

   As Genzyme contemplated whether to stay in the surgical products business,
Collier said, it began to see its earlier missteps as strengths.

   Medical device companies were well-suited to selling the products, but not to
developing or manufacturing them. Biotech companies would suffer the same
transitional woes Genzyme had already been through. Small biosurgery companies
would probably have trouble funding the sales forces needed to market their
products.

   "We began thinking that the difficulty of penetrating this market might give
us a competitive advantage," he said.

   Genzyme Biosurgery will focus on cardiac and orthopedic surgeries,
historically the two biggest areas for medical devices. With its acquisition of
Biomatrix Inc., the company picked up an injectable fluid called Synvisc that
has helped many patients delay total knee replacement surgery.

   The company has another product to treat cartilage damage in the knee, and a
bioabsorbable product called Seprafilm to reduce internal scarring after
surgeries. It is working on cellular and gene therapies that would be delivered
to the heart during surgeries to treat a number of conditions.

   "It's important to have a fair number of products because there is no
blockbuster like Lipitor here," Collier said. "The $500 million product is rare
in surgical products. It's mostly $50 million to $100 million. So you can't bet
the ranch on any one product."

   As biology transforms the nature of medical devices and surgery, however, Dr.
Doros Platika, president and chief executive of Curis, believes the market
opportunities for these products also will grow. Treatments will become
available for conditions that were untreatable or poorly treated.

   Of the 500,000 people nationwide who lose their bladder to cancer or suffer
other serious bladder conditions, Platika said, only 20,000 a year undergo
reconstructive surgery because of the high rate of complications. If Curis
succeeds in its efforts to grow replacement bladders, he believes many more
patients would opt for the surgery.

   But balancing the medical need for a product with economic and practical
considerations is crucial. The company is in late-stage clinical trials for a
product that could repair a urological defect in children, sparing them a life
of kidney problems and even kidney failure.

   The same product could be developed to treat incontinence in the elderly.
But, Platika said, the procedure would be so much more expensive than diapers
that it becomes a tough sell for patients, insurance companies, and investors.

   And as companies venture into the realm of harvesting cells from a patient to
grow customized tissues or organs, he said, business strategies also will
evolve. Sales representatives, surgeons, and patients will have to coordinate
their schedules for procedures. Economies of scale will fade away, and living
cells can't be stored on shelves as they await buyers.

   "But that is the future," Platika said. "We're going to move more and more
away from plastic and metal, and more and more toward natural products - cells
and growth factors - that will give you back what you had naturally."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/JONATHAN WIGGS Earl "Duke" Collier, president
of Genzyme Biosurgery, says the Genzyme division is focusing on cardiac and
orthopedic surgeries. GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/MARK WILSON Daniel R. Omstead, left,
Doros Platika, center, and Michael Tarnow of Curis Inc.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2000


                              4 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 27, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C4

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
FDA SEEKS MORE DATA ON GENZYME DRUG

BYLINE: BY RONALD ROSENBERG and NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration has completed its application review of
Fabrazyme, Genzyme Corp.'s enzyme replacement drug to treat Fabry's disease, and
requested additional data and another study, the company reported yesterday.

   That's expected to delay FDA approval, but not affect Genzyme's financial
performance next year, said Henri Termeer, chairman and chief executive.

      "We are moving forward expeditiously with the investigators and trial
sites for our study and anticipate patient enrollment will begin in January,"
Termeer said in a statement.

   Genzyme plans to embark on a phase 4 trial, which is conducted as a follow-up
study to confirm a product's clinical benefit. The multicenter study, due to
start next year, calls for Genzyme to examine several issues, including
Fabrazyme's ability to prevent deterioration of kidney function.

   For Genzyme, the FDA request comes near the finish line of a hotly contested
race with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. (TKT), which is developing Replagal, a
nearly identical drug to treat Fabry's disease.

   In June, both companies - within days of each other - asked the FDA to
approve their drugs. Each wants to be the exclusive provider of the drug to the
estimated 2,500 men who have Fabry's disease, under the government's "orphan
drug" program, which is designed to encourage the development of treatments for
rare disorders.

   Wall Street analysts have estimated that either Genzyme or TKT will be able
to command as much as $100,000 a year per patient.

   At a scientific meeting in October, the two companies showed how their drugs
reduced a type of fat, called GL-3, that builds up in the kidneys of patients
with this rare inherited disorder. Since Fabry's patients lack a key enzyme,
GL-3 builds up, causing pain and placing them at risk for stroke, kidney damage,
and heart attacks.

   However, a side-by-side comparison of the data presented by TKT and Genzyme
at the meeting was difficult, because each had different goals. TKT's primary
study sought a reduction in pain; eliminating GL-3 was the focus of Genzyme's
pivotal clinical trial.

   In July, Genzyme claimed patent infringement and went to court in Delaware to
block TKT from marketing Replagal, if it is approved. TKT wants the case moved
to US District Court in Boston.

   Genzyme's announcement late yesterday about the FDA's request for additional
data and the phase 4 study came after the stock markets closed.

   Gene Logic to supply custom data to Biogen

   Gene Logic Inc. will supply a customized gene expression database to
Cambridge biotechnology giant Biogen Inc.

   The Maryland provider of genomic information said the database will be
derived from its GeneExpress series of databases, which are used to discover and
validate new drug targets, develop promising therapeutic compounds, and help
facilitate clinical trials.

   Biogen, among the oldest biotech companies, has increasingly incorporated
genomics and related technologies into its research programs to augment its
strengths in biology and to speed drug discovery.

   The company's drug development efforts focus on four areas: cancer,
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, fibrotic diseases, and neurodegenerative
diseases.

   Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

   Curis raises $46.8m with new stock issue

   Curis Inc., which is awaiting regulatory approval to market a product that
spurs bone growth in hard-to-heal fractures, raised $46.8 million in a private
placement of 5.2 million shares of newly issued stock.

   The Cambridge company said it will use the money to help fund its research
and development programs in regenerative medicine, to build its sales and
marketing capabilities, and for potential acquisitions.

   The company is conducting human clinical trials for a product to treat a
pediatric urological disorder known as vesicoureteral reflux, which can cause
serious kidney complications. It is also developing ways to regenerate cells,
tissues, and organs to treat a number of conditions, including heart disease and
diabetes.

   Curis has about 31.3 million shares of outstanding stock, trading at about $8
a share on the Nasdaq exchange.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2000


                              5 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 27, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   Cubic stock drops after warning Stock in San Diego's Cubic Corp. dropped more
than 9 percent yesterday to $26.75, as investors reacted to the company's
announcement that its annual earnings had been slashed due to an $18 million hit
over its MILES military training technology.

   Earnings for the fiscal year ended Sept. 30 totaled $674,000 compared to $14
million last year. SAIC wins $240 million pact San Diego's Science Applications
International Corp. won a contract to provide logistics technology to a variety
of federal agencies.

   Valued at $240 million, the contract stretches over five years, with one
five-year renewal option.

   The contract was awarded by the General Services Administration.

   SAIC, an employee owned research and engineering company with more than $5.5
billion in sales, said the contract includes supply chain operations,
acquisition support and prime vendor services. Remec to make acquisition Remec
Inc. of San Diego has agreed to acquire Pacific Microwave Corp., a privately
owned microwave electronics company based in the Philippines. Terms of the deal
weren't disclosed.

   Pacific Microwave employs 850 workers. Remec is in the throes of trying to
buy another microwave company, Allgon of Sweden, in a stock and cash deal valued
at roughly $265 million.

   But because Remec's shares have plunged 41 percent this year, analysts
speculate that the Allgon deal is in trouble.

   Company officials were not available for comment yesterday.

   Shares in Remec, which makes high-frequency subsystems used in the
transmission of voice, video and data traffic over wireless communications
networks, closed yesterday at $10.19, up $1.19. Levi Strauss gets bank credit
Levi Strauss & Co. got a commitment for a new $1.5 billion bank credit, which
the maker of Levi's and Dockers jeans said would reduce its borrowing costs and
allow it to avoid a $32 million penalty on its existing debt.

   The new credit consists of a $750 million revolving credit line and a $750
million term loan.

   The commitment is from Bank of America, Citicorp USA Inc. and the Bank of
Nova Scotia.

   The San Francisco-based company had until Feb. 1 to raise $300 million to
repay part of the $1.6 billion in bank debt it has outstanding to avoid paying a
penalty. Newport to buy Kensington Newport Corp. of Irvine said it agreed to
acquire Kensington Laboratories Inc., a privately held maker of robotic systems,
for as much as $335 million in stock.

   The agreement will give Newport, which makes equipment used to produce
semiconductors and fiber-optic parts, the rights to more than 20 Kensington
patents. Genzyme asked for more data Genzyme Corp. of Cambridge, Mass., said its
General division had been asked by U.S. regulators to provide additional data on
its Fabrazyme, a treatment for Fabry disease, delaying the drug's approval.

   Genzyme is in a race with smaller rival Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. to be
the first to win U.S. approval for a drug to treat Fabry disease, a rare
metabolic disorder. Because of regulations designed to encourage companies to
develop drugs for rare diseases, the first drug the FDA approves is likely to be
granted seven years of marketing exclusivity and tax benefits. Bradlees to close
all stores Discount retailer Bradlees Inc. confirmed yesterday that it will go
out of business, putting almost 10,000 people out of work.

   The Braintree, Mass.-based company announced it has filed for Chapter 11
bankruptcy protection in New York and agreed to sell its remaining inventory to
Gordon Brothers Retail Partners.

   The company expected all of its 105 stores to close within eight weeks,
company spokesman Fred McGrail said.

   A phaseout of its headquarters and distribution functions will begin this
week.

   The company expects to keep its sales staff through this process, and a
bankruptcy court judge has approved severance payments, which will be at least
two weeks pay. Willamette to provide names Willamette Industries Inc. will
provide hostile suitor Weyerhaeuser Co. with a full list of its shareholders
after an Oregon court ruled in favor of Weyerhaeuser's request for the records.

   Weyerhaeuser is offering to pay $48-a-share for Willamette and assume about
$1.7 billion of debt owed by the paper and lumber company.

   Weyerhaeuser plans to ask Willamette shareholders to elect four of its
candidates to the company's 10-member board of directors at their next annual
meeting in an effort to put pressure on Willamette to accept its offer.

   Willamette's annual meetings are typically held in April.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              6 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   December 26, 2000, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 34 Medicine

LENGTH: 584 words

HEADLINE: OF NOTE

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   Baylor cancer researcher is given $ 1.5 million grant

    Dr. Helen Heslop, a professor of medicine and pediatrics at Baylor College
of Medicine, has been awarded a $ 1.5 million grant to advance her work in
cancer immunotherapy.

   Heslop is one of seven scientists in the United States to receive the Doris
Duke Charitable Foundation's 2000 Distinguished Clinical Scientist Award for
Bench-to-Bedside Translational Research.

   She is on the faculty at the Center for Cell and Gene Therapy at Baylor, The
Methodist Hospital and Texas Children's Hospital.

   Her research will focus on testing new concepts of immunotherapy in children
and adults undergoing stem cell transplantation for malignant disease.

   The Doris Duke Charitable Foundation's Medical Research Program supports
medical study in cardiovascular disease, cancer, AIDS, sickle cell disease and
other blood disorders.

    UTMB taps Kentuckian as chief operating officer

    Karen Sexton will join the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
on Jan. 8 as chief operating officer. Sexton will take over for Janice M.
Feldman, who has held the position of interim COO while the search for a
permanent replacement was conducted.

   Sexton comes to UTMB upon ending a 25-year career at the University of
Kentucky Hospital in Lexington, Ky.

   Her first order of business, Sexton said, will be getting to know the staff,
patients and the community by studying the needs of each and learning how she
can better strengthen the environment around them.

   A native of Kentucky, Sexton received her bachelor's of science degree at
Eastern Kentucky University College of Nursing, her master's of science in
community mental health at UK College of Nursing, and a doctorate from UK.

    UT-Houston enrolling participants in 2 studies

    The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston is seeking
participants for the following studies:

    Family members caring for Alzheimer's patients face increased demands on
their time, emotions and stamina. This can affect their physical and mental
health. Family caregivers are needed as volunteers to take part in an
interactive, educational group to learn strategies to manage stress and decrease
anxiety. To find out more about participating in the nine-week study at the
UT-Houston Center on Aging, call 713-500-3779.

    Men and women using cocaine are needed to participate in a behavioral
research study. Free drug counseling is available. Call 713-500-2840.

    Katy hospital's new chief a longtime administrator

    Dan E. Brown is the new administrator of Christus St. Catherine Hospital in
Katy.

   Brown has been in hospital administration for the past 18 years and has been
administrator of two facilities - Northeast Baptist Hospital and North Central
Baptist Hospital in San Antonio.

   Most recently he was vice president of alternative services for Baptist
Health System, a nonprofit integrated health system in San Antonio. He also was
vice president of planning and marketing for Baptist Memorial Hospital System.

    Baylor leg pain scientists seek volunteers for study

    The Atherosclerosis Research Clinic at Baylor College of Medicine needs
participants for a study on intermittent claudication (leg pain due to blockage
in arteries) and peripheral arterial disease.

   Study participants must be from ages 40 to 80 and experiencing leg pain.
Qualified volunteers will receive free study medication, physical exams, lab
analyses, and other related tests.

   For more information, call 713-798-3171.


GRAPHIC: Mugs: 1. Karen Sexton; 2. Dan E. Brown

TYPE: -LINKS-; Appointments

NOTES: Contact us
 Mail information with a contact name and phone number to: Medicine Page,
Houston Chronicle, P.O. Box 4260, Houston, Texas 77210. Call 713-220-2550 or fax
to 713-220-6806. Send electronic mail to medicine@chron.com and please include
your e-mail address in the message.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 2000


                              7 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                     December 25, 2000 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. 30A

LENGTH: 337 words

HEADLINE: Christmastime and the special gift of sight;
 Vision: For 75 years, Wilmer Eye Institute has helped keep holidays and life in
focus.

BODY:

   HUGH DOWNS, formerly of ABC's aptly named "20/20," serves on its board of
directors. So does former astronaut and retired U.S. Sen. John Glenn. Both have
been patients as well.

    More than 110,000 relatively anonymous men and women sat confidently last
year in the crowded waiting rooms of Johns Hopkins' renowned Wilmer Eye
Institute. Many had little doubt that, when the bandages were removed, their
sight would be vastly improved or restored.

    Cataract surgery, in which a clouded lens is removed and replaced, is all
but routine. The morning-after results are often dramatic. Once thought to be
the stuff of miracles, eye operations are now so successful as to be taken for
granted. Surely, though, most patients say thank you quietly every day.

    With eye surgery heavily marketed - performed in shopping malls! - thanks
are due to many surgeons. Wilmer's, though, are frequently cited as tops in the
nation by U.S. News and World Report.

    In this new century, its scientists predict, doctors will succeed in
transplanting the human retina. Gene therapy will be available to combat eye
diseases. A photo microchip will be implanted to restore sight, and drug therapy
will control abnormal blood vessel growth that leads to vision loss.

    The institute has reported encouraging progress toward treatment of macular
degeneration, the leading cause of blindness among people age 55 or older.

    Wilmer grew to prominence with the generosity of various private givers. It
operated in its first year, 1925, with five full-time faculty members and a
budget of $83,500. Last year, the figures were 118 faculty and $47.9 million.
More than 7,700 major surgeries were performed - not including lasik procedures.

    Christmas seems an especially appropriate time to remember the contributions
of eye surgeons to the quality of our lives. With a staff of caring and
efficient professionals, top to bottom, they enable many of us to read our
holiday cards, to enjoy our trees and to see our children's faces.


LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2001


                              8 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     December 25, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 688 words

HEADLINE: How to make a human, and other 2000 highlights

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   There was little mystery about what would turn out to be Science magazine's
pick for top story this year. Although "genome" still may not be a household
word, most people know that it means the collection of genes that constitute the
recipe book for a human, and that 2000 was the year all the ingredients were
spelled out.

   A year ago, Science magazine noted, the lowly earthworm C. elegans was the
only multi-celled organism whose genome had been completely sequenced. Now,
humans, the fruit fly and the first plant -- a weed that one writer called the
botanist's equivalent of the lab rat -- join the list, and researchers say the
mouse, rat, zebrafish and two species of puffer fish soon will follow. (Don't
you wonder who picks these critters and why the puffer fish gets to go ahead of,
say, a guppy?)

   Genetics dominated science and medical news all year, from the first death in
a gene therapy experiment to promising gene-based treatments for diabetes and
other diseases, and, most recently, to the controversy over genetically
engineered corn and other food products.

   Here are a few other local and national medical stories that dominated
headlines this year:

   Cancer: A group of government science advisers recommended that estrogen,
taken as pills, be considered a carcinogen because of its role in promoting
uterine cancer and, to a lesser extent, breast cancer.

   The American Cancer Society published the largest study ever done on colon
cancer deaths and smoking, concluding that as many as 12% of the former can be
blamed on the latter. Colon cancer should join lung, bladder and an array of
other cancers considered to be at least in part caused by smoking, the society
said.

   Also, results came out from the first human experiments with endostatin, a
drug that attacks tumors by crimping their blood supply. The drug wasn't the
magic bullet many had hoped for, but it was well tolerated and will move into
further testing.

   AIDS: Drug treatments continued to improve and become easier to tolerate.
Combination pills became more common, and the FDA approved a new protease
inhibitor drug in September.

   Scientists also announced that studies of viral evolution suggested that the
AIDS epidemic started to spread in humans around 1930. In 1999, some of the same
researchers linked the origin of the epidemic to a subspecies of chimpanzee.

   Organ transplants: Wisconsin officials and transplant surgeons battled new
federal rules requiring wider sharing of donated organs. The state lost a
federal lawsuit challenging the rules, but has been operating under an organ
payback system with Minnesota and Illinois for livers, the most critically
needed organ.

   Abortion: Mifepristone, better known as RU-486 and even better as the French
abortion pill, won Food and Drug Administration approval in September, giving
women another alternative to surgical termination of an unwanted pregnancy. It
can be used up to seven weeks into a pregnancy and as early as 30 days after the
last period.

   Tissue banks: Three University of Wisconsin-Madison employees, including the
head of its nationally known organ procurement program, were suspended and later
resigned over their roles in a private tissue recovery business. UW adopted new
rules for retrieving and re-marketing donated tissue and bone.

   E. coli: A child died and dozens of people were sickened in an outbreak of E.
coli bacteria tied to two Sizzler restaurants in Milwaukee. A separate outbreak
occurred in a Waukesha school.

   Flu: In some ways, we're ending the year the way we started it, with lots of
news stories about the perils of the flu, and hospitals being overcrowded and
having to divert ambulances. As a friend put it, the flu is the medical writer's
equivalent of a weather story. It's an annual epidemic, which to many people
seems a contradiction of terms. It isn't. The flu season has its unique twists
and turns each year, but it is with us every winter, just like cold and snow.
The most important thing you need to know about the flu is this: Get a shot, and
you probably won't get it.

   Best wishes for a happy and healthy new year.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 2000


                              9 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    DECEMBER 25, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: Court Battle Rages in Gene Patent Case

SOURCE: Boston Globe

BYLINE: Ronald Rosenberg

BODY:
To its detractors, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. is a biotech pirate, seeking to
capture an established company's markets by producing nearly identical drugs
that skirt patent laws.

    To supporters, the Cambridge, Mass., company is an innovator that developed
a new human cell technology, one that will lead to more competition and directly
benefit patients with lower cost therapeutics.

    Among biotechnology analysts, TKT's detractors outnumber its supporters.
Even some local biotech company executives privately question TKT's strategy of
going head-to-head with two of the industry's leading companies: Amgen Inc., the
world's largest bio-pharmaceutical company, which is based in Thousand Oaks
(Ventura County); and Genzyme Corp., TKT's crosstown neighbor in Cambridge.

    Both companies claim TKT is infringing on some of their patents and have
taken their claims to federal court.

    TKT claims to have developed a new gene-activation technology that enables
it to make drugs similar to those of Amgen and Genzyme but through a wholly
different process.

    Amgen has charged that TKT's proposed drug, Dynepo, violates five of its
patents that cover Epogen, Amgen's blockbuster red blood cell stimulator
commonly used to treat anemia in kidney dialysis patients. The Amgen drug has
been on the market since 1989.

    TKT makes Dynepo by turning on the human gene for erythropoietin, the
naturally occurring protein that stimulates the production of red blood cells in
bone marrow but is normally dormant. The switched-on human cells are then grown
in a culture to produce the drug.

    Amgen and TKT are awaiting a decision -- expected any day now -- from U.S.
District Court Judge William Young in that patent infringement case. A nonjury
trial ended in September.

    "TKT has become the lightning rod, attracting a lot of negative attention
because it believes it has an alternative way of making proteins which does not
conflict with Amgen," said William Tanner, biotechnology analyst at S.G. Cowen
Securities in Boston.

    "If Amgen's patents are valid and enforceable, TKT should be stopped, but if
TKT or others have a different mechanism for making the same protein, why should
they not be allowed to pursue it?" Tanner said.

    A similar patent conflict exists between Genzyme and TKT. Genzyme claims TKT
is violating a patent Genzyme licensed from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in
New York to make alpha-galactosidase. This is the enzyme that is missing in
patients with Fabry's disease, a rare disorder that affects 2,000 to 4,000 men
worldwide and causes severe pain and kidney failure.

    The two companies are in a tight race to be the first to gain both Food and
Drug Administration approval for their respective drug treatments and
orphan-drug status, which enables one company to be the sole supplier of drugs
to Fabry's patients for seven years. Each expects to hear from the FDA next
month.

    While TKT has not divulged how it makes its Fabry's drug treatment, called
Replagal, Genzyme's chief counsel, Tom DesRosier, has said that its broad
manufacturing patent is enough to show that TKT is violating it.

    Genzyme filed a patent infringement suit against TKT last summer in U.S.
District Court in Delaware. That case is pending.

    "There are people in the biotech industry who frown upon TKT's strategy
because they believe it is hurtful to litigate some of these biotech patents,"
said Dennis Harp, biotechnology analyst at Deutsche Bank in New York. Harp said
he believes Amgen will ultimately prevail in the courts.

    Dr. Jonas Alsenas, a portfolio manager at Ing Furman Selz Asset Management,
disagrees. He maintains the TKT's gene activation technology is significantly
different from the way Amgen makes Epogen.

    He also cites a Nov. 29 decision by the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in
Washington, D.C., that narrows patent claims and any changes made between the
time the patent is filed and when it is issued.

    "I honestly believe that TKT will win in Judge's Young's courtroom because
of Amgen's very broad interpretations, their inability to prove their case and
the (Circuit Court of Appeals) decision," said Alsenas. "But if TKT loses, its
chances of winning on appeal are now higher."

    Those different outlooks illustrate why TKT has become one of the most
watched biotechnology companies, not only by Wall Street but also by patent
attorneys and other industry executives.

    Rather than using gene activation to develop entirely new therapeutics, TKT
has chosen to go after one of the most lucrative biotech drug arenas against
Amgen and an emerging area in rare diseases pioneered by Genzyme.

    That strategy has alarmed Amgen, Genzyme, and some biotech companies that
have compared TKT to generic drug companies that make lower-priced versions of
existing pharmaceuticals -- not novel therapeutics.

    So TKT is poaching, these opponents claim, looking to steal market share
from established companies that spent considerable time and expense to develop
drugs and create markets for them.

    No one has more to lose by TKT's actions than Amgen, whose Epogen is the
world's best-selling bio-pharmaceutical. Together with its licensed partner,
Johnson & Johnson, Epogen revenues are expected to exceed $4 billion this year.

    With the financial stakes so high, no matter who wins, either Amgen or TKT
is expected to appeal the decision.

    "Expect a fierce battle which could possibly end up in the Supreme Court,"
said Robert M. LeBoyer, biotech analyst for Leerink Swann & Co.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                              10 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              December 22, 2000, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1517 words

HEADLINE: From the heart

SERIES: SUN-TIMES CHRISTMAS SURVIVAL GUIDE

BYLINE: Nancy Moffett

BODY:


   Bill Fitzgerald plans to run 50 miles in the cold today, and he'll spread the
cheers.  For his feat, Children's Memorial Hospital will get cash contributions.

   Funds he raises could go for patient care, research, equipment or education;
uses will be unrestricted, said Jennifer Lopez, development coordinator with the
Children's Memorial Foundation. "That's the kind (of gift) we like the best,"
she said.

   Fitzgerald thus joins street-corner bell ringers and solicitation envelopes
that arrive in mailboxes as steadily as Christmas tunes play shopping malls.

   If doubt over where to send year-end charity dollars adds to your holiday
stress, experts say, just simplify by focusing on what you really care about and
on specific needs you want to address.

   Fitzgerald decided to benefit Children's at least partly because he enjoys
"pretty good health" and wants to share his blessings. The "ultramarathon" of 50
miles will mark his 50th birthday this month.

   Children's uses donations for child advocacy, such as giving safety helmets
to children; for family support services such as its Family Life Center, used by
parents and children at the hospital; for equipment such as the extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation machine bought for the neonatology department to help get
rid of a dangerous substance some babies inhale. Or it could be used for
research, as 50 percent of the unrestricted funds are.  In one research area,
for instance, the neurology team is working on development of gene therapy
approaches to treat Parkinson's disease.

   Donations to: Children's Memorial Foundation, 2300 Children's Plaza Box No.
4, Chicago 60614

   Call: (773) 880-4237

   On the Web: www.childrensmemorial.org

   GIRL TALK: Denise Moreno is the kind of young woman teen girls trust. Two
years ago, when she was making presentations in schools on drugs and alcohol,
girls would pull her aside for a private word about their problems.  "I said,
'Listen, these girls need someone to talk to,' " said Moreno, a worker for
Chicago Youth Centers.

   So she posted fliers and started Girl Power. She billed it as a sort of
weekly rap session and believes it will prevent major problems down the road.
Under the auspices of Chicago Youth Centers, a few dozen 10- to 14-year-olds
from Humboldt Park get together on Fridays and talk about everything from sex to
substance abuse, to body image and college plans. They meet at Centro Nuestro,
3208 W. North.

   "The girls are basically asking questions they would ask their moms if they
could" said Moreno, who will turn 30 in January. "I'm able to break the ice."
She asks only "that they keep their grades up."

   CYC is an independent agency that has worked for more than 40 years in tough
Chicago neighborhoods. It serves more than 11,000 young people each year and
works with local schools and community groups.

   Donations to: Chicago Youth Centers, 104 S. Michigan, Chicago 60603-5902.

   Call: (312) 648-1550

   On the Web: www.

   chicagoyouthcenters.org

   SALVATION IN EV-

   ERY NATION: A radio antenna at 5040 N. Pulaski marks a little-known worldwide
network run by the Salvation Army. SATERN, the Salvation Army Team Emergency
Radio Network, was begun here by Maj. Patrick McPherson. It connects more than
1,600 ham radio operators around the world.

   "If there is a disaster anywhere in the world, we are the most reliable
service to search for people," said Bob Cotner, director of development. "I
could say 'Contact my friend in Liberia,' " and it would be done, Cotner said.

   The Salvation Army also has a little-known Missing Persons program
headquartered in Des Plaines and is one of two agencies authorized by the U.S.
Congress to carry on disaster services.

   Donations to: Salvation Army, 5040 N. Pulaski, Chicago 60630

   Call: (773) 725-1100

   On the Web: www.

   salarmychicago.org

   RX FOR READING: Doctors prescribe books, not just pills and elixirs, for kids
at 39 pediatric clinics in the city.  Literacy Chicago has promoted the Reach
Out and Read program here for three years. It started in Boston: "A doctor
decided that parents she saw would read more to their kids" if the docs actually
ordered it up like medicine, said Joan Ebner, development director for Literacy
Chicago. Literacy Chicago estimates 89,000 children were involved in the program
during well-child visits last year.

   Donations to: Literacy Chicago, 70 E. Lake, 15th floor, Chicago 60601

   Call: (312) 236-0341

   On the Web: www.

   literacychicago.org

   HELP BABIES

   THRIVE: The Infant Welfare Society, established in 1911 to try to keep babies
alive, first opened milk dispensing stations in low-income areas and soon added
medical services for children and their mothers. Now the society runs a
pediatric dental clinic and does ophthalmology, cardiology counseling and mental
health care. It serves more than 12,000 poor children and their mothers each
year. The present facility at 1931 N. Halsted opened in 1970.

   Donations to: Infant Welfare Society of Chicago, 1931 N. Halsted, Chicago
60614

   Call: (312) 751-2800 Ext. 240

   On the Web: www.

   infantwelfare.org

   SOLE PROVIDERS: Money to support the Joffrey Ballet of Chicago goes on stage
but also into schools. Kids who take Joffrey workshops -- a little-known
educational function of the company -- get free ballet shoes, said Dawn Leader,
Joffrey public relations manager. Chicago Public School programs include teacher
training so dance clubs can keep going. Gifts can be earmarked for educational
outreach.  Donors also can earmark funds toward the $ 150,000 per year the
company spends on toe shoes for its dancers.

   Donations to: 70 E. Lake, Suite 1300, Chicago 60601

   Call: (312) 739-0120 Ext. 44

   On the Web: www.

   joffrey.com

   SOAP SKILLS: Women who need work get a job. Women who need a skill get
training. The Enterprising Kitchen gives women a chance to learn and work in a
real-life environment.  They create a line of all-natural handmade soaps and
sell them to fund more training and jobs. The products are marketed with
boutique style and have no animal fats or tallows; only essences of natural
plant and flower extracts are used, with olive oil as a base. All the packaging
is done at the kitchen, 4545 N. Broadway. "It's a real business; women become
invested in it," associate director Ann Jenich said.

   Donations to: Enterprising Kitchen, 4545 N. Broadway, Suite 219, Chicago
60640

   Call: (800) 818-6158

   On the Web: www.theenterprisingkitchen

   .org

   FAR AND NEAR: In Chicago, the Red Cross responds to three fires every night.

   It's well-known that disasters around the world call out the emergency troops
(this week, Illinois sent staff to help tornado victims in Alabama). But the Red
Cross also works in Chicago neighborhoods when home fires take their toll. And
it delivers training on many fronts, said spokeswoman Joan Beaubaire.

   In one little-known program, the agency sells heart defibrillators and trains
users. Schools and public places including the Ravinia Festival have bought the
equipment and taken advantage of the training.

   A new Red Cross initiative is the "I'm OK" program, in which people who live
in senior housing are trained to check in on their peers.

   Donations to: American Red Cross of Greater Chicago, 75 Remittance, Suite
1907, Chicago 60675-1907

   Call: (312) 729-6120

   On the Web: www.

   chicagoredcross.org

   DECODING CLOTH: Casa Guatemala, now 15 years old, was created to work with
the democracy movement in Guatemala. As needs changed, its mission shifted to
focus on Guatemalans in Chicago, who have supplanted Cubans as the city's
third-largest Latino group, executive director Jose Oliva said. The organization
helps with immigration and language issues.

   Its youth group is working on an ambitious project called "Weaving a Peoples
History." Mayans learned to preserve their history in coded cloth patterns after
Spaniards forbade writings in their own language, Oliva said.

   A six-month study developed the histories of 13 different Mayan communities,
and some of the clothing was deciphered.

   "We turned the information into a curriculum for youth," Oliva said. Next
spring, a play will be produced to reflect the history of the Guatemalan people
as reflected in the trajes, the clothing.

   Donations to: Casa Guatemala, 4554 N. Broadway, Suite 219, Chicago 60640

   Call: (773) 334-9101

   On the Web: www.casa

   guatemala.org

   SURF, FOR GOOD-

   NESS' SAKE: The AOL Foundation's year-old www.helping.org site lets you check
out "giving opportunities" specific to your interests or geography. Punch in
your interest to find groups doing the work you would like to support. It has a
database of 650,000 nonprofits and takes no cut from donations made through it
online.  Users pay nothing, nonprofits pay nothing, and advertising is not
accepted.

   "The underlying mission is to make sure that the Internet benefits society,"
said David Eisner, vice president of the AOL Foundation. As Eisner recounts, AOL
Chairman Steve Case said, "Why can't we just make it as easy to give online as
to buy a present?"

   More than a million dollars has been raised so far.

GRAPHIC: Beverly Moore checks finished soap balls at the Enterprising Kitchen,
4545 N. Broadway. The products are sold to fund more training and jobs.  Youth
workers Karen Roberts (left) and Denise Moreno help girls at Centro Nuestro. See
also related stories page 7. ; AL PODGORSKI; SCOTT STEWART

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2000


                              11 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                   December 21, 2000, Thursday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 29A

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: Rochester's challenges warrant state response

BYLINE: Lori Sturdevant; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Rochester, Minn.

BODY:

   Blessed with the behemoth Mayo Clinic, Rochester has long been seen by the
rest of Minnesota as the lucky exception to the Upper Midwest's harsher economic
realities. The place has projected a self-sufficiency laced with just enough
smugness to make it more admired than befriended.

        Rochester and Mayo leaders appreciate the admiration, they indicated
this week. But right now they could use a few more friends, especially at the
State Capitol.

        Rochester and the clinic that dominates it are uniquely blessed, in a
way that benefits the whole state. But they are not spared the challenges facing
other large Minnesota cities and major players in the health care industry. Some
of those challenges are big enough to put Rochester's special status at risk _
and big enough to warrant a state response.

        Most immediate is the coal train threat. The Dakota, Minnesota and
Eastern Railroad proposes to increase the number of coal-carrying trains
rumbling through Rochester every day from two or three to 35 _ one every 40
minutes, night and day. Noisy, dusty, vibrating trains would pass within several
hundred feet of patients at Mayo's Methodist Hospital.

        Former state Sen. Nancy Brataas, R-Rochester, may not be exaggerating
when she calls this proposal "the greatest threat to this city in its history."
The trains could do grave damage to Rochester's greatest asset _ the reputation
of the Mayo Clinic as a desirable place to receive medical care.

        Last week, the federal Surface Transportation Board postponed its
decision on the DM&E request for an additional 60 days. That gives Rochester and
its organizational powerhouse, Brataas, more time to rally opposition. They have
Minnesota's congressional delegation on their side. Now they need Gov. Jesse
Ventura to tell the board as only he can that no third-rate railroad should be
allowed to ruin the Mayo Clinic. If the Legislature could growl a little, too,
it might help.

        While legislators are paying Rochester some overdue attention, they
should take note of the following:

        - Health care is on the verge of being revolutionized by gene therapies
derived from the burgeoning science called genomics, the study of the genetic
composition of living organisms. Researchers at both the Mayo Clinic and the
University of Minnesota worry that despite their best efforts, they are barely
keeping up with the competition in states like Michigan, Maryland and Wisconsin,
where legislatures are ponying up millions for genomics research.

        Shrewdly applied state funding could not only keep Minnesota at the
cutting edge of medical practice in the 21st century, but encourage cost-saving
coordination of effort between Minnesota's two centers of medical research.
There's a fine use for as-yet-unclaimed tobacco settlement money.

        - The Mayo Clinic's 28-year-old medical school has trained about a third
of Minnesota's doctors, about as many as were trained at the University of
Minnesota. A big share of other medical professionals in the state received
either primary or continuing education at Mayo.

        That huge benefit has come cheap for Minnesota taxpayers. The state
increased a tiny stipend for Mayo's medical school to about $9 million per year
several years ago, in response to a deep cut in federal support for the
residency training of physicians.

        Mayo leaders are grateful for the state's helping hand. But they rightly
ask why the state's other hand demands payment of the so-called "provider tax"
on health services. Mayo's provider tax remittance to the state this year will
hit $18 million.

        - Whatever is said about the shortage of skilled workers in the rest of
the state goes double for Rochester. Insufficient labor is the biggest
constraint on growth at Mayo and in the high-tech sector centered around the
city's other major employer, IBM. That in turn means lost opportunity for
southeastern Minnesota.

        Those facts must not be lost on the legislators who set state higher
education spending. Rochester's share is low _ so much so that the city felt
compelled to dedicate a portion of local sales tax revenue to facilities at
Rochester Community and Technical College. No other state school has held out a
tin cup to its host city in that way. It's not fair to Rochester, nor to all the
Minnesotans who benefit from Rochester's special strength.

    .

    _ Lori Sturdevant is a Star Tribune editorial writer and columnist. Contact
her at lsturdevant@startribune.com


GRAPHIC: MAP; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2000


                              12 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   December 21, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 1550 words

HEADLINE: Genes, corn and planets orbited 2000 Controversy, discovery defined
the big stories

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg; Anita Manning; Rita Rubin; Dan Vergano

BODY:

   News in medicine and science can be many things: a research breakthrough
that promises to heal the sick or a raging controversy over public
policy. On this page, we look at some of the stories that captured
attention this year, and some that will reverberate for decades.

   Mapping the genome

   A public-private race to decode the Book of Life, the genetic
blueprint for a complete human, ended in a tie June 26. The publicly
financed Human Genome Project and Celera Genomics, a private biotechnology
company in Rockville, Md., jointly announced that the two programs
independently produced rough drafts of the genetic sequence found
on the 23 pairs of human chromosomes. The human body is believed
to contain 80,000 genes.

   The information is expected to revolutionize our understanding
of disease and launch an era in which medications can be tailored
to a person's genetic makeup. Already, the pharmaceutical industry
is mining information from public and private genetic sequence
databases to develop drugs aimed at specific genetic targets.
It is believed that such medicines will be more powerful and have
fewer side effects than conventional drugs.

   The public effort, led by Francis Collins, who directs the National
Human Genome Research Institute at the National Institutes of
Health, was to be completed by 2005. But Collins pushed the schedule
ahead after Craig Venter launched Celera in May 1998 and announced
he would complete the gene sequencing more quickly and for less
money. Despite their rivalry, which grew heated at times, Venter
and Collins agreed to appear together to announce the completion
of the draft.

   -- Steve Sternberg

   Biotech corn controversy

   Efforts by the biotechnology industry to foster consumer acceptance
of genetically modified foods took a hit in September, when consumer
activists revealed that tests on Taco Bell brand taco shells in
grocery stores found that they contained a type of biotech corn
that had not been approved for human consumption.

   StarLink corn, developed by Aventis CropScience with built-in
pest resistance, was approved by the Environmental Protection
Agency only for animal feed because it contains a protein that
scientists worry could cause an allergic reaction in humans.

   When it was learned that part of the crop of 80 million bushels
of StarLink corn had been inadvertently mixed with conventional
corn, Aventis launched a $ 100 million buyback program, and U.S.
food companies recalled dozens of brands of taco shells, corn
chips, cornmeal and other products.

   StarLink corn has been withdrawn from the market -- none will
be planted in 2001. Aventis has asked the EPA to grant a temporary
clearance to cover corn grown in the past two years, which may
remain in the food supply. Critics are urging the EPA to deny
the request, noting that 44 people have reported illnesses, from
itching to breathing problems, possibly related to the engineered
corn.

   The EPA is evaluating scientific data and has not granted Aventis'
request. Early this month, a panel of scientists reported to the
EPA its conclusion that there is a "medium likelihood" that
the protein in StarLink could cause an allergic reaction, but
that because there is relatively little of the product in the
American diet, it poses a "low probability" of allergy risk.

   Biotech advocates fear that the biocorn episode will undermine
confidence in food safety and regulatory systems.

   -- Anita Manning

   Abortion pill

   Although women in France have had access to RU-486, the "abortion
pill," since 1988, it became available in the USA only in mid-November.

   Abortion advocates hope that RU-486, sold as Mifeprex in the USA,
will increase the number of doctors willing to provide abortions.
In France, the drug is used in 40% of abortions. So far in the
USA, however, physicians who perform surgical abortions have been
the quickest to incorporate Mifeprex into their practices.

   Mifeprex can be used as soon as a woman is pregnant until seven
weeks after her last menstrual period. The drug blocks the hormone
progesterone, required to maintain a pregnancy. In almost every
case, a second drug, misoprostol, which triggers uterine contractions,
must be taken to complete the abortion.

   When the Food and Drug Administration approved Mifeprex on Sept.
28, George W. Bush, then the Republican presidential candidate,
issued a statement criticizing the move.

   "As president, I will work to build a culture that respects life,"
Bush's statement said.  -- Rita Rubin

   Research conflicts

   Public confidence in medical research suffered this year, shaken
by continuing reports of financial conflicts and questionable
treatment decisions among physicians running clinical trials of
drugs in human volunteers.

   Leading the furor were repercussions over the 1999 death of teenager
Jesse Gelsinger in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial.
His death, triggered by an allergic reaction to an experimental
genetic treatment, grabbed more headlines after it was revealed
that lead investigator James Wilson had part ownership of the
treatment under study. The Food and Drug Administration released
a letter this month threatening to permanently bar him from conducting
human research.

   But 2000 also was a year during which the public became acutely
aware of how financial interests could taint the integrity of
science.

   "When an investigator has a financial interest in or funding
by a company with activities related to his or her research, the
research is lower in quality, more likely to favor the sponsor's
product, less likely to be published, and more likely to have
delayed publication," wrote Catherine DeAngelis, head of the
Journal of the American Medical Association, in a November
editorial. Only 19% of research institutions limit the financial
links between researchers and the companies whose drugs they evaluate,
according to a JAMA study.

   Further, exploding demand for patients in drug trials appears
to have exacerbated the strains on safeguards for humans in research
trials, experts concluded at a National Institutes of Health meeting
in August. The demand is driven by FDA requirements and ever-growing
numbers of drugs under study by the pharmaceutical industry.

   Over the past decade, clinical trials emerged as a $ 6 billion
industry, no longer a sidelight for medical schools, which saw
their share of trials drop from 80% in 1991 to 40% by the decade's
end. In their place, contract research organizations hire academics
on behalf of the industry to manage trials. In some cases, the
companies design, analyze and ghost-write the resulting studies
for clients.

   Increasing concern has focused on the potential for conflicts
of interest to undermine public faith in the integrity of researchers.
"Without trust, medical research is doomed," said DeAngelis,
calling for reform of the system.

   -- Dan Vergano

   Planets aplenty

   The detection of planets orbiting nearby stars, a science-fiction
favorite, reached the status of everyday news in 2000. More than
50 "extra-solar" planets now rest on astronomers' registries,
up from 34 at the start of the year.

   Finds included the first planet circling a star (HD27442) in a
stable, Earth-like orbit -- inviting speculation on the possibility
of life in the "habitable zone" around a star -- and smaller,
Saturn-size planets orbiting stars outside our solar system. Past
discoveries featured gas-giant planets, like Jupiter in shape
and composition, but orbiting either bizarrely close to their
star (closer than Mercury orbits the sun) or winging around in
long, eccentric orbits unlike any planets in our solar system.
Newer ones hint at familiar-looking planets.

   "Finally, we're beginning to discover planetary systems that
are not merely the pathological systems of the past -- close-in
giants or giants in highly eccentric orbits," says astronomer
Seth Shostak of the SETI Institute in Mountain View, Calif.

   To discover planets, astronomers rely on detecting periodic, back-and-forth
"wobbles" in the motion of stars. Such motions reveal the presence
of a planet gravitationally tugging on a star.

   Current telescopes can detect planets only about the size of Neptune,
says Paul Butler of the Carnegie Institution of Washington (D.C.),
a member of the most prolific planet-hunting team. Neptune is
more than four times the diameter of Earth.

   From his team's ongoing survey of some 2,000 stars within 200
light-years of Earth, Butler estimates that 5% possess giant planet
companions. Of those, perhaps one in 50 revolves around its star
in an Earth-like orbit. Moons orbiting such an object might meet
the conditions for life, scientists speculate.

   Within three years, scientists expect to detect the first gas-giant
planet orbiting in a stable orbit, like Jupiter's, around a nearby
star. Further out, NASA plans to loft its Space Interferometry
Mission (SIM) probe in 2009. "We're going to attempt to find
Earth-sized planets with it," says NASA's Anne Kinney, who selected
the SIM scientists. "Astronomers are ever intrepid. We'll see
if they can pull this one off."

   -- Dan Vergano

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Keith Simmons and Quin Tian, USA TODAY, photo resource by
Tom Gannam for USA TODAY and NASA (Photo illustration); PHOTO, B/W, Forrest
MacCormack for USA TODAY; PHOTO, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY; Rivals and
colleagues: Francis Collins, left, of the Human Genome Project and Craig Venter
of Celera Genomics raced to map the human genetic code.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2000


                              13 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 20, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 1070 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
TKT TESTS PATENT LAW LIMITS ANALYSTS SEE FIRM AS BOTH PIRATE, PIONEER IN
INFRINGEMENT CASES

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   To its detractors, Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. is a biotech pirate, seeking
to capture an established company's markets by producing nearly identical drugs
that skirt patent laws.

   To supporters, the Cambridge company is an innovator that developed a new
human cell technology, one that will lead to more competition and directly
benefit patients with lower-cost therapeutics.

      Among biotechnology analysts, TKT's detractors outnumber its supporters.
Even some local biotech company executives privately question TKT's strategy of
going head-to-head with two of the industry's leading companies: Amgen Inc., the
world's largest biopharmaceutical company based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., and
Genzyme Corp., TKT's crosstown neighbor in Cambridge.

   Both companies claim TKT is infringing on some of their patents and have
taken their claims to federal court.

   But TKT claims to have developed a new gene-activation technology that
enables it to make drugs similar to those of Amgen and Genzyme but through a
wholly different process.

   Amgen has charged that TKT's proposed drug, Dynepo, violates five of its
patents that cover Epogen, Amgen's blockbuster red blood cell stimulator
commonly used to treat anemia in kidney dialysis patients. The Amgen drug has
been on the market since 1989.

   TKT makes Dynepo by turning on the human gene for erythropoietin, the
naturally occuring protein that stimulates the production of red blood cells in
bone marrow but is normally dormant. The switched-on human cells are then grown
in a culture to produce the drug.

   Amgen and TKT are awaiting a decision - expected any day now - from US
District Court Judge William Young in that patent infringement case. A non-jury
trial ended in September.

   "TKT has become the lightning rod, attracting a lot of negative attention,
because it believes it has an alternative way of making proteins which does not
conflict with Amgen," said William Tanner, biotechnology analyst at S.G. Cowen
Securities in Boston. "If Amgen's patents are valid and are enforceable, TKT
should be stopped. But if TKT or others have a different mechanism for making
the same protein, why should they not be allowed to pursue it?"

   A similar patent conflict exists between Genzyme and TKT. Genzyme claims TKT
is violating a patent Genzyme licensed from Mount Sinai School of Medicine in
New York to make alpha-galactosidase. This is the enzyme that is missing in
patients with Fabry's disease, a rare disorder that affects 2,000 to 4,000 men
worldwide and causes severe pain and kidney failure.

   The two companies are in a tight race to be the first to gain both US Food
and Drug Administration approval for their respective drug treatments and
"orphan drug" status, which enables one company to be the sole supplier of drugs
to Fabry's patients for seven years. Each expects to hear from the FDA within
the coming month.

   While TKT has not divulged how it makes its Fabry's drug treatment, called
Replagal, Genzyme's chief counsel, Tom DesRosier has stated that its broad
manufacturing patent is enough to show that TKT is violating it. Genzyme filed a
patent infringement suit against TKT last summer in US District Court in
Delaware. That case is pending.

   "There are people in the biotech industry who frown upon TKT's strategy
because they believe it is hurtful to litigate some of these biotech patents,"
said Dennis Harp, biotechnology analyst at

   Deutsche Bank in New York. Harp said he believes Amgen will ultimately
prevail in the courts.

   Dr. Jonas Alsenas, a portfolio manager at Ing Furman Selz Asset Management,
disagrees. He maintains TKT's gene activation technology is significantly
different from the way Amgen makes Epogen.

   But he also cites a Nov. 29 decision by the US Circuit Court of Appeals in
Washington, D.C., that narrows patent claims and any changes made between the
time the patent is filed and when it is issued.

   "I honestly believe that TKT will win in Judge Young's courtroom because of
Amgen's very broad interpretations, their inability to prove their case and the
[Circuit Court of Appeals] decision," said Alsenas. "But if TKT loses, its
chances of winning on appeal are now higher."

   Those different outlooks illustrate why TKT has become one of the most
watched biotechnology companies, not only by Wall Street but by patent attorneys
and other industry executives.

   "You have many Wall Street analysts invested in Amgen and want to see them
win," said Kathleen Madden Williams, cochairwoman of the biotechnology patent
practice at the Boston law firm of Palmer & Dodge. "Many of these analysts did
not appreciate the fine poins of the case and how unpredictable the case has
become with the [circuit court] ruling."

   Despite repeated requests, TKT officials declined to be interviewed until
after Judge Young makes his decision.

   TKT was founded by Dr. Richard Selden, its president and chief executive, in
1988 as a gene therapy company. It has only recently expanded into drug
discovery and development.

   But rather than using gene activation to develop entirely new therapeutics,
TKT has chosen to go after one of the most lucrative biotech drug arenas against
Amgen and an emerging area in rare diseases pioneered by Genzyme.

   That strategy has alarmed Amgen, Genzyme, and some biotech companies that
have compared TKT to generic drug companies that make lower-priced versions of
existing pharmaceuticals - not novel therapeutics. So TKT is poaching, these
opponents claim, looking to steal market share from established companies that
spent considerable time and expense to develop drugs and create markets for
them.

   TKT maintains that its drug development technology is unique, so there is
nothing illegal about pursuing existing drug markets. After all, major
pharmaceutical companies are producing very similar cholesterol-lowering drugs
and hypertension medications without a barrage of legal attacks.

   Still, no one has more to lose by TKT's actions than Amgen, whose Epogen is
the world's best-selling biopharmaceutical. Together with its licensed partner,
Johnson & Johnson, Epogen revenues are expected to exceed $4 billion this year.

   With the financial stakes so high, no matter who wins, either Amgen or TKT is
expected to appeal the decision.

   "Expect a fierce battle which could possibly end up in the Supreme Court,"
said Robert M. LeBoyer, biotech analyst for Leerink Swann & Co.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, GLOBE FILE PHOTO /Dr. Richard Selden, right, TKT's president and
chief executive, with Dr. Douglas Treco, senior vice president of research and
development. Selden founded the Cambridge firm in 1988.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2000


                              14 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  December 20, 2000 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. B12, Research Notebook

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: CHRISTMAS TREE THAT KEEPS NEEDLES IS GOAL OF PLANT SPECIALISTS'WORK

SOURCE: Compiled by Richard L. Hill - of The Oregonian staff

BODY:

   Vacuuming dry pine needles off the carpet is part of having a Christmas tree
-- or is it?

   Plant pathologist Gary Chastagner of Washington State University and
geneticist Ulrik Nielsen of the Forest and Landscape Research Institute in
Denmark are working to develop Christmas trees that won't dry up and shed their
needles.

   They have found that some clones of the Nordmann fir have better water
retention after harvest than the original fir. The seed from these trees in
Denmark has been imported for Northwest growers.

   They found that noble and Fraser firs were the only species that consistently
did not have needle shedding when displayed dry, and placing them in water was
effective in maintaining moisture retention at a minimum of three to four weeks.

   Gene therapy step looks promising in production of clotting proteins For the
first time, scientists have used a gene-therapy technique in animals to
continually produce very high amounts of a clotting protein similar to that
lacking in people with hemophilia.

   A lack of this protein, known as factor IX, occurs in hemophilia type B. If
human gene therapy studies could yield sustained factor IX production in high
amounts, then hemophilia patients would no longer need daily injections of the
protein.

   The new research at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill indicates
that the gene-therapy method used in the study may be applied to hemophilia A,
the more common form of the disease.

   A report published Dec. 4 in the journal Molecular Therapy describes the
method of placing a cloned gene into mice.

   "Surprisingly and unexpectedly, we found the mice were producing amounts of
this factor 100 to 1,000 times more than we've observed before," said Dr.
Christopher E. Walsh, clinical director of the university's Gene Therapy Center.

   Two skeletons uncovered at site of French colony near Texas coast
Archaeologists with the Texas Historical Commission have unearthed what they
hope will be confirmation that the French, not the Spanish, led the way in the
settlement of Texas.

   On the banks of Garcitas Creek, south of Victoria near the Texas coast, two
skeletons have been unearthed. They are thought to be those of French colonists
who helped build Fort St. Louis more than 300 years ago.

   More than 100 French colonists and soldiers were led to the New World by
explorer Rene Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle in 1685.

   Though he was searching for the mouth of the Mississippi River, La Salle
overshot his mark and entered Matagorda Bay. Jeff Durst, assistant project
director, said people began dying from disease and hardship as soon as they hit
the Gulf Coast.

   When the Karankawa tribe overran the fort in 1688, only about 25 colonists
remained.

   Spanish soldiers were later ordered to find the French fort and destroy it.
Spanish Gen. Alonso De Leon burned Fort St. Louis to the ground in 1690, and
there have been enduring tales that the Spanish later built their own presidio
atop the ruins.

   Durst said proof of that Spanish fort was found just days before the
discovery of the skeletons.

   Major Alaskan glacier shrinking, will form large fjord near Valdez

   A massive glacier in Alaska appears headed for disintegration.

   Alaska's Columbia Glacier, which stretches from the Chugach Mountains into
Prince William Sound near Valdez, has retreated more than seven miles and
thinned significantly since 1982, breaking off new icebergs into the sound much
faster than it is accumulating snow.

   A detailed analysis of the glacier based on field observations, aerial
surveillance and computer modeling shows the "retreat has been erratic but
continues at approximately" a half-mile per year, Tad Pfeffer of the University
of Colorado at Boulder and colleagues wrote in the Nov. 28 issue of the journal
EOS.

   The glacier eventually could retreat as far as 15 miles up the valley it has
carved out and create a spectacular fjord "to rival Glacier Bay" in Alaska
within 50 years, and perhaps in less than a decade, they wrote.

   Compiled by Richard L. Hill

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2000


                              15 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 19, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. C-7

LENGTH: 224 words

HEADLINE: UPMC PLANS GENE THERAPY TEST TO AID HEART MUSCLE

BODY:


   A new gene therapy to grow blood vessels in oxygen-starved heart muscle will
be tested at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, officials said
yesterday.

   A harmless virus carrying a gene, called hypoxia inducible factor one alpha,
or HIF-1 alpha, will be injected into the heart muscle of some patients
undergoing bypass surgery. The gene makes a protein that signals cells to make
other proteins for angiogenesis, or the formation of blood vessels.

   During bypass surgery, doctors restore blood flow and oxygen to the heart
muscle by constructing conduits around blocked arteries. But sometimes a blood
vessel may have too many clogs to bypass or is too small to open up with
angioplasty, so the heart muscle it supplies remains vulnerable to damage.

   In the new study, the surgeon will inject the experimental gene directly into
those high-risk regions of heart muscle. The hope is that new blood vessels will
form to supply adequate oxygen to the tissue.

   Animal studies indicate that the technique works and is not toxic, said
surgeon Dr. Kenneth McCurry, principal investigator for the Pittsburgh arm of
the study.

   About 20 patients from six centers, including UPMC, will participate in the
safety and efficacy trial, which is sponsored by Genzyme Surgical Products and
has been reviewed by federal authorities.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2000


                              16 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 17, 2000, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy grant to focus on diabetes

SOURCE: Knight Ridder Tribune News

BYLINE: CHRISTINE MORRIS

DATELINE: MIAMI

BODY:

   MIAMI - An "exceptionally significant" collaboration to develop gene therapy
for fighting diabetes will be announced Wednesday by the University of Miami and
the University of Florida, using a $ 10.4 million grant from the Juvenile
Diabetes Research Foundation.

   "It's a big initiative, putting the universities together to cure a disease,"
said Dr. Camillo Ricordi, scientific director of UM's Diabetes Research
Institute. UF is internationally recognized for its gene therapy research, while
the UM Institute is a world leader in the transplantation of islet cells, the
cells in the pancreas that make insulin.

   In Type I diabetes, the most serious form, the body destroys islet cells and
so cannot produce insulin, which helps convert food into energy.

   More than a million Americans battle the disease, many suffering
complications such as heart disease, stroke and blindness.

   Researchers at the new JDRF Gene Therapy Center for the Prevention of
Diabetes and Its Complications will focus on increasing the survival of
transplanted islet cells, which are susceptible to inflammatory damage or
rejection.

   "We may be losing a significant part of the islets that are transplanted
before they start working," said Ricordi, who was a leader in developing the
technology for harvesting islet cells from donated pancreases.

   By putting corrective genes in the cells, researchers hope to make the cells
resistant to damage. UF will try to use a virus known as the adeno-associated
virus, or AAV, as a means of delivering the genes to the cells.

   It's a promising delivery system, because it apparently causes no disease and
the body's immune system does not attack it, said Dr. Luca Inverardi, the
principal investigator for UM's core facility, who called the collaboration "an
extraordinary adventure."

   "The potential for gene therapy is huge and likely to impact on all aspects
of medicine," said Dr. Elizabeth Fenjves, head of the UM Institute's gene
therapy program. "If genes are appropriately delivered, they can persist for the
life of the cell and potentially lead to a cure."

   Reducing the number of cells needed to reverse the diabetes is a major goal
because the number of donor pancreases falls far short of the need.

   Ricordi said 1,200 pancreases were available last year; 2 million to 3
million people with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes need insulin.

   Finding a cure for diabetes "is a very ambitious goal," said Dr. Mark
Atkinson, director of the new center and of UF's Center for Immunology and
Transplantation. "But we feel we have a very ambitious set of investigators who
can tackle that lofty goal."

   Researchers also will work to reduce the complications suffered by diabetes
patients who undergo kidney transplants and to fight diabetes-related blindness.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2000


                              17 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    December 15, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 395 words

HEADLINE: IN BRIEF

BODY:



   * Manugistics Group, a software provider in Rockville, won approval to sell
its products to NATO's 19 member nations, 27 partner countries and governmental
agencies. The company met the standards set by the NATO Consultation Command and
Control Agency (NC3A), which is responsible for offering scientific and
technical support to the transatlantic body. Through this deal, Manugistics
hopes to build upon its government business. Earlier this month, the software
firm closed the largest deal in its 30-year history when it was chosen as a
vendor for the U.S. military. Under this agreement, NATO members need only issue
a purchase order to buy Manugistics products under contract terms prenegotiated
between Manugistics and NC3A.



   * BioReliance, a Rockville biological testing and manufacturing company, has
won a five-year contract worth up to $ 6 million from the National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases to help develop gene therapies, the company
said. The company has agreed to produce viral vectors, a virus-based mechanism
that is a key component of gene therapy. Gene therapy involves treating a
disease by replacing defective genes with normal or genetically altered ones.
The institute will use the materials in upcoming human tests of new gene
therapies for infectious diseases such as AIDS.


   * Invitrogen, the San Diego firm that acquired Life Technologies Inc. of
Rockville, is moving about 400 of its remaining Maryland workers to its facility
in Frederick. Invitrogen acquired Life Technologies in September and had laid
off about 30 workers at the Rockville facility to cut costs and consolidate its
workforce, said Dan Peoples, a company spokesman.


   * NobleStar, a Reston-based digital business consulting firm, announced its
acquisition of Roaming Factory, a Swedish wireless-communications consulting
firm. The two companies did not disclose the exact value of the
"multimillion-dollar" cash-and-stock deal, but they did say it will close
immediately. NobleStar hopes the acquisition will broaden its client
base--reaching both new new industries and new locales.


   * Ciena, a Linthicum, Md., maker of fiber-optic equipment, announced its
plans to offer a an optical switch platform that can be upgraded with software
to meet the future needs of telecommunication carriers or Internet service
providers.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2000


                              18 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   December 14, 2000 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: WEST ZONER; HILLSBORO Pg. 17

LENGTH: 842 words

HEADLINE: PLATT ELECTRIC INFUSED WITH GIVING ETHIC

SOURCE: TOM QUINN - The Oregonian

DATELINE: BEAVERTON

BODY:

   Summary: The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation tops the Beaverton company's list,
but philanthropist Harvey Platt doesn't stop there

   Harvey Platt doesn't play golf. He doesn't fish, climb mountains or try to
balloon around the world, either.

   Instead, when the chief executive officer of Beaverton-based Platt Electric
Supply wants to escape the grind of running a company with 800 employees in six
states and $300 million in annual revenue, he pops open a spreadsheet.

   Like a baseball fan poring over a box score, Platt studies the latest
fund-raising effort to fight a debilitating disease. Later, he might pick up the
phone and round up donations to help a local burn victim.

   Platt's hobby is philanthropy.

   Next week, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will be on the receiving end of
Platt's generosity again as he and his employees complete their Holiday Dream
2000 campaign. For the first time in the 12 years the company has sponsored the
event, the total raised for the foundation could exceed $200,000.

   "A lot of companies are generous and cut checks," said Cathy Gidley,
executive director of Oregon's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Platt Electric's
primary charity. "But Harvey is very rare. His whole philosophy, every single
piece of his operation, incorporates our campaign to raise money and awareness.

   "If we had 20 Harvey Platts out there, we'd never have to have another
fund-raising event."

   The check from Holiday Dream 2000 will represent about 25 percent of the
foundation's annual budget, Gidley said. It also will bring the company's total
contribution to the foundation to $1.25 million in the past 12 years.

   "It's really wonderful," she said.

   From company raffles to charity golf tournaments, benefit dance shows to
walk-a-thons, Platt Electric is an innovative and uncommon experiment in
economics. The pursuit of profit goes hand-in-hand with dedication to the
community.

   The core idea is simple enough.

   "We've been very fortunate," Platt said, alluding to the success his company
has enjoyed since its founding in 1953. "I think it's our responsibility to do
what we can for those who need help. When you watch a kid with cystic fibrosis
get sick and die, it puts everything in perspective."

   An often fatal genetic disease, cystic fibrosis is marked by a thick
secretion of mucus that blocks respiratory and digestive tracts. Symptoms
include persistent coughing, wheezing or pneumonia; excessive appetite but poor
weight gain; and bulky stools.

   For Platt, the effort to give starts with his employees and radiates out.

   "If you recruit people who care about these issues, you're going to have a
better work force. They're going to care about the customer and doing the right
thing," he said. "Ultimately, it's going to serve us all better. I see no
downside."

   Like other forms of recreation, philanthropy is a pursuit often gauged by
numbers -- and for Platt, 32 is just as important as 200,000.

   When the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation was established in 1955, most people with
the disease didn't live long enough to enter grade school.

   By 1989, the year Platt and his company adopted the foundation as its primary
charity, someone with the affliction might hope to survive to get a driver's
license.

   Today, life expectancy is 32. With promising treatments such as gene therapy
on the horizon, the future is a little brighter for people with the disease --
roughly 30,000 nationwide and 700 in Oregon.

   "Whatever the scientists are doing is working," said Platt, noting that
virtually all the money his company raises goes toward research into new
therapies. "I recently attended a seminar on how to take care of adults with CF.
That's a problem you want to have."

   Although the numbers outline a story of progress, Platt Electric doesn't have
to look far to find evidence that its efforts are making a difference.

   The company first adopted cystic fibrosis as its cause after an employee's
son was diagnosed with the disease. That boy is now a man, with a full-time job
and a pilot's license.

   Although the bulk of Platt's charitable efforts go toward cystic fibrosis,
the caring doesn't stop there.

   Through the years, countless Oregonians in need have found an angel in the
Beaverton chief executive officer. A simple gut check is the only barometer
Platt needs to know whether to get involved.

   Recently, after reading The Oregonian's Season of Sharing Wishbook, Platt
teamed up with his wife, Sandy, to make the holidays a little jollier for Joseph
Stupfel.

   The Southeast Portland man has muscular dystrophy, a disease that has
destroyed his muscles and made communicating with others difficult. The couple
designated their $3,000 gift to help Stupfel buy a computer and software. He
plans to write a book for the parents of children with muscular dystrophy.

   Stupfel, like others on the receiving end, must be happy that Platt doesn't
spend a lot of time working on his backswing at Pumpkin Ridge.


   You can reach Tom Quinn at 503-294-5963 or by e-mail at
thomasquinn@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2000


                              19 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   December 14, 2000 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SOUTHWEST ZONER; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 838 words

HEADLINE: PLATT ELECTRIC'S CEO INFUSES COMPANY WITH ETHIC OF GIVING

SOURCE: By TOM QUINN, The Oregonian

DATELINE: BEAVERTON

BODY:

   Cystic fibrosis tops the Beaverton company's list, but philanthropist Harvey
Platt doesn't stop there

   Harvey Platt doesn't play golf. He doesn't fish, climb mountains or try to
balloon around the world, either.

   Instead, when the chief executive officer of Beaverton-based Platt Electric
Supply wants to escape the grind of running a company with 800 employees in six
states and $300 million in annual revenue, he pops open a spreadsheet.

   Like a baseball fan poring over a box score, Platt studies the latest
fund-raising effort to fight a debilitating disease. Later, he might pick up the
phone and round up donations to help a local burn victim.

   Platt's hobby is philanthropy.

   Next week, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will be on the receiving end of
Platt's generosity again as he and his employees complete their Holiday Dream
2000 campaign. For the first time in the 12 years the company has sponsored the
event, the total raised for the foundation could exceed $200,000.

   "A lot of companies are generous and cut checks," said Cathy Gidley,
executive director of Oregon's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Platt Electric's
primary charity. "But Harvey is very rare. His whole philosophy, every single
piece of his operation, incorporates our campaign to raise money and awareness.

   "If we had 20 Harvey Platts out there, we'd never have to have another
fund-raising event."

   The check from Holiday Dream 2000 will represent about 25 percent of the
foundation's annual budget, Gidley said. It also will bring the company's total
contribution to the foundation to $1.25 million in the past 12 years.

   "It's really wonderful," she said.

   From company raffles to charity golf tournaments, benefit dance shows to
walk-a-thons, Platt Electric is an innovative and uncommon experiment in
economics. The pursuit of profit goes hand-in-hand with dedication to the
community.

   The core idea is simple enough.

   "We've been very fortunate," Platt said, alluding to the success his company
has enjoyed since its founding in 1953. "I think it's our responsibility to do
what we can for those who need help. When you watch a kid with cystic fibrosis
get sick and die, it puts everything in perspective."

   An often fatal genetic disease, cystic fibrosis is marked by a thick
secretion of mucus that blocks respiratory and digestive tracts. Symptoms
include persistent coughing, wheezing or pneumonia; excessive appetite but poor
weight gain; and bulky stools.

   For Platt, the effort to give starts with his employees and radiates out.

   "If you recruit people who care about these issues, you're going to have a
better work force. They're going to care about the customer and doing the right
thing," he said. "Ultimately, it's going to serve us all better. I see no
downside."

   Like other forms of recreation, philanthropy is a pursuit often gauged by
numbers -- and for Platt, 32 is just as important as 200,000.

   When the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation was established in 1955, most people with
the disease didn't live long enough to enter grade school.

   By 1989, the year Platt and his company adopted the foundation as its primary
charity, someone with the affliction might hope to survive to get a driver's
license.

   Today, life expectancy is 32. With promising treatments such as gene therapy
on the horizon, the future is a little brighter for people with the disease --
roughly 30,000 nationwide and 700 in Oregon.

   "Whatever the scientists are doing is working," said Platt, noting that
virtually all the money his company raises goes toward research into new
therapies. "I recently attended a seminar on how to take care of adults with CF.
That's a problem you want to have."

   Although the numbers outline a story of progress, Platt Electric doesn't have
to look far to find evidence that its efforts are making a difference.

   The company first adopted cystic fibrosis as its cause after an employee's
son was diagnosed with the disease. That boy is now a man, with a full-time job
and a pilot's license.

   Although the bulk of Platt's charitable efforts go toward cystic fibrosis,
the caring doesn't stop there.

   Through the years, countless Oregonians in need have found an angel in the
Beaverton chief executive officer. A simple gut check is the only barometer
Platt needs to know whether to get involved.

   Recently, after reading The Oregonian's Season of Sharing Wishbook, Platt
teamed up with his wife, Sandy, to make the holidays a little jollier for Joseph
Stupfel.

   The Southeast Portland man has muscular dystrophy, a disease that has
destroyed his muscles and made communicating with others difficult. The couple
designated their $3,000 gift to help Stupfel buy a computer and software. He
plans to write a book for the parents of children with muscular dystrophy.

   Stupfel, like others on the receiving end, must be happy that Platt doesn't
spend a lot of time working on his backswing at Pumpkin Ridge.


   You can reach Tom Quinn at 503-294-5963 or by e-mail at
thomasquinn@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2000


                              20 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                   December 14, 2000 Thursday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: WEST ZONER; BEAVERTON Pg. 01

LENGTH: 872 words

HEADLINE: PLATT CEO INFUSES FIRM WITH ETHIC OF GIVING

SOURCE: TOM GUINN - The Oregonian

DATELINE: BEAVERTON

BODY:

   Summary: The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation tops the Beaverton company's list,
but philanthropist Harvey Platt doesn't stop there

   "If you recruit people who care about these issues, you're going to have a
better work force. They're going to care about the customer and doing the right
thing." -- HARVEY PLATT

   Harvey Platt doesn't play golf. He doesn't fish, climb mountains or try to
balloon around the world, either.

   Instead, when the chief executive officer of Beaverton-based Platt Electric
Supply wants to escape the grind of running a company with 800 employees in six
states and $300 million in annual revenue, he pops open a spreadsheet.

   Like a baseball fan poring over a box score, Platt studies the latest
fund-raising effort to fight a debilitating disease. Later, he might pick up the
phone and round up donations to help a local burn victim.

   Platt's hobby is philanthropy.

   Next week, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation will be on the receiving end of
Platt's generosity again as he and his employees complete their Holiday Dream
2000 campaign. For the first time in the 12 years the company has sponsored the
event, the total raised for the foundation could exceed $200,000.

   "A lot of companies are generous and cut checks," said Cathy Gidley,
executive director of Oregon's Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, Platt Electric's
primary charity. "But Harvey is very rare. His whole philosophy, every single
piece of his operation, incorporates our campaign to raise money and awareness.

   "If we had 20 Harvey Platts out there, we'd never have to have another
fund-raising event."

   The check from Holiday Dream 2000 will represent about 25 percent of the
foundation's annual budget, Gidley said. It also will bring the company's total
contribution to the foundation to $1.25 million in the past 12 years.

   "It's really wonderful," she said.

   From company raffles to charity golf tournaments, benefit dance shows to
walk-a-thons, Platt Electric is an innovative and uncommon experiment in
economics. The pursuit of profit goes hand-in-hand with dedication to the
community.

   The core idea is simple enough.

   "We've been very fortunate," Platt said, alluding to the success his company
has enjoyed since its founding in 1953. "I think it's our responsibility to do
what we can for those who need help. When you watch a kid with cystic fibrosis
get sick and die, it puts everything in perspective."

   An often fatal genetic disease, cystic fibrosis is marked by a thick
secretion of mucus that blocks respiratory and digestive tracts. Symptoms
include persistent coughing, wheezing or pneumonia; excessive appetite but poor
weight gain; and bulky stools.

   For Platt, the effort to give starts with his employees and radiates out.

   "If you recruit people who care about these issues, you're going to have a
better work force. They're going to care about the customer and doing the right
thing," he said. "Ultimately, it's going to serve us all better. I see no
downside."

   Like other forms of recreation, philanthropy is a pursuit often gauged by
numbers -- and for Platt, 32 is just as important as 200,000.

   When the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation was established in 1955, most people with
the disease didn't live long enough to enter grade school.

   By 1989, the year Platt and his company adopted the foundation as its primary
charity, someone with the affliction might hope to survive to get a driver's
license.

   Today, life expectancy is 32. With promising treatments such as gene therapy
on the horizon, the future is a little brighter for people with the disease --
roughly 30,000 nationwide and 700 in Oregon.

   "Whatever the scientists are doing is working," said Platt, noting that
virtually all the money his company raises goes toward research into new
therapies. "I recently attended a seminar on how to take care of adults with CF.
That's a problem you want to have."

   Although the numbers outline a story of progress, Platt Electric doesn't have
to look far to find evidence that its efforts are making a difference.

   The company first adopted cystic fibrosis as its cause after an employee's
son was diagnosed with the disease. That boy is now a man, with a full-time job
and a pilot's license.

   Although the bulk of Platt's charitable efforts go toward cystic fibrosis,
the caring doesn't stop there.

   Through the years, countless Oregonians in need have found an angel in the
Beaverton chief executive officer. A simple gut check is the only barometer
Platt needs to know whether to get involved.

   Recently, after reading The Oregonian's Season of Sharing Wishbook, Platt
teamed up with his wife, Sandy, to make the holidays a little jollier for Joseph
Stupfel.

   The Southeast Portland man has muscular dystrophy, a disease that has
destroyed his muscles and made communicating with others difficult. The couple
designated their $3,000 gift to help Stupfel buy a computer and software. He
plans to write a book for the parents of children with muscular dystrophy.

   Stupfel, like others on the receiving end, must be happy that Platt doesn't
spend a lot of time working on his backswing at Pumpkin Ridge.


   You can reach Tom Quinn at 503-294-5963 or by e-mail at
thomasquinn@news.oregonian.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2000


                              21 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 14, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. B-13:2,6,7; B-7:1

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: The 10-year effort to sequence the first plant genome

BYLINE: Maarten J. Chrispeels; Chrispeels is a professor of biology and director
of the San Diego Center for Molecular Agriculture at the University of
California San Diego.

BODY:
 Gregor Mendel, the father of genetics, would have been a happy man if he had
been alive today to see plant biologists all over the globe celebrate a
once-in-a-lifetime event: the publication of the complete genetic sequence of
the first plant genome.

   In 1865 Mendel published in a rather obscure journal his painstaking
observations on garden peas about the inheritance of contrasting characteristics
such as plant height and flower color.  His research led to the idea that
properties of organisms as diverse as peas, bacterial pathogens and humans are
all encoded in genes and that genes are inherited as discrete units from one
generation to the next.  It took another 75 years to understand that the
chemical nature of genes is DNA.

   After the structure of DNA was established in the early 1950s, the pace of
discoveries in molecular biology quickened.  Within the last few years the
genomes of the bacterium E. coli, baker's yeast, and the fruit fly were
sequenced and today, the sequence of the 25,000 or so genes of the small weed
Arabidopsis thaliana, a member of the mustard family, is being published in the
British journal Nature.  This publication is the culmination of a 10-year effort
by an international group of scientists that includes Joseph Ecker and Joanne
Chory, researchers at the Salk Institute who are members of the San Diego Center
for Molecular Agriculture.

   Why is this cause for celebration?  What good is it to know the sequence of
the genes of a rather insignificant weed?  And why did scientists choose this
weed anyway to spend so much money and effort on?

   Just as sequencing the genome of the fruit fly, an equally insignificant
animal, is permitting major advances in biomedical science, so will the
sequencing of the genome of this weed permit major advances in plant science and
agriculture.  And just as medical scientists will soon get their hands on the
real thing, the human genome, so agricultural scientists will be clamoring to
have the genome sequences of our most important crops.  Although corn may take a
long time because the genome is so large, the rice genome is small and will be
completed and freely available within a year or two.

   Nevertheless, because the genes of different plant species are so similar and
because Arabidopsis is a real flowering plant, it is a great help to plant
molecular biologists and geneticists to have the genes of Arabidopsis
deciphered.  Arabidopsis was chosen by the international team because it is a
normal flowering plant that does everything other plants do, but does it with a
small genome.

   The genetic blueprint of this weed will help us figure out precisely how
genes work to shape the development of a flowering plant from a seed, how plants
defend themselves against pests and diseases, how they react and adapt to
stresses in their physical environment such as a shortage of nutrients, a cold
spell or drought.  Many of the basic genetic mechanisms are the same in all
organisms, but the details are fascinatingly different.

   Scientists in San Diego are well poised to take advantage of this wealth of
new information.  The internationally renowned group of plant biologists at the
University of California San Diego, the Salk Institute and the Scripps Research
Institute will immediately be able to mine this new database containing the
25,000 genes to further their own discoveries about plants.

   The most exciting work is still to come, which is to figure out the functions
of those genes.  San Diego agricultural biotechnology companies such as DOW
Agrosciences.  Akkadix and the Novartis Agricultural Discovery Institute are
pursuing research ultimately aimed at improving crops by altering their genes so
that the yield will be more bountiful and the food more nutritious.  This is the
goal of molecular agriculture, to continue humanity's 10,000 year long journey
of crop domestication and crop improvement using the plant's own genes.

   The first generation of genetically modified (GM) crops that farmers are now
growing relied on introducing genes from other organisms to improve crop plants.
In the future, genetic modification will be more like gene therapy: making small
changes in the makeup of a plant's own genes or transferring genes from one
plant species to another.

   The sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome is a major step in that direction.


GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; Tim Brinton

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2000


                              22 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           December 14, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: OPINION; Pg. B-13:2,6,7; B-7:1

LENGTH: 720 words

HEADLINE: The 10-year effort to sequence the first plant genome

BYLINE: Maarten J. Chrispeels, Chrispeels is a professor of biology and director
of the San Diego Center for Molecular Agriculture at the University of
California San Diego.

BODY:

   Gregor Mendel, the father of genetics, would have been a happy man if he had
been alive today to see plant biologists all over the globe celebrate a
once-in-a-lifetime event: the publication of the complete genetic sequence of
the first plant genome. In 1865 Mendel published in a rather obscure journal his
painstaking observations on garden peas about the inheritance of contrasting
characteristics such as plant height and flower color.

   His research led to the idea that properties of organisms as diverse as peas,
bacterial pathogens and humans are all encoded in genes and that genes are
inherited as discrete units from one generation to the next.

   It took another 75 years to understand that the chemical nature of genes is
DNA. After the structure of DNA was established in the early 1950s, the pace of
discoveries in molecular biology quickened.

   Within the last few years the genomes of the bacterium E. coli, baker's
yeast, and the fruit fly were sequenced and today, the sequence of the 25,000 or
so genes of the small weed Arabidopsis thaliana, a member of the mustard family,
is being published in the British journal Nature.

   This publication is the culmination of a 10-year effort by an international
group of scientists that includes Joseph Ecker and Joanne Chory, researchers at
the Salk Institute who are members of the San Diego Center for Molecular
Agriculture. Why is this cause for celebration?

   What good is it to know the sequence of the genes of a rather insignificant
weed?

   And why did scientists choose this weed anyway to spend so much money and
effort on? Just as sequencing the genome of the fruit fly, an equally
insignificant animal, is permitting major advances in biomedical science, so
will the sequencing of the genome of this weed permit major advances in plant
science and agriculture.

   And just as medical scientists will soon get their hands on the real thing,
the human genome, so agricultural scientists will be clamoring to have the
genome sequences of our most important crops. Although corn may take a long time
because the genome is so large, the rice genome is small and will be completed
and freely available within a year or two. Nevertheless, because the genes of
different plant species are so similar and because Arabidopsis is a real
flowering plant, it is a great help to plant molecular biologists and
geneticists to have the genes of Arabidopsis deciphered.

   Arabidopsis was chosen by the international team because it is a normal
flowering plant that does everything other plants do, but does it with a small
genome. The genetic blueprint of this weed will help us figure out precisely how
genes work to shape the development of a flowering plant from a seed, how plants
defend themselves against pests and diseases, how they react and adapt to
stresses in their physical environment such as a shortage of nutrients, a cold
spell or drought.

   Many of the basic genetic mechanisms are the same in all organisms, but the
details are fascinatingly different. Scientists in San Diego are well poised to
take advantage of this wealth of new information.

   The internationally renowned group of plant biologists at the University of
California San Diego, the Salk Institute and the Scripps Research Institute will
immediately be able to mine this new database containing the 25,000 genes to
further their own discoveries about plants. The most exciting work is still to
come, which is to figure out the functions of those genes.

   San Diego agricultural biotechnology companies such as DOW Agrosciences.

   Akkadix and the Novartis Agricultural Discovery Institute are pursuing
research ultimately aimed at improving crops by altering their genes so that the
yield will be more bountiful and the food more nutritious.

   This is the goal of molecular agriculture, to continue humanity's 10,000 year
long journey of crop domestication and crop improvement using the plant's own
genes. The first generation of genetically modified (GM) crops that farmers are
now growing relied on introducing genes from other organisms to improve crop
plants.

   In the future, genetic modification will be more like gene therapy: making
small changes in the makeup of a plant's own genes or transferring genes from
one plant species to another. The sequencing of the Arabidopsis genome is a
major step in that direction.

GRAPHIC: 1 DRAWING; PHOTOBY: Tim Brinton

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              23 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                   December 13, 2000 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 662 words

HEADLINE: GenVec gets $38 million in 'do-or-die' IPO;
 Funds are enough to keep drug firm alive, but fall far short of goal

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., faced with what one analyst described as a "do-or-die"
situation, pushed ahead yesterday with its initial public offering despite weak
demand that forced the company to settle for tens of millions of dollars less in
proceeds than initially planned.

    The Gaithersburg developer of gene therapies grossed about $38 million from
the sale of 4 million shares, but only after slashing the offering price for the
second time in two days. Presuming a standard underwriting fee of 7 percent,
GenVec likely will net only about $35 million - well below the $54.6 million it
had targeted at first.

    The company priced its shares at $9.50 for yesterday's offering, a reduction
from the $11 to $12 target it had announced Monday. Initially, GenVec had
targeted a price of $14 to $16 for the shares.

    The stock gained nearly 4 percent to close at $9.88 yesterday on the Nasdaq
stock market.

    GenVec's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission also show a
concurrent, private sale of about $5 million in shares to its major
pharmaceutical partner, Warner-Lambert, a Pfizer Inc. subsidiary.

    The IPO shortfall means the company likely will be forced back into
fund-raising far sooner than it had hoped.

    "Clearly, they don't have enough money to go through with all their plans,"
said Stefan D. Loren, a biotechnology industry analyst for Legg Mason Wood
Walker Inc. He called the offering a "do or die" situation for GenVec.

    Despite raising less than planned, the offering did succeed in bringing
GenVec back from a brink familiar to many biotechnology companies that are
developing expensive therapies but have yet to get any to market.

    As of Nov. 30, the company was down to $5.7 million in cash, cash
equivalents and short-term investments, having spent $1.7 million in November
alone.

    GenVec projects it will spend about $40 million over the next two years if
it does not sign any new collaborations with pharmaceutical partners.

    GenVec's offering was hurt by poor timing and investor wariness over the
emerging field of gene therapy, said Emily Hall, a Morningstar Inc.
biotechnology industry analyst.

    The company had shelved its first attempt at a public offering in 1998 after
the market soured.

    It then filed with the SEC for an attempt on Oct. 5 only to find the market
worsening again. November turned out to be the worst month this year for biotech
stocks, losing 15 percent of its market capitalization in that month alone.

    Biotech stocks since have made a comeback, but the market for them remains
volatile. "IPOs tend to do better in general when the market is hot," Hall said.
"It may just be an issue of timing."

    But GenVec also is trying to bring treatments to market at a time when the
Food and Drug Administration is cracking down on some gene-therapy trials. The
FDA, for example, has shut down the trial of a drug that seeks to treat heart
disease by generating new blood-vessel growth.

    Human Genome Sciences Inc. of Rockville, the drug's manufacturer, had
licensed the drug to Vascular Genetics Inc., which was handling the trials. The
FDA raised concerns about a number of issues, including the failure to report in
a timely fashion the death of a patient in the trial.

    And in the most high-profile case, an immune compromised 18-year-old died
while participating in gene-therapy testing at the University of Pennsylvania.
The trial was testing a drug that, like GenVec's lead drug candidate, is
delivered via a deactivated cold virus known as an adenovirus.

    GenVec's lead product, which it is developing in partnership with
Warner-Lambert, is designed to treat heart and peripheral vascular diseases with
a protein that generates blood-vessel growth.

    Unlike some other gene therapies, the GenVec drug, known as BioBypass, is
administered directly to diseased tissues via injection or a catheter, a move
designed to reduce immune-system reactions.


LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2000


                              24 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  December 13, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C6

LENGTH: 709 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
NEOGENESIS, MERCK IN GENOMICS DEAL

BYLINE: BY RONALD ROSENBERG and NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   NeoGenesis Inc. of Cambridge said it signed a multiyear agreement with Merck
& Co. to use its proprietary chemical genomics database to help find potential
drug leads.

   Financial terms of the agreement were not disclosed.

      NeoGenesis, formed three years ago, has a database of 10 million diverse
compounds. It uses these computerized molecules with its proprietary chemical
analysis to help pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies find promising new
protein-based drug candidates for certain diseases.

   Historically, the pharmaceutical industry has focused on 400 to 500 targets -
specific disease molecules that a drug or hormone goes after. But with the
mapping of the human genome, researchers expect there will be thousands of new
targets. That will create the need for more high-speed computers and
sophisticated software to identify which compounds might be used to create the
next drug.

   Merck wants to use NeoGenesis chemical genomics technology to find drug leads
in cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and diabetes, said Allen Michels, chief
executive of NeoGenesis. Michels said Biogen Inc., Bayer A.G., and
Schering-Plough Inc. are also users of NeoGenesis bioinformatics systems.

   "You can not be in the biopharmaceutical industry without being able to
understand and apply high-tech information technology, because it is the only
way to deal with the complexity and massive amount of data," said Michels.

   TKT repurchases drug from partner Aventis

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., whose partner Aventis S.A. will market Dynepo,
the controversial anemia-fighting drug that is identical to Epogen from Amgen
Inc., said it has bought back a second drug licensed to Aventis.

   TKT officials will not identify the reacquired drug, although some industry
watchers believe it is similar to Amgen's Neupogen, the complementary drug to
Epogen, which raises white blood cell counts to reduce infections among cancer
chemotherapy patients. Like Epogen, Neupogen is one of the world's most
successful biotechnology drugs.

   In repurchasing the unnamed drug, TKT reportedly believes it can pursue its
development faster than Aventis, which is working on many other drug candiates.

   "We have benefited from Aventis' expertise in moving the protein from basic
research to preclinical testing and into clinical development," Richard F.
Selden, the TKT chief executive and cofounder, said in a statement. "And I
believe we have the ability to aggressively move this program into pivotal
trials and beyond."

   Amgen's Neupogen sales, which were more than $1.2 billion last year, are
expected to climb to around $1.36 billion this year, according to several Wall
Street analysts. They expect revenues to reach nearly $1.5 billion next year.

   TKT/Aventis and Amgen are awaiting a decision from US District Judge William
Young over Amgen's claims that TKT's Dynepo violates Epogen patents. Amgen
insists its human gene activation technology does not infringe on the Epogen
patents. The trial in Boston ended in September.

   Zycos Inc. virus drug moves to human trials

   Zycos Inc., a privately held Lexington company, said it is beginning human
clinical trials to test the effectiveness of its drug to treat a virus
associated with cervical cancer.

   The virus, known as the human papillomavirus, or HPV, can cause precancerous
cervical infections, which can progress to cancer if left untreated.

   Nationwide, about 2 million women every year are diagnosed with the
precancerous infections. Some infections disappear on their own. But many women
must undergo invasive procedures to remove the cervical tissue.

   Zycos's drug, known as ZYC101a, is designed to trigger the body's own
defenses. It contains a bit of genetic code naturally processed by the immune
system and tells disease-fighting T cells to attack cervical cells infected by
HPV.

   The company said clinical trials completed this year showed that the drug is
safe. If this second phase of testing is successful, the drug will enter the
final phase of testing generally required by the US Food and Drug Administration
for approval.

   Zycos is using a unique DNA-based approach to develop therapies to treat a
variety of illnesses, including viruses, cancer, and autoimmune diseases.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2000


                              25 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          December 13, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-3

LENGTH: 1195 words

HEADLINE: Future comings and goings

BYLINE: Eric Haseltine; DISCOVER MAGAZINE | Eric Haseltine is a contributing
editor to Discover magazine.

BODY:
 On a flight from Tokyo recently, my gaze wandered from the computer sitting in
my lap to the Pacific 20,000 feet below.  As we descended toward Los Angeles, I
watched the blue ripples relentlessly marching toward a distant shore.  Suddenly
I realized it would be possible to calculate from the waves' direction and
velocity not only where they would end up but when they would get there.  In a
sense, I could predict their future.

   Turning back to my computer, I marveled at how quickly it had become an
essential appendage, and it occurred to me that the waves below were not all
that different from the waves of technological change that sweep over us.

   Like waves at sea, waves of technology are always out there somewhere,
relentlessly heading for an impact.  And they can be detected while still far
from shore.  We even ought to be able to see them coming when they're 20 years
away.  With this in mind, follow me into the future to discover what awaits us
and look back at what was lost:

   1. Many forms of mechano-electric technology will vanish, leaving in their
place more reliable, purely solid-state devices.  Storage media such as CDs,
DVDs, VCRs and cassette tapes will disappear as continued advances in data
compression technology cram music and videos into even less memory space and the
capacity of solid-state memories to hold these media grows exponentially.

   MP3-type storage devices of 20 years from now will store 128 megabytes
(today's capacity) times 10,000, which is 1.28 terabytes.  That's enough to hold
more than 200 feature-length movies.  Film movie cameras and projectors will be
out of the picture as high-resolution digital imaging and digital light
modulators with no moving parts replace their counterparts.

   Also, odds are that mechanical push buttons on a wide range of appliances
from TV remotes to telephones will go away as voice-activated controls, made
possible by inexpensive, high-performance signal processors, take over.

   2. Writing your signature on a legal document will be considered quaint
because of ubiquitous biometric IDs, including iris, fingerprint and
voice-recognition systems.

   3. Film scores played by real orchestras will be found only in archives as
computer-synthesized music completely drowns out the real thing.  The majority
of choral music in movies also will arise from electronics, not singers.

   4. Nielsen ratings will be gone, because most TVs will be linked to broadband
two-way network connections that tell broadcasters how many viewers are watching
at any given instant.

   5. Many analog devices will vanish as more powerful digital devices replace
them.  Analog TVs and radios will join the vacuum tubes on the shelves of
electronic surplus stores.  Digital broadcasting will be the norm.  Digital TV
and radio also will have much better quality.  The market for analog cathode-ray
tubes will implode as various sorts of more compact, power-efficient flat panel
displays come to dominate.

   6. We'll wonder why we ever patronized video, record and software stores.
Broadband connections will be a much simpler way to distribute movies, music and
software.  Network distribution of content also will be considerably cheaper: no
manufacturing, no middleman and no inventory to stock.

   7. Wires on headphones will be gone because low-cost radio links will replace
them.  It also will be hard to find anyone who holds a cell phone to his ear
because it will be much more convenient to put the guts of the phone on a wrist
or waist and have it wirelessly link to a small earpiece and microphone.

   8. Getting lost will take real creativity in an era where an embedded GPS
receiver will enable personal electronic devices to know where they are within a
few yards.

   9. Junk mail will no longer show up.  Advertisers will print their messages
in your home or office using your online connection without troubling themselves
with postage and printing costs.  You won't call it junk mail because
advertisers will know so much about you from monitoring your purchase patterns
and online behaviors that the advertisements will be for items you probably will
want to buy anyway.

   10. Stunt doubles in action-packed TV shows and motion pictures will have
ridden off into the sunset because incredibly realistic computer animations of
actors will be much safer and cheaper to produce.

   11. Hemophilia medicines that now come from limited supplies of donated blood
will be replaced by safe proteins synthesized outside the body or by coagulation
factors produced by genetically modified cells within the body.

   12. Baldness treatments will thin out dramatically as dermatologists learn
how to make scalp tissue grow hair follicles.  Anti-graying formulas may fade
away as gene therapies restore melanin pigments to older scalps.

   13. These days more than 600,000 coronary bypass procedures are performed
annually, but such painful and debilitating surgery will be passe when
cardiologists begin to use their genetic arsenal to grow new blood vessels in
place of those that are blocked.

   14. Diabetics will finally be able to say goodbye to insulin injections.  The
better alternative: Doctors will routinely implant healthy islets of Langerhans
cells into the pancreas.

   15. Genetic diseases can arise from mutations of either single genes or
multiple genes acting in concert.  The first genetic diseases to be eliminated
will most likely be the single-gene variety because doctors can more precisely
target the locus of the disorder.  Illnesses falling in this category include
cystic fibrosis, familial hypercholesterolemia, Huntington's chorea, sickle-cell
anemia, Duchenne (a form of muscular dystrophy) and Tay-Sachs disease.

   16. Immunosuppressants to prevent rejection of transplanted organs won't be
needed in a world where doctors grow new organs from a patient's own tissues.

   17. Chemotherapies will become less important for attacking cancers when more
precise gene-based treatments emerge.  Techniques in development include:
infecting tumors with recombinant viruses that make cancer cells vulnerable to
antiviral and antibiotic agents; designing antibodies that attack cancers; and
taking tumor cells out of the body, genetically altering them, and injecting
them back into the body as vaccines that stimulate the immune system.

   18. Cars and trucks will be powered by battery-driven electric motors, hybrid
gas/electric engines, or gas/fuel-cell engines.  Even with improved fuel
efficiency, long-haul trucking in the United States is likely to dwindle as it
has in Europe, where gas prices are already high.

   19. Cooling towers on industrial buildings will be eliminated because they
throw off too much waste heat.  They'll be replaced by natural-gas-powered
absorption chillers similar to technology found on old gas refrigerators.
Radiated energy will be recaptured to warm water and generate electricity.

   20. Plastic wrap and many plastic utensils will be found only in landfills.
Replacing plastics will be an entire family of biopolymers made from cornstarch.
Some are already available but still too costly compared with compounds made
from temporarily cheap petrochemicals.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; Ideas as bright as light bulbs have the power to replace such
present-day commonalities as the video store, movies made of film, analog
devices, junk mail and getting lost.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2000


                              26 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                  December 13, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Gene Research Rule Proposed; Regulation Seeks to Increase U.S. Review,
Keep Reporting Manageable

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Fifteen months after the field of gene therapy was roiled by the death of a
teenage volunteer and by revelations that many researchers had failed to tell
regulators about complications in their own gene therapy studies, the Clinton
administration yesterday proposed a new system for tracking dangerous side
effects of the experimental treatments.

   A proposed federal rule, published in yesterday's Federal Register, seeks to
resolve conflicts between patient advocates who have called for full public
disclosure of all ill effects in gene therapy volunteers, drug companies that
hope to profit from the nascent field of medicine but are accustomed to keeping
the details of their studies confidential, and researchers who have complained
about being overburdened with regulations.

   It attempts to achieve middle ground by loosening old requirements that had
demanded immediate reporting of all serious complications, while at the same
time beefing up federal attention to those complications when they're reported.

   Representatives of groups that would be affected by the change quickly found
fault with various aspects of the proposed rule. It remained unclear yesterday
whether that meant the rule was a good compromise or was doomed to political
oblivion.

   At issue are so-called serious adverse events, including deaths,
life-threatening episodes or significant incapacities that occur in volunteers
getting gene therapy, an experimental approach that seeks to cure diseases by
giving people new genes.

   For the past 10 years the National Institutes of Health has demanded that all
serious adverse events occurring in gene therapy volunteers be reported to that
agency immediately, whether they seem to have been caused by the treatment
itself or were probably a normal outcome of the patient's underlying condition.

   That standard is more strict than the Food and Drug Administration's rule
that immediate reporting is required only when researchers believe the problem
may have been caused by the treatment itself--a difference that reflects NIH's
longstanding concern that researchers might not be able to tell if a problem was
caused by the novel treatment or not.

   Three events last fall triggered a review of the NIH policy. First, several
gene therapy companies submitted adverse-event reports with demands that the
data be kept confidential, in violation of NIH's policy of public access.
Second, a nationwide review indicated that many researchers were not even
reporting adverse events to the NIH as required. And third, Tucson teenager
Jesse Gelsinger became the first person to die as a clear and direct result of
gene therapy.

   The newly proposed rule reaffirms that all adverse events should be made
public. But it calls for researchers to immediately report to the NIH only those
serious adverse events believed to have been possibly caused by the treatment.
That standard is in harmony with FDA's rules, a simplification that researchers
said they applauded. But some patient advocates criticized the change, saying
researchers cannot be expected to be unbiased when it comes to deciding whether
their treatment has caused a problem.

   "It's very disturbing that they are going to do something like this, where
everyone can decide for themselves," said Abbey S. Meyers, president of the
National Organization for Rare Disorders in New Fairfield, Conn.

   Under the rule, problems deemed unrelated to the treatment must be submitted
in annual summary reports--which a new NIH subcommittee would analyze, along
with other reports, to watch for worrisome trends.

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, said he favored the extra oversight the new
committee would bring and didn't mind if some adverse-event reports got
submitted annually instead of immediately--as long as it would encourage better
reporting overall. "Remember," he said, "some of these guys weren't reporting
adverse events at all before."

   But Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization,
criticized those aspects of the new rule, saying they would allow too much
public access to commercial data he believes should be confidential. Moreover,
he said, the NIH subcommittee's duties would be redundant with the FDA's.

   "It usurps FDA's regulatory authority and turns the death of Jesse Gelsinger
into some kind of a turf battle," he said.

   The NIH is accepting comments on the proposed rule through Feb. 10.


LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2000


                              27 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                  December 13, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 229 words

HEADLINE: After GenVec IPO, a Small Gain

BYLINE: Terence Chea , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   GenVec Inc. stock rose slightly yesterday on its first day of public trading
after the Gaithersburg biotechnology company cut its share price twice and
raised $ 38 million in its initial public offering.

   Shares of the Maryland gene-therapy company traded as high as $ 11.75
yesterday before closing at $ 9.88, a modest gain of 38 cents over its initial
offering price of $ 9.50. The company floated 4 million shares, and about 1.8
million changed hands on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   The proceeds were much less than GenVec had hoped to raise. In October, the
company filed to sell the 4 million shares at $ 14 to $ 16 per share to raise as
much as $ 64 million. On Monday, the company dropped its target price range to $
11 to $ 12 per share, in the face of cooling demand for technology issues. And
by Monday evening the offering price settled at $ 9.50 per share, raising only $
38 million before expenses for the company.

   GenVec plans to use proceeds from the offering to support clinical trials,
research and development, equipment purchases, facility expansion, and other
corporate purposes.

   The 4 million shares of GenVec common stock represent about 23 percent of the
company's 17.8 million outstanding shares. At yesterday's close, the company had
a market value of about $ 175 million.


   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2000


                              28 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                             All Rights Reserved
                               The Baltimore Sun

                    December 12, 2000 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS, Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: GenVec lowers prices in IPO;
 New range offers shares at $11 to $ 12, down from $14 to $16

BYLINE: Julie Bell

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   GenVec Inc., forced to pull its initial public offering after the market for
biotechnology stocks soured two years ago, moved yesterday to salvage its latest
attempt at going public amid volatility in the biotech sector and lingering
concerns over some gene therapies.

    The stock might go public as early as today.

    The Gaithersburg company, which filed Oct. 5 to offer shares at $14 to $16
each, said yesterday that the offering would be priced in the $11 to $12 range.
At that price, the 4 million shares are expected to raise net proceeds of $41.6
million, down from $54.6 million.

    The market for biotechs has had major swings since GenVec filed to go public
in October. The Nasdaq biotechnology index has clawed its way back from its
November low of 1,041.51. Yesterday, it closed at 1,217.08, nearly the same
level that it registered on the day of GenVec's October filing.

    But demand for some gene-therapy companies remains soft, said Jim D.
McCamant, editor-at-large of the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley,
Calif. "Gene therapy is starting to mature nicely, but it's not something that's
on the radar screen for Wall Street," he said. In addition, he said, "I think
it's the market: Biotech did terribly after (GenVec) filed" to go public.

    November was a particularly brutal month, pushing down the market values of
publicly traded biotech companies about 15 percent - or $70 billion, according
to Burrill & Co., a San Francisco merchant bank that concentrates on the life
sciences industry.

    A smaller concern, McCamant said, is that GenVec's filing comes at a time of
increased scrutiny for gene-based drugs delivered via deactivated viruses.
GenVec's lead product, BioBypass, uses a deactivated virus and is undergoing
Food and Drug Administration-required human trials.

    The FDA has been paying close attention to such gene-therapy trials after
the death last year of an immune-compromised 18-year-old who was enrolled in a
clinical trial unrelated to GenVec. The trial was testing the safety of a gene
therapy delivered by an adenovirus, a deactivated cold virus.

    BioBypass uses an adenovirus to carry a protein that encourages blood
vessels to grow in tissues with inadequate blood flow. BioBypass, however, is
delivered via a catheter directly to the diseased heart tissue, lessening
chances that a patient's immune system will be affected.

    BioBypass as a coronary artery therapy is in the second of three FDA phases
of human testing. It is also in Phase II trials as a therapy for peripheral
vascular disease.

    GenVec declined to comment on yesterday's amended filing with the Securities
and Exchange Commission. Companies generally limit their comments to the
contents of such filings while their shares are in registration, fearing that
they will run afoul of SEC guidelines that prohibit companies from hyping stocks
during an offering.

    GenVec plans to use $24 million of the stock-offering proceeds for research
and development, including clinical trials, its amended SEC filing said. That is
down from $30 million earmarked for research in the Oct. 5 filing. About $8
million will be used for capital expenditures, down from the $10 million it was
planning to spend before reducing the share-price range, the amended
registration said.


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000


                              29 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      DECEMBER 12, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A29

LENGTH: 422 words

HEADLINE: FDA MOVES TO BAN PENN GENE RESEARCHER

BYLINE: Frederick Cusick, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has begun steps to impose a permanent
research ban on James M. Wilson, the University of Pennsylvania gene-therapy
researcher who supervised an experiment that led to the death of an Arizona
teenager last year.

   In a Nov. 30 letter to Wilson, the FDA says that the Penn researcher
"repeatedly or deliberately violated regulations governing the proper conduct of
clinical studies." The letter proposes that he be "disqualified" from future
work as a clinical investigator. That could have the effect of barring Wilson
from ever again testing experimental drugs or products on humans in this
country.

   The FDA also sent "warning letters" to two other scientists involved in the
project, Steven Raper of Penn and Mark Batshaw of the Children's National
Medical Center in Washington. The letters allege for the first time that both
men violated standards of conduct.

   The three scientists could not be reached for comment.

   Penn issued a statement yesterday calling the letter "a very serious matter."

   The university said that " . . . we know that Dr. Wilson understands its
importance, is reviewing the letter carefully and intends to respond in a timely
way."

   Wilson has until Dec. 30 to respond to the charges.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died in September 1999 a few days
after Wilson's group injected millions of genetically altered viruses into his
liver in an effort to find a treatment for genetic disorders.

   According to the findings in the FDA's letter:

   Both Gelsinger and another volunteer were included in the study despite
medical test results that showed they were ineligible.

   New participants "were misled" into thinking the FDA was comfortable with the
study, when the agency had not been informed of earlier incidents of toxicity
that should have led to the study being suspended.

   Wilson "loosened" two important study criteria, allowing less-healthy and
more at-risk subjects into the study without telling the FDA.

   Wilson "misled" Penn's scientific and ethical review board regarding the
performance of a key blood test that was designed to protect the safety of
volunteers.

   The FDA has already placed Penn's Institute of Human Gene Therapy, which
Wilson heads, on a "clinical hold," limiting it to animal and test-tube studies.

   The Gelsinger family reached a legal settlement with Wilson and Penn last
month.

   Frederick Cusick's e-mail address is fcusick@phillynews.com

   * This article contains information from Inquirer wire services.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                              30 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 951 words

HEADLINE: Clinton, Congress Near Accord on Budget; Plan Would Trim Military
Spending, Save Funds for Education, Medical Research

BYLINE: Dan Morgan; Eric Pianin , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   President Clinton and congressional negotiators moved closer to a compromise
on the budget yesterday by agreeing to a plan that would slightly trim spending
by the Pentagon and other departments next year but preserve substantial
increases for education and medical research.

   The compromise that emerged from the third White House meeting between
Clinton and congressional leaders in the past 10 days would provide about $
108.9 billion for education, health and labor programs, a $ 13.2 billion
increase over last year's total.

   While Democrats complained that the deal was less generous than a tentative
agreement worked out before the Nov. 7 election, it would provide far more than
allowed under a spending freeze proposed last week by House Majority Whip Tom
DeLay (R-Tex.). That proposal sparked furious protests from health and education
groups that are fighting to protect major increases for the National Institutes
of Health and federal education aid.

   The compromise marks a major step forward in the effort to resolve the
impasse blocking final action on the new budgets of seven federal departments.
Congress voted yesterday to keep the federal agencies operating through Friday,
the 20th such temporary spending measure since the new fiscal year began Oct. 1.

   A White House official, commenting on yesterday's meeting, said both sides
were hopeful of finishing the job and adjourning the lame-duck Congress by
Friday. However, bargaining still remains on separate legislation providing
beefed-up funding for Medicare over the next five years, as well as a
Clinton-backed plan to upgrade the residency status of hundreds of thousands of
immigrants.

   Moreover, congressional officials stressed yesterday that it was still
uncertain whether the compromise on the bill funding the Labor, Education and
Health and Human Services Departments would be acceptable to House and Senate
members, once the details are made known.

   House Appropriations Committee Chairman C.W. Bill Young (R-Fla.), who did not
attend the White House meeting, said he believed the final version would
"guarantee that the promise we made to medical research [at] NIH can be and will
be kept, and that the promise we made in increasing educational funding can and
will be kept."

   Under a deal worked out between senior congressional negotiators and the
White House before the election, total funding for the labor, health and
education programs would have totaled $ 112.6 billion, enough to fund the
increases sought by NIH and the Department of Education.

   In addition to cutting the earlier figure by more than $ 3 billion,
yesterday's agreement calls for economies that would save $ 415 million in
Pentagon programs and $ 550 million in non-defense operations through next
September, when the current fiscal year ends.

   But senior Republicans and Democrats vowed yesterday to fight any final
package that makes trims in the increases for the NIH and education.

   Rep. John Edward Porter (R-Ill.), who has spearheaded a drive to double the
NIH budget over five years through annual increases of 15 percent, indicated
that anything less would be unacceptable. "Both presidential candidates as well
as both houses of Congress have supported doubling funding as a national
priority," he said. "The economy has been extremely strong. If we can't provide
this money for the war on disease under these circumstances, when can we do it?
We have to send a message to the research community that we are not going to
back away from that commitment."

   NIH funding has grown rapidly, and reached $ 17.8 billion in the fiscal year
that ended Sept. 30. President Clinton requested an additional $ 1 billion, and
a subsequent agreement between the House and Senate, reflecting strong
Republican support for medical research, increased it by another $ 1.7 billion.

   In a letter to The Washington Post yesterday, former NIH director Harold
Varmus warned that if the NIH did not receive its expected increase, "thousands
of anticipated grants will not be awarded, training programs will be curtailed,
clinical trials will not be started and momentum built up over the past few
years will fade."

   Joining the fray with letters to congressional leaders in recent days have
been representatives of research universities and organizations supporting
research into major diseases such as cancer and diabetes.

   Other groups credit federal funding of biomedical research with spawning the
revolution in gene therapy and the growth of the U.S. biotech industry.

   Top Democrats, meanwhile, expressed anger at the overall compromise, and
voiced concern that the $ 8 billion in increases negotiated earlier for federal
education aid could be trimmed in the final package.

   Rep. David Obey (D-Wis.), ranking Democrat on the House Appropriations
Committee, charged Republicans with reneging on spending increases for education
and labor programs.

   "While Congress has already approved major increases for agriculture, energy
and water programs, transportation and other areas, now we're being told we
committed a mortal sin and we're all going to hell because we passed a
labor-health bill a few billion dollars above the president's request," Obey
said.

   Clinton and congressional Democrats are pushing for major increases in funds
for school construction, after-school programs, and hiring more teachers to
reduce class sizes. Republicans have been strongly supportive of additional
money for handicapped education and college scholarships for low-income
students.

   But just as reductions in these programs would be unwelcome to many
lawmakers, conservatives are sure to oppose the proposed cuts in defense
spending.


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000


                              31 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: FDA Seeks to Penalize Gene Scientist

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   In an unusual move, the Food and Drug Administration has initiated
proceedings that could prevent a high-profile University of Pennsylvania gene
therapy researcher from testing experimental drugs or products in human subjects
in this country.

   James Wilson, the Penn scientist who oversaw an experiment that last year
killed Tucson teenager Jesse Gelsinger, "repeatedly or deliberately violated
regulations governing the proper conduct of clinical studies," according to a
letter the agency sent Wilson Nov. 30. The letter proposes that Wilson be
"disqualified" as a clinical investigator, roughly equivalent to a lawyer being
disbarred.

   Wilson has until Dec. 30 to provide a written response to the agency's
allegations, including charges that he failed to protect the "rights, safety and
welfare" of research subjects under his care and submitted "misleading and
inaccurate" statments to the FDA.

   Separately, the FDA said yesterday it also had sent out "warning letters" to
Wilson's top two collaborators in the Gelsinger study--Mark Batshaw of
Children's National Medical Center in the District and Steven Raper of
Penn--alleging for the first time that they too violated FDA regulations and
standards of conduct.

   Gelsinger died in September 1999, a few days after Wilson's team injected
millions of genetically engineered viruses into the 18-year-old's liver as part
of an effort to develop a treatment for hereditary diseases. Since then, FDA
investigators and others have criticized the study for alleged failings and for
a possible conflict of interest posed by Wilson's founding of a company that
stood to profit from the work.

   The FDA has initiated disqualification proceedings a dozen times in the past
three years, according to agency records. In this case the move is but the
latest of several legal and regulatory blows against Wilson and Penn. The FDA
already has placed Penn's Institute of Human Gene Therapy, which Wilson directs,
on an open-ended "clinical hold," relegating it for now to animal and test-tube
studies only. Last month the university and Wilson settled a civil lawsuit with
the Gelsinger family, details of which remain undisclosed.

   Among the conclusions in the FDA's Nov. 30 letter:


   * Gelsinger and another volunteer were enrolled despite medical test results
that indicated they were ineligible for the study.


   * New participants "were misled" into believing that the FDA was comfortable
with the study, when in fact the researchers had failed to inform the agency
about instances of serious toxicity in previous volunteers that should have
resulted in the study being halted.


   * Wilson loosened two "important" criteria for accepting volunteers, thus
allowing less healthy or more at-risk participants in without the FDA's
knowledge or consent.


   * Wilson "misled" Penn's scientific and ethical review board regarding the
performance of a key blood test that was intended to ensure the safety of
volunteers.


   * The informed-consent document that volunteers signed did not mention the
deaths of monkeys given a similar treatment, and failed to mention that the one
monkey given the same treatment that the volunteers received fell ill from a
rare blood disorder that would later kill Gelsinger.


   Penn officials released a short statement yesterday, saying, "This is
obviously a very serious matter, and we know that Dr. Wilson understands its
importance, is reviewing the letter carefully and intends to respond in a timely
way."


LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000


                              32 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 11, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 461 words

HEADLINE: RULES FOR CLINICAL TRIALS

BODY:

   A YEAR AGO THIS FALL, a teenage boy died in a gene-therapy experiment he
should never have been included in - he was too sick. His death in a therapeutic
trial run by a University of Pennsylvania scientist who had an economic interest
in the therapy set off alarm bells in academia, industry, and government.

   The incident brought to light the wide disparity in conflict-of-interest
rules governing medical-school researchers, especially those doing clinical
research with patients. In the past month, articles and editorials in the two
leading medical journals, the Journal of the American Medical Association and
the New England Journal of Medicine, have focused attention on this discrepancy
and the risk that more patients will be the unfortunate guinea pigs of
self-interested scientists.

      Companies sponsoring research could also try to delay, squelch, or change
results that reflect badly on their drug or therapy. At a time when properly
managed partnerships between industry and academic medicine hold out promise of
health-care progress, universities should agree on ethics guidelines that are
both tougher and more uniform.

   Harvard Medical School organized a meeting of medical schools recently in
Washington to move in this direction. Some schools require disclosure by
researchers of any financial interest they have in whatever is being tested.
Others are less demanding. Harvard is among the most rigorous: It limits
researchers to $20,000 worth of equity or $10,000 in consulting fees from
companies they are doing experiments for. Few expect this standard to be adopted
across the board.

   The argument against strict rules is that they could, in the phrase of Dr.
David Korn of the Association of American Medical Colleges, "interdict a
developmental pathway of immense social benefit."

   But in the present climate, a corrosive loss of trust in the integrity of
biomedical research is a distinct danger.

   Without such trust, patients are going to be less willing to volunteer for
clinical trials. And, when entrepreneur-researchers report positive results from
clinical trials for drugs that will make them rich, the public might no longer
accept them at face value. In addition, a national policy would ensure that
medical schools would not compete for top scientists by offering them more
leeway for profit-making.

   At a minimum, universities should agree on policies mandating disclosure of
any conflicts of interest, preferably administered not by the medical school
itself (which might have its own interest in the project) but by a regional
board. Patients and their own doctors should be informed, too. A good, national
policy will inevitably be a balancing act, but current practice tilts toward
"anything goes."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000


                              33 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

HEADLINE: COMING TO GRIPS WITH THE WEB: ESSAY;
Fast-Changing Genie Alters the World

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF

BODY:

   At the outset, it was a free and simple map to the buried treasures of the
information age.

   Then it morphed into something else, fueling an astounding "new economy" gold
rush that at its peak last year contributed several trillion dollars in new
wealth to the nation's stock markets. (Lately, things have not panned out as
well for the prospectors.)

    In a remarkably short period, the World Wide Web has touched or has promised
to alter -- some would say threaten -- virtually every aspect of modern life.
The Web has caused giant corporations to adjust their business strategies,
whether General Electric, General Motors or General Mills. And such are the
abilities of the Web to "scale" -- whether up or down -- that it is also
restoring craft and commerce in remote Cambodian villages. (Click on
www.villageleap.com to view the current selection of woven scarves from the
village of Robib in north central Cambodia. Major credit cards cheerfully
accepted.)

   The Web has been hailed as the most significant computing advance of the 20th
century, and yet to see the Web as a single, static invention is to miss the
point. Today's Web is not yesterday's, or tomorrow's.

   Initially, the Web simply exploited the most powerful attribute of what was
then a collection of computer networks called the Internet. That attribute,
simply put, was the ability to share information globally and, when everything
was working, instantaneously.

   Recall that during this same period, in the early 1990's, companies like
America Online and Prodigy were trying to keep computer users corralled within
proprietary online services. Such services, which by that point had attracted
only a few million users combined, were designed to make customers captive
audiences of whatever "content" the network operators chose to provide. (It says
as much about the adaptability of America Online's executives, as it does about
evolving technology, that AOL has been able to turn itself into one of Web's
most popular brand names.)

   Compared with the old proprietary approach, the Web had a truly worldwide
reach -- even if going overseas meant little more, at first, than checking the
Webcam that was trained on a coffee pot in a Cambridge University computer lab.

   The Web's strengths were precisely what many experts had long viewed as the
Internet's weakness: the so-called "any to any" quality that treated all
computers on the network as equals. Unlike the telephone network, in the words
of David Eisenberg, the former Bell Labs researcher, the Internet was the
ultimate "stupid" network, because all the intelligence and the power resided at
the end points, not in the middle.

   As with the Internet itself, the Web's roots lay in the late 1960's. Back
then, Douglas Engelbart, a young engineer leading a small team of researchers at
Stanford Research Institute, and Ted Nelson, a social scientist working solo,
had independently come up with an idea that came to be called hypertext. With
hypertext, information that allows the cross-referencing of digital documents is
encoded right into the documents.

   But it was not until 1990 that Tim Berners-Lee, a British programmer at the
CERN physics research center in Geneva, developed hypertext markup language --
or HTML, the embedded referencing system that is encoded into each Web document.
It was HTML, followed a few years later by easy-to-use Web browser software like
Mosaic (and Mosaic's commercial offshoot, Netscape Navigator), that made today's
Web feasible.

   But feasibility also came in a confluence of related technologies that made
computers usable by nontechnical people: mice pointing devices; graphical, or
image-based, interfaces; widespread commercial access to the Internet; and
perhaps most important, affordable personal computers with sufficient power to
search for and display graphical information.

   The Web turned the formerly text-based Internet into a multimedia system. And
as technology continues to evolve, the Web is incorporating elements of all
other media -- print publishing, telephones, music and even television and
movies. (Of course, as anyone who has conducted an Internet phone conversation
or downloaded a Web video can attest, the medium is not yet always as good as
the message.)

   Where does the Web go next?

   As it moves beyond the PC onto hand-held devices, tablet computers and other
so-called digital appliances, while spinning out a gossamer matrix of fiber
optic cables and wireless antennas, the Web seems intent on living up to its
World Wide name. Today, about half the nation's population has access to the Web
via PC's. Within a few years, the Web could be accessible by half the global
population, although in many cases the access will be through digital cell
phones and other wireless devices.

   Another watershed technology is also starting to redefine the Webscape. Until
now, the Web has largely involved humans retrieving information from machines.
But now comes a protocol known as XML, for Extensible Markup Language. XML
organizes data so that computers can communicate directly without human
intervention.

   Within the next three years, XML is expected to be at the heart of the
next-generation Web. And the cultural implications may be even more profound
than with the first generation.

   One possibility is the creation of vast automated global markets in which
suppliers and manufacturers can let their computers find, buy and sell goods and
services roboticly. Or genetic researchers looking for gene therapies could turn
their computers loose to sift through one another's databases to identify and
propose medically promising possibilities.

   What are the consequences, if many routines of modern life can be conducted
without human intervention?

   Though the Web was initially hailed as a global digital library of
Alexandria, it soon became apparent that the free flow of digital information
had a darker side. The last seven years of the Web have brought new social
challenges, including new threats to privacy and intellectual property law.
Whether music, child pornography or hate speech, the flow of information across
geographic, legal and cultural boundaries is now virtually unstoppable.

   What will happen in technology's next generation, when Web machines routinely
speak directly to other machines? A grand utopian transformation? Or is the
world about to embark on the dark course described in Arthur C. Clarke's 1965
short story, "Dial F for Frankenstein"? The story details the first moments of a
globally connected computer network, in which the network becomes a sentient
being -- though one that behaves like a 2-year-old child.

   In reality, the impact of the Web's next generation will probably resemble
the current one, with changes taking root on the broad middle ground between
human perfection and willful machine tantrums. The only certainty may be this:
The world will not have time to comfortably contemplate the consequences, for
the next chapter in Web's history is already hurtling forward, in Internet time.



   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Sizing Up the Web"
By most measures, other than ad spending, the web has seen steady growth in the
last few years.

Graph tracks people online -- millions, Percentage of U.S. population since
1996.
Graph tracks time spent online -- monthly average per person, Hours since 1998.

TOP SITES -- VISITORS, MILLIONS

October 2000
AOL Network: 61.5
Yahoo! sites: 56.5
Microsoft sites: 52.1
Lycos: 31.0
Excite network: 30.3
Go network: 23.0
About: 22.2
AltaVista network: 19.3
CNET networks digital: 18.7
Infospace Impressions: 18.0

October 1998
AOL network: 29.2
Microsoft sites: 27.5
Yahoo! sites: 27.0
Lycos: 25.6
GeoCities: 18.4
Excite network: 17.4
Netscape: 18.0
Walt Disney: 13.7
Infoseek: 12.1
AltaVista network: 10.8

CONSUMER SPENDING ONLINE
TRAVEL -- $11.0 billion
PC'S -- $7.7
CLOTHES -- $2.4
BOOKS -- $2.2
OTHER -- $13.4

Graph tracks advertising -- total ad spending since 1999.
(Source: Jupiter Media Metrix)(pg. C4)


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000


                              34 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               December 11, 2000, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. C10

LENGTH: 864 words

HEADLINE: FINANCIAL TIES THAT BIND

BODY:


RESEARCH ETHICS

   IT isn't often that a company goes to the enormous expense of paying for
research on a new drug, and then tries to bury the results. But a California
biotechnology company did exactly that last month.

   The company, Immune Response Corp., had developed a vaccine for people
infected with HIV. When a study showed that it was ineffective, Immune Response
tried to prevent researchers from publishing the results. Because they footed
the bill, company officials argued that they owned the data.

   There was precedent for their position. A few years ago, another drug company
blocked publication of a study showing one of its drugs was no more effective
than a cheaper, competing product. Five years passed before word of that
suppressed study emerged. Meanwhile, consumers continued to pay for the higher-
priced drug.

   When it became clear that the Journal of the American Medical Association
would print the HIV vaccine study, Immune Response Corp. officials tried another
tack. They asked an arbitrator for $ 7 million to $ 10 million in damages --
enough to bankrupt the researchers and severely penalize their universities. The
researchers are Dr. James Kahn from the University of California in San
Francisco and Dr. Stephen Lagakos from the Harvard School of Public Health.

   Theirs was just the latest skirmish in a growing battle for the integrity of
medical research. Today, when pharmaceutical companies are spending more on drug
studies than even the National Institutes of Health, the question of how to
reconcile the conflicting goals of commerce and science has taken on a new
urgency.

   A large body of evidence suggests corporate funding can influence study
outcomes and lead researchers to faulty -- sometimes dangerous -- judgments.
Since the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger during a failed gene therapy
experiment in September 1999, research ethics and conflicts of interest have
been under national scrutiny, the subject of congressional hearings and
professional seminars.

   Last month, federal regulators shut down an experiment involving nearly 200
children at the National Institutes of Health. The study was seeking clues to
genetic causes of obesity -- a discovery that, in a nation with epidemic levels
of obesity, could prove enormously profitable. Experts who originally reviewed
the NIH study concluded it posed unacceptable risks to some study subjects who
were otherwise healthy and as young as age 6. An NIH researcher persuaded the
review panel to reverse itself and approve the study, saying it was no more
dangerous than children playing in traffic. But a new NIH review panel, the
Office for Human Research Protections, shut down the experiment in November. It
was the fourth time the new review panel had taken such dramatic action since it
began functioning in June.

   The panel was spurred in part by revelations that followed Mr. Gelsinger's
death during a failed gene therapy experiment. He had liver damage that should
have disqualified him from the study. Two other patients suffered serious
reactions that were not reported to federal authorities as required. Most
troubling of all, the widely respected study leader, Dr. James Wilson, owned
stock worth $ 13.5 million in a company that made the ill-fated gene therapy
drug.

   Such financial relationships blur the line between dispassionate scientist
and corporate booster. More common are arrangements in which corporations
underwrite research on their products. These relationships can, and do,
influence study outcomes. Concerns about this conflict of interest prompted a
policy at the New England Journal of Medicine to refuse articles from doctors
with ties to the makers of drugs they review. Despite that, the Los Angeles
Times last year found that the journal published numerous articles from authors
with unreported drug company ties.

   Universities, too, have financial disclosure requirements. But a recent
review found they were woefully inadequate. At St. Louis and Washington
universities, for example, researchers are required to disclose financial ties.
But there is no clear consensus about the degree of involvement that should
trigger disclosure or the degree that should disqualify a researcher. If a
doctor who earns $ 200,000 annually receives a few hundred dollars for making a
speech, must that be reported? What if he receives a few thousand dollars?

   The influence of drug company money permeates the government. A recent
analysis by USA Today concluded that more than half of U.S. Food and Drug
Administration advisers have financial ties to pharmaceutical companies. Th at
revelation comes as the agency is under fire for so-called "fast track" approval
of drugs later found to have caused patient deaths.

   These problems aren't new. Yet researchers still haven't come to terms with
how to resolve them. Corporate funding of medical research isn't going to
disappear. Sweeping new rules to protect patients and prevent financial
conflicts are required.

   So, for medical researchers, the question is simple: They can help draft new
guidelines that are tough and enforceable, or leave it to their critics to write
the rules.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000


                              35 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    December 11, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: At issue: IPOs this week

BODY:

Shares  Expected  Mkt.
sold  price value
Co. (ticker), underwriter  (millions)  range (mils.)
GenVec (GNVC), J.P. Morgan  4.0  $14-$16  $312
Early stage gene therapy drugs for heart disease and cancer
Cellomics (CLMX), Prudential Securities  6.0  $11-$13  $322
Makes screening and informatics products for studying cells
Resources Connection (RECN), CS First Boston  6.5  $12-$14  $287
Former Deloitte & Touche consulting subsidiary

   Source: Renaissance Capital, 203-622-2978

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000


                              36 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    December 10, 2000, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1190 words

HEADLINE: Hemophilia work shows gene healing's promise

SOURCE: Associated Press

BYLINE: BRIAN BERGSTEIN

DATELINE: ALAMEDA, Calif.

BODY:

   ALAMEDA, Calif.- Modern medicine saved Steven Faust's life, but that's not
good enough.

   Faust has hemophilia, a dangerous and debilitating inherited disorder that
prevents his blood from clotting. He needs weekly injections of a clotting
protein, a cumbersome regimen that costs $ 150,000 a year.

   Quietly, in an industrial park on an island in San Francisco Bay,
white-coated scientists at Avigen Inc. are plugging away on a genetic treatment
that could be more effective, cheaper and easier. One shot each year or so could
give hemophiliacs a healthy version of the gene that orders the body to produce
their missing blood-clotting protein.

   If gene therapy for hemophilia is successful, it would transform life for
people like Faust.

   It also could lead the way to similar cures for some of mankind's most vexing
problems: heart disease, Parkinson's, perhaps even cancer.

   Now there are signs those shimmering moments, while still far off, are
getting closer.

   Last month, the German pharmaceutical giant Bayer Corp. bought a $ 15 million
stake in Avigen in exchange for the rights to distribute its gene therapy
treatment for hemophilia B, one of the two forms of the disorder. The companies
will work together to seek regulatory approval for the technique, which has
proven promising in research on dogs and in early human trials. Avigen hopes the
treatment can hit the market by 2004.

   Such advances partly explain why venture capital firms poured nearly $ 1
billion into biotechnology companies in the third quarter of 2000, according to
the research firm Venture Economics and the National Venture Capital
Association. While that amounted to less than 4 percent of all venture
investment nationwide, it was more than twice the amount invested in biotech in
the second quarter.

   "The reason there is so much interest in gene therapy is the potential, and
that's the key word at this point in time - potential," said John Monahan,
president and chief executive of Avigen, an 8-year-old company with 100
employees. "In the next 10 years there probably will not be an area of medicine
where gene therapy won't have an impact."

   That optimism can be seen in Avigen's headquarters in the island city of
Alameda. A few turns past the labs where Avigen's scientists toil, bright and
freshly painted corridors lead to empty rooms - the offices and labs the company
expects to need in coming years.

   Avigen also is eyeing possible genetic therapies for Parkinson's disease and
Gaucher's disease - an inherited enzyme-deficiency disorder whose victims bleed
and bruise easily.

   But there's no assurance business will be easy.

   Companies like Avigen take years to show a profit - if they do so at all -
since many focus on narrow or arcane techniques that may never work well enough
to get approved.

   Competition is expected to increase as the completion of the human genome
project - the mapping of nature's instructions for making and maintaining our
bodies - provides a deeper understanding of the role DNA plays in disease.

   Even now, Avigen is far from the only company hunting hemophilia. The disease
is well understood and simple - victims have one defective gene. So hemophilia
is "one of the low-hanging fruits in gene therapy," a good way to establish that
the principle works, said Jan Medina, a senior biotechnology analyst at the ING
Barings investment bank.

   "I think it does have a lot of promise, but people have be cautiously
optimistic about the approach," he said. "We're still at the early stages. From
what we've seen, it will work."

   Avigen believes its breakthrough will be the way it introduces healthy genes
into patients.

   For long-term production of a protein, such as the blood-clotting factor that
hemophiliacs need, healthy genes need to be delivered directly into cells.

   Researchers like to use viruses for that purpose because they are adept at
entering cells, and their genetic material can be replaced with beneficial DNA.

   There have been problems in earlier attempts at this approach. One kind of
virus, known as an adenovirus, is relatively common in the body but can be toxic
in large quantities.

   Last year, gene therapy suffered a staggering blow when an 18-year-old
subject died in a University of Pennsylvania study. The fatal immune system
reaction was believed to have been caused by an adenovirus.

   Avigen has patented and licenses the use of a different virus, known as the
adeno-associated virus, which is found in everyone. The virus seems to be
invisible to the immune system, so cells with genes delivered in an
adeno-associated virus will not be destroyed by the body.

   Avigen's future rests on that virus. In fact, a slimmed-down version of the
acronym, AAV, is the "Av" in Avigen.

   But that is by no means the only method showing promise.

   At the American Society of Hematology conference in San Francisco last week,
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., announced good results in
early clinical trials for a hemophilia A gene therapy.

   Transkaryotic Therapies is following a different trail - a nonviral method in
which a small amount of a patient's cells are removed, genetically engineered to
produce the desired protein and injected back into the body.

   Chiron Corp., based in Emeryville, just north of Alameda, and 44 percent
owned by the Swiss pharmaceutical company Novartis, also is running clinical
trials of a gene therapy for hemophilia A.

   Chiron would not disclose its process but has called both the AAV and the
nonviral systems promising.

   Still another competitor, GenStar Therapeutics Corp. in San Diego, is about
to begin human trials on gene therapy for hemophilia A, in partnership with
Baxter Healthcare Corp.

   GenStar is using the common cold virus as a delivery mechanism. Though that
is an adenovirus, GenStar completely removes the virus' genetic material before
inserting its beneficial payload.

   Earlier techniques were not so thorough, said GenStar's chief executive, Dr.
Robert E. Sobol.

   "It's like removing all the thorns from the rose bush, rather than having
some that remain," he said. "We have a better understanding of how to apply the
technology more effectively."

   The advantage of using an adenovirus is its size: It can carry eight times as
much DNA as Avigen's AAV. That allows GenStar to send bigger genes or
combinations of genes into cells, a technique at the root of potential gene
therapies for prostate cancer and even an AIDS vaccine.

   The company hopes to begin clinical trials on those therapies late next year.

   Hemophiliacs were badly burned by science in the 1980s, when thousands got
HIV and hepatitis from donated clotting factor that wasn't properly cleansed.

   Faust is optimistic that gene therapy will be safe and inexpensive enough to
be covered by regular insurance programs.

   "Maybe to a normal person, gene therapy might seem more science-fiction-scary
than for a hemophiliac," Faust, 38, said from his home in Atlanta. "It can be a
whole new frontier of salvation for us. One, it can help us keep alive and keep
healthy. And two, it can relieve a huge financial burden on ourselves and our
families."


GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven Faust is framed by artwork in his Atlanta home as he
relaxes with his dog, Alexis. Faust has hemophilia, a debilitating inherited
disorder that prevents his blood from clotting. Faust needs weekly injections of
a clotting protein, a cumbersome regimen that costs $ 150,000 a year. But gene
therapy may change that and make his life easier.; Associated Press

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000


                              37 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                December 10, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

HEADLINE: Backseat Drivers

BYLINE: By Anne Magurran;  Anne Magurran is the professor of ecology and
evolution at the University of St. Andrews.

BODY:


    THE CENTURY OF THE GENE
 By Evelyn Fox Keller.
 Illustrated. 186 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
 Harvard University Press. $22.95.

    When James D. Watson and Francis Crick unraveled the mysteries of DNA half a
century ago, the unexpected simplicity of inheritance was one of its most
compelling features. As Crick remarked, "DNA makes RNA, RNA makes protein and
proteins make us." Until recently we could only marvel at the process. Now we
have the potential to direct it. Designer babies and gene therapy are set to
follow in the wake of the Human Genome Project. Genetically modified crops
promise better nutrition or environmental contamination, depending on one's
point of view. Genes have achieved iconic status and, it seems, the capacity to
change every aspect of our lives.

   Not so, according to Evelyn Fox Keller, a professor of the history and
philosophy of science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, in "The
Century of the Gene." She argues that while the gene served 20th-century science
well, recent discoveries about the complexity of gene action undermine its
position as the unifying concept in biology. In its place she advocates a more
holistic view, in which genes no longer shape destiny but behave as bit players
in the game of life. She insists that the word "gene" has become so loaded with
contradictory meanings that it is in danger of collapsing under the strain.

   Keller begins by considering the mechanisms that ensure that DNA is
bequeathed, more or less faithfully, from one generation to the next. Mutations
-- typographical errors that occur in the sequence of nucleotide bases that make
up the DNA code -- are rare: about 1 in 10 billion bases is incorrectly copied
during DNA replication. However, the extreme fidelity of the copying process is
not an inherent quality of DNA; it stems from associated proteins that perform
proofreading and repair tasks. Without their intervention it is estimated that
the error rate could rise to 1 percent. Thus, the "master molecule" requires
many servants.

   Have these servants even more subtle functions? Although most mutations are
deleterious, the exceptions are the raw material of evolution. Occasionally,
bases are changed in a way that increases the survival or reproductive success
of their carrier: such mutations are the basis of adaptation by natural
selection. It is conceivable, therefore, that when a population faces
environmental challenges, it would be advantageous to accelerate the mutation
rate. As long as some of these variants flourish, the population will prosper.
This idea is known as "evolvability." Keller discusses recent proposals that
mechanisms normally ensuring the faithful reproduction of DNA have also evolved
to create genetic variability under stressful conditions. But she fails to do
justice to the controversies surrounding these ideas, such as whether natural
selection can operate at the level of the population as opposed to directly on
the individual. Nor does she mention that evolvability is only feasible in
certain classes of organism, like bacteria. Although it is being used here to
undermine the gene, evolvability is by far the more contentious concept.

   Keller argues that genes are dependent on other cellular performers by
likening DNA to a score and RNA to players who give the music expression.
Furthermore, she cites the case of Dolly the sheep as evidence that organisms
are constructed not so much by genetic programs as by developmental ones. Dolly
was the first mammal to be cloned using DNA taken from an adult cell. However,
it was only when this DNA was inserted into a sheep's egg from which the nucleus
had been removed that Dolly's genes could produce another Dolly. The impotence
of DNA in the absence of the appropriate cellular milieu is the reason "Jurassic
Park" is science fiction. Still, it is worth remembering that the majority of
these indispensable developmental players are ultimately produced by genes.

   Finally, Keller draws attention to functional redundancy, whereby seemingly
important genes can be deleted without any apparent repercussions. She notes
parallels with engineering, which, spurred on by catastrophic events like the
collapse of Scotland's Tay Bridge in 1879, makes doubly sure that structures can
cope with all eventualities. The Forth Rail Bridge, just north of Edinburgh,
stands as a monument to this practice of overengineering. As elsewhere in the
book, the really interesting questions, including whether there is evidence for
backup genes, are glossed over in the attempt to muster evidence against genetic
determinism.

   Keller calls for a different vocabulary to accommodate her perspectives. She
finds that present terminologies are problematic, maintaining, for example, that
seeing the gene as both a structural and functional entity has hindered
progress. But beyond suggesting that concepts can be borrowed from engineering
and computing science, the nature of the substitute lexicon is unclear. She
anticipates new forms of biological thought that will be enormously innovative,
but is vague about what the innovations might be.

   The book's condensed presentation of complex ideas, like evolvability, is
only sparingly seasoned with examples, making it challenging reading. Keller's
critique of accepted notions, notably the "primacy of the gene," ensures that
the book is challenging in the other sense too. But its thesis that the gene is
in crisis is unconvincing. Moreover, many quotations from eminent biologists are
used to bolster Keller's case, but quotations giving the opposite viewpoint are
largely omitted. Because science progresses by falsifying hypotheses and testing
accepted wisdom, the scientific literature is a rich repository of opposing
arguments. This is why the writing of evolutionary biologists -- who never
dispute the truth of Darwinian selection -- proves so fertile for creationists
in search of support.

   In practice, scientists appreciate that there is no universally agreed
definition of a gene, but they devise working definitions that allow them to
formulate hypotheses and explain observations. Keller admits this pragmatism in
her conclusion: "Indeed, the sort of definitional difficulties historians and
philosophers worry about rarely if ever impede biologists in their day-to-day
usage of the term," and she concludes that "gene talk" is unlikely to cease. If
scientists are so untroubled by the multifaceted nature of the gene, why do we
need the new lexicon Keller advocates? To argue that the "landscapes of
possibility" in science are shaped by words articulated by "language-speaking
actors" (scientists) is rather like saying that Shakespeare's depiction of human
nature was limited by his usage of 16th-century English.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2000


                              38 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times

                December 10, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Page 22; Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 824 words

HEADLINE: THEATER REVIEW;
Children in Pursuit Of Elusive Happiness

BYLINE: By NEIL GENZLINGER

DATELINE: MADISON

BODY:

   ANY time a cast list tops two dozen names at this time of year, the customers
are likely to run for cover. We're conditioned to expect one of those painfully
unwatchable holiday productions in which the main point is to get everybody's
children, relatives and friends their two minutes onstage, regardless of talent.

   But don't let the 27 names (not to mention a few pets) on the bill of "The
Blue Bird" at the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival scare you away. Bonnie J.
Monte has accomplished the nearly impossible: from a large cast that mixes
professionals and amateurs, she has wrung a vivid production whose strengths far
outweigh the occasional sluggish spot and gratuitous camcorder moment.

    Ms. Monte, who both directed the show and adapted the script from the
90-year-old play by Maurice Maeterlinck, could not have chosen a more
challenging work to close out her 10th season with the festival. The play, a
fantasy about two children who search for the blue bird of happiness, is rarely
performed, perhaps because doing it justice requires some elaborate staging, not
to mention bringing animals, a loaf of bread, sugar and various trees credibly
to life.

   But Ms. Monte has plunged into the task with gusto and, apparently, a fair
amount of money. Making remarkable use of the festival's relatively small stage,
she has created a show full of the kind of grand images that linger in a child's
mind. Adults, too, will find many of them pretty compelling.

   "The Blue Bird" opens with a touching Christmas Eve scene in which an
impoverished brother and sister, Tyltyl and Mytyl, gaze with wonder at a rich
neighbor's holiday party. For the well-off children who are likely to be able to
afford to see this production -- top ticket is $38 -- there should be enough
food for thought in this scene alone to last well into the new year.

   Paul Molnar and Holly Haire, grown-up actors in the children's roles, have no
trouble making you believe; Ms. Haire especially catches the giddy innocence of
a young girl. Their reverie about the neighbor's party is interrupted by the
mysterious Fairy Berylune (Mary Dierson), who tells them, "It is no more
beautiful over there than it is here," and then sends them on a search that
turns out to be far more wondrous than any holiday revelry.

   There follows a riotous scene in which the children's traveling companions --
bread, milk, sugar, the cat, the dog and more -- all come to life, appearing
rapid-fire out of hiding places in the set. In the Maeterlinck universe, animals
and things and entities like light and night have souls, and all of them are
eager to be able to communicate with the humans who have fascinated or tormented
them for so long.

   Each of these newly alive beings has moments: Sugar (Christian Conn) pulling
off his fingers to give the children a treat; Fire (Veronica Watt) and Water
(Beth Bailey) constantly bickering. The show stealers, though, are Jeffrey M.
Bender as Bread and Andy Paterson as Tylo the Dog. Both display perfect comic
timing in demanding roles. And again there is plenty of food for thought for
younger audience members -- imagining that inanimate objects have personalities
and speculating on what those personalities might be should fuel months of
"let's pretend."

   The festival's stated purpose in picking the show was to provide
entertainment that would challenge both young and old, and "The Blue Bird" is no
mere nursery rhyme brought to life. Serious themes are encountered on this
fanciful journey, ones that will resonate with adults more than with the young.

   There are environmental overtones, as when the children find themselves in a
forest where the trees are understandably irked, since the youngsters' father is
a woodcutter. There is an overarching question of whether mankind's curiosity
can go too far, a notion that sounds as if it's straight out of a debate on
cloning or gene therapy. ("I can't understand man," one character says. "What is
he aiming at? Must he absolutely know everything?")

   Some of this may be unsettling for very young children -- Mytyl and Tyltyl
meet their dead grandparents, for instance, and travel to the kingdom of Night,
with its rooms full of diseases and ghosts and such. And it all may be a bit
long for fidgeters. As briskly as Ms. Monte keeps things moving, the show is
still more than two and a half hours long.

   But Harry Feiner's impressive sets and Molly Reynolds's memorable costumes,
combined with the zesty performances, should be enough to keep almost everyone
interested. The art show in the theater's small gallery, featuring work by
elementary school students in Morristown that was inspired by the play, is also
a nice touch.

THE BLUE BIRD

   New Jersey Shakespeare Festival.

   F. M. Kirby Shakespeare Theater, 36 Madison Avenue, Madison.

   Through Dec. 23. Today and next Sunday at 2 and 7 p.m.; Tuesday through
Friday at 8 p.m.; and Saturday at 2 and 8 p.m.

   (973) 408-5600.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Andy Paterson as Tylo.; Paul Molnar as Tyltyl and Holly Haire
as Mytyl in the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's "Blue Bird." (Photographs by
Jerry Dalia)

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2000


                              39 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                  DECEMBER 8, 2000 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 719 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH HOPE FOR DIABETICS SECOND STUDY SEES GENE THERAPY AS AID
SECOND STUDY SEES GENE THERAPY AS AID

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapists might be able to retrain cells in the stomach and intestine
to produce insulin and treat diabetes, scientists said yesterday.

   They said they had genetically engineered gut cells in mice to produce human
insulin. The genetically engineered mice survived without developing diabetes
even after their pancreatic cells, which normally produce insulin, were
destroyed, the researchers said.

   Their report, published in the journal Science, is the second in as many
months to suggest that gene therapy might be used to treat or even cure
diabetes, which affects 16 million people in the United States alone.

   The idea is to replace the insulin produced by pancreatic beta cells by
genetically altering cells that make similar substances in the body. In type I,
or juvenile, diabetes, the beta cells in the pancreas are destroyed and in type
II, or adult-onset, diabetes the body is no longer able to use insulin
effectively.

   Tests on human patients are a long way off, said Timothy Kieffer, a
researcher at the University of Alberta in Edmonton, Canada who helped lead the
study.

   "The approach that we took in this study is clearly not applicable to treat
human patients, so what we need to do now is develop a suitable delivery system
to get into humans," he said in a telephone interview.

   Kieffer, Anthony Cheung and colleagues used cells in the gut called K cells,
which are similar to beta cells.

   K cells secrete the hormone GIP, which works with insulin, which in turn
helps the body use fats and glucose effectively.

   "The role of GIP is to tell the pancreatic beta cells that there is food in
the intestine containing glucose," Kieffer said. He said if they could be made
to produce insulin, the body would probably handle it better than it handles the
injected insulin used by diabetics.

   They took K cells from mice and inserted the human insulin gene. They
injected this new gene into mouse embryos and found when the mice were born,
they produced human insulin in the small intestine and stomach.

   "This insulin protected the mice from developing diabetes," the researchers
wrote. They tested this by destroying the beta cells of the mice. Normal mice
died of diabetes but the genetically engineered mice survived.

   This could be a useful approach for gene therapy for diabetes, the
researchers said.

   "There are many features of the upper gastrointestinal tract that make it an
attractive target for gene therapy," they wrote. It is easy to get to without
surgery, using tools such as endoscopes, so it would be easy to deliver gene
therapy directly to the area.

   Kieffer said it might even be possible to deliver the new genes orally, in a
pill or perhaps using liposomes, little balls of fat, encased in food or some
other carrier.

   And the gut is full of stem cells - the immature master cells that can give
rise to many other types of cells, which are again preferred targets of gene
therapy. Kieffer said if stem cells could be genetically changed, instead of
mature cells, the effects will last much longer.

   Theirs is the second report in as many months on gene therapy and diabetes.
In November, teams at the University of Calgary and Yonsei Medical School in
Seoul used genetic engineering to make mice produce human insulin in their
livers.

   In February, a team at Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. said they genetically
engineered mouse muscle cells to produce extra insulin when "told" to do so by a
drug given orally.

   And Canadian researchers reported in August that they had transplanted
pancreatic islet cells into patients to treat their diabetes.

   Kieffer thinks a gene therapy approach may work better than transplants,
because the immune system will attack any transplanted cells. Thus patients who
get transplants have to take immune-suppressing drugs.

   "A potential feature of the gene therapy approach is that by making another
cell in the body take over the production of insulin, we hope this would
ameliorate the requirement for immunosuppression," he said.

   Kieffer, whose work was paid for by the Juvenile Diabetes Research
Foundation, the Heritage Foundation and the Canadian Diabetes Association, said
he and Cheung had formed a company under the auspices of the University of
Alberta, called enGene, to help move the research along.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                              40 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            December 8, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Scientists use gene therapy to prevent diabetes in mice

BYLINE: MAGGIE FOX, REUTERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Gene therapists might be able to retrain cells in the stomach and intestine
to produce insulin and treat diabetes, scientists said yesterday.

    They said they had genetically engineered gut cells in mice to produce human
insulin. The genetically engineered mice survived without developing diabetes
even after their pancreatic cells, which normally produce insulin, were
destroyed, the researchers said.

    Their report, published in the journal Science, is the second in as many
months to suggest that gene therapy might be used to treat or even cure
diabetes, which affects 16 million people in the United States alone.

    The idea is to replace the insulin produced by pancreatic beta cells by
genetically altering cells that make similar substances in the body. In type I
diabetes, the beta cells in the pancreas are destroyed, and in type II diabetes,
the body is no longer able to use insulin effectively.

    Tests on human patients are a long way off, said Timothy Kieffer, a
researcher at the University of Alberta in Edmonton, Canada, who helped lead the
study.

    "The approach that we took in this study is clearly not applicable to treat
human patients, so what we need to do now is develop a suitable delivery system
to get into humans," he said in a telephone interview.

    Kieffer, Anthony Cheung and colleagues used cells in the gut called K cells,
which are similar to beta cells.

   K cells secrete the hormone GIP, which works with insulin, which in turn
helps the body use fats and glucose effectively.

    "The role of GIP is to tell the pancreatic beta cells that there is food in
the intestine containing glucose," Kieffer said. He said that if they could be
made to produce insulin, the body probably would handle it better than it
handles the injected insulin used by diabetics.

    They took K cells from mice and inserted the human insulin gene. They
injected this new gene into mouse embryos and found that when the mice were
born, they produced human insulin in the small intestine and stomach.

   "This insulin protected the mice from developing diabetes," the researchers
wrote. They tested this by destroying the beta cells of the mice. Normal mice
died of diabetes, but the genetically engineered mice survived.

   This could be a useful approach for gene therapy for diabetes, the
researchers said.

    "There are many features of the upper gastrointestinal tract that make it an
attractive target for gene therapy," they wrote. It is easy to get to without
surgery, using tools such as endoscopes, so it would be easy to deliver gene
therapy directly to the area.

    Kieffer said it might even be possible to deliver the new genes orally, in a
pill or perhaps using liposomes, little balls of fat, encased in food or some
other carrier.

    And the gut is full of stem cells - the immature master cells that can give
rise to many other types of cells, which are again preferred targets of gene
therapy. Kieffer said that if stem cells could be genetically changed, instead
of mature cells, the effects would last much longer.

    Theirs is the second report in as many months on gene therapy and diabetes.
In November, teams at the University of Calgary and Yonsei Medical School in
Seoul used genetic engineering to make mice produce human insulin in their
livers.

    In February, a team at Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it genetically
engineered mouse muscle cells to produce extra insulin when "told" to do so by a
drug given orally.

    And Canadian researchers reported in August that they had transplanted
pancreatic islet cells into patients to treat their diabetes.

    Kieffer thinks a gene therapy approach may work better than transplants,
because the immune system will attack any transplanted cells. Thus patients who
get transplants have to take immune-suppressing drugs.

    "A potential feature of the gene therapy approach is that by making another
cell in the body take over the production of insulin, we hope this would
ameliorate the requirement for immunosuppression," he said.

    Kieffer, whose work was paid for by the Juvenile Diabetes Research
Foundation, the Heritage Foundation and the Canadian Diabetes Association, said
he and Cheung had formed a company under the auspices of the University of
Alberta, called enGene, to help move the research along.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                              41 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    December 7, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 26; National Desk

LENGTH: 355 words

HEADLINE: NEW POLICY ON MISCONDUCT SET FOR FEDERAL RESEARCH

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The White House issued a new policy on misconduct Wednesday that establishes
uniform guidelines for all federally financed research programs.

   The policy, developed by the National Science and Technology Council,
stipulates that informants who alert officials to potential misconduct should be
protected against retaliation.

   At the same time, people who are accused of misconduct should receive details
of the allegations in writing and an opportunity to respond, the policy says.

   Federal agencies have one year to implement the rules, the White House said.

   Federal officials have had an uneven history of dealing with misconduct
allegations and monitoring the spending of billions of research dollars.

   In one high-profile case, the Food and Drug Administration found that
University of Pennsylvania researchers failed to properly report side effects
and had no outside monitors in a gene therapy experiment that led to the death
of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, last year.

   But researchers also have been wrongly accused of misconduct. A researcher
who was charged with scientific fraud and was the target of investigations and
congressional hearings for more than a decade was cleared in 1996.

   Thereza Imanishi-Kari had been accused of falsifying data in a genetic
research paper that was co-authored by Nobel laureate David Baltimore.

   The federal government's new policy defines misconduct as knowingly or
recklessly fabricating, falsifying or plagiarizing research.

   Once an allegation is made, an agency is to conduct an inquiry to determine
if a fuller investigation is needed. Records can be kept secret and are exempt
from the Freedom of Information Act during the investigation.

   The policy says of the accused: "The mere filing of an allegation of research
misconduct against them will not bring their research to a halt or be the basis
for other disciplinary or adverse action absent other compelling reasons."

   Criminal or civil-fraud misconduct would be referred to appropriate
authorities.

   Misconduct short of such fraud could bring letters of reprimand, suspension
or termination of the program.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2000


                              42 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   December 7, 2000, Thursday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: MISCELLANEOUS, Pg. A-2

LENGTH: 934 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   Business Editors: Features Editors:

   The technology news enterprise package for this week through Dec. 12.

   Comments or questions to Frank Bajak at fbajak@ap.org or 212-621-1689, or to
Terry Badger at tbadger@ap.org or 212-621-1976. Questions about photos to Rich
Kareckas at 212-621-1900. For questions about graphics, call Dawn Desilets at
212-621-7827. Repeats of stories can be obtained through the AP Service Desk at
212-621-1595.

   Eds: ADDS photo numbers for BC-Search Engines Explored, BC-Gene Therapy, ADDS
graphics for BC-E-Government Pioneer and BC-Search Engines Explored.

   NET-BASED GOVERNMENT: Singapore cuts through red tape with one-stop Web site

   SINGAPORE -- Grouchy bureaucrats are everywhere citizens conduct routine
business with governments. Unless those citizens are Singaporeans, doing
business on the Internet. Increasingly, people in the small southeast Asian
nation are finding they need do little more than visit a single government Web
site to accomplish tasks as mundane as applying for an extra phone line or as
vital as buying a new home.

   While governments around the world race to make their services available
online, e-government is old hat in tech-savvy Singapore, which has been
aggressively computerizing its services since 1981.

   BC-E-Government Pioneer. 980 words. Moved Wednesday as f7163 for release
Saturday, Dec. 9 and thereafter. Also moving on general news circuits.

   By Regan Morris.

   AP Photo SIN101 of Dec. 6, AP Graphic E-GOVERNMENT PIONEER.

   BUSINESS, GENERAL interest.

   EXPLORING SEARCH: Under the hood, profits often set agenda for search engines

   SAN FRANCISCO -- Almost everyone on the Internet makes search requests, but
hardly anyone understands the mechanics behind the search. Having the knowledge
didn t matter much in the early days of the Web because search engines all used
the same basic techniques. In their quest for profits, though, search engines
are embracing new financial strategies that could affect the information
delivered to Web surfers. The shift is making the distinctions among search
engines increasingly relevant to Web surfers and online merchants.

   BC-Search Engines Explored. 900 words. Moving Thursday as f7164 for use
Monday, Dec. 11 and thereafter. Also moving on general news circuits.

   By Business Writer Michael Liedtke.

   AP Graphic SEARCH ENGINES EXPLORED. AP Photo BEA101 of Dec. 7

   BUSINESS, GENERAL interest.

   BIOTECH TREATMENT: Small company s hemophilia therapy highlights promise of
gene manipulation

   ALAMEDA, Calif. -- Modern medicine saved Steven Faust s life, but that s not
good enough. Faust has hemophilia, a rare but debilitating inherited disorder
that prevents blood from clotting. He needs weekly injections of a blood
clotting protein, a cumbersome regimen that costs $ 150,000 a year. Quietly, in
an industrial park on an island in San Francisco Bay, white-coated scientists at
Avigen Inc. are plugging away on a genetic treatment that would be more
effective, cheaper and easier. If the gene therapy for hemophilia is successful,
it would improve the lives of people like Faust and could lead to similar cures
for some of mankind s most vexing problems.

   BC-Gene Therapy. 900 words. Moving Thursday as f7165 for use Sunday, Dec. 10
and thereafter. Also moving on general news circuits.

   By Business Writer Brian Bergstein.

   AP Photo FX101 of Dec. 7.

   BUSINESS, SCIENCE interest.

   FREESPEECH.COM: Judge says First Amendment doesn t apply to Web addresses

   CONCORD, N.H. -- Free speech may prevail elsewhere on the Internet, but not
when it comes to typing www.(pickanyobscenity).com. At least, that s one federal
judge s opinion in an adult Web site case.

   The dispute before Judge Steven McAuliffe was whether the First Amendment
protects World Wide Web addresses. Do they serve to communicate, or to navigate?
McAuliffe found for navigation. Free-speech advocates say the judge grossly
underestimated the communicative power of domain names.

   BC-Internet-Name Freedom. 750 words. Moved Wednesday as f7166 for release
Monday, Dec. 11 and thereafter.

   By J.M. Hirsch.

   BUSINESS, GENERAL interest.

   GLOBAL TOY STORE: Net helps spread toy fads worldwide in days

   LONDON -- In toy stores from Birmingham to Boston to Beijing, a small robotic
toy dog silently begs, Buy me, buy me.

   Along with aluminum scooters and the latest miniature monsters from the
Pokemon range, computerized canines called Poo-chi or Teksta are expected to be
the gifts of choice for youngsters around the world these holidays.

   Egged on by aggressive mass marketing, youngsters increasingly demand the
same playthings. But toy sellers say that, in a global community, children also
are influenced by word of mouth and the World Wide Web.

   BC-Global Toys. 750 words. Moved Tuesday on financial wires as f7044 for use
any time.

   By Sue Leeman.

   AP Photo planned.

   CONSUMER, LIFESTYLE interest

   TECH TESTS:

   PRODUCT REVIEW: Netscape 6.0 Likened to Fashion Show

   UNDATED -- Netscape has unleashed Version 6.0, the Web browser that looks
like a fashion show.

   Available for the PC, Mac and Linux platforms, Netscape 6.0 has taken Version
4.7, the dependable browser in a Wall Street business suit, and moved it to the
East Village, complete with nose ring and dyed orange hair.

   The default interface is consciously hip-looking. Like those tall platform
shoes, it s stylish, but not right for everyone. In this case, the look is a
theme.

   BC-Tech Tests-Netscape 6.0. 600 words. Moved Wednesday as f7167 for use
anytime.

   By Larry Blasko.

   CONSUMER interest.

   The AP

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2000


                              43 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 5, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 813 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY TRIAL CALLED A SUCCESS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   In a rare bit of good news for the controversial field of gene therapy,
Boston researchers yesterday reported that they have used a cautious form of the
treatment to reduce spontaneous bleeding in people with hemophilia.

   The Boston scientists said they were able to treat several patients with the
inherited bleeding disease without using weakened viruses, a common strategy in
gene therapy that has brought harsh scrutiny to the field. A young volunteer
died in a gene therapy experiment using viruses in Pennsylvania last year, and
there have been several other adverse reactions to viruses.

      And, though the findings announced yesterday at a San Francisco conference
were preliminary, supporters of gene therapy saw them as part of a welcome
trend. It's at least the third report in the past year of small successes with
gene therapy, which previously has disappointed despite hundreds of experiments
over the past 20 years.

   "These are the first positive results from a trial of gene therapy for
hemophilia A," which causes abnormal bleeding in about 13,500 Americans, said
Dr. David Roth of Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, the principal
investigator. The safety trial in a small number of patients is sponsored by
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge.

   Gene therapy is a relatively new arm of medicine in which copies of normal
genes are used to replace or compensate for malfunctioning genes in the patient.
But, although the theory behind gene therapy is appealing, researchers have been
hard-pressed to help patients until recently.

   Last year's good news came from a team in France, which reported correcting a
severe immune defect in three out of five young children, and from Philadelphia,
where researchers saw glimpses of benefit after treating three patients with
hemophilia B, the other major type of the disease.

   Roth, an assistant professor at Harvard Medical School and director of
clinical research at BIDMC, revealed the data at a meeting of the American
Society of Hematology in San Francisco.

   Importantly, he said, the signs of activity in the genes given to the
volunteers were not accompanied by any serious side effects.

   Roth said in an interview: "We all feel cautiously encouraged at seeing what
we're seeing."

   The trial, which so far has treated fewer than a dozen patients, was halted
temporarily last winter by Beth Israel Deaconess officials in a review of gene
therapy research prompted by the Pennsylvania death.

   The death of Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson was triggered by an injection of genes
carried by weakened viruses - the most common technique for getting genes into
body cells to correct a variety of diseases that are caused by mutated genes.

   By contrast, Roth and the TKT scientists removed a small amount of skin cells
from the patients, took them to the laboratory and inserted the normal blood
clotting genes by subjecting them to a small electric shock. After several weeks
of multiplying in the lab, doctors inserted marble-sized clumps of the
gene-corrected cells into the patients' abdomens in a minor surgical procedure.
The clumps contained from 100 million to 400 million cells each.

   Hemophilia can be mild or severe depending on how much of the protein, Factor
VIII, the person's body is naturally making. Those with less than 1 percent of
normal levels are severely affected, Roth said, and often have spontaneous
bleeding inside their joints as well as excessive bleeding from cuts and wounds.

   Such patients take bioengineered Factor VIII, but it's very expensive and
usually is taken after a bleeding episode has already occurred.

   When the genes were implanted into the six patients, who ranged in age from
20 to 72, Roth said, four of the volunteers were able to decrease the amount of
bioengineered Factor VIII they were taking. Moreover, two of the patients had
fewer episodes of spontaneous bleeding than before the therapy, for up to a
year.

   The longest patient followup was 18 months.

   Dr. Richard Selden, chief executive officer and founder of Transkaryotic,
said the trial had enrolled only a small number of patients and proceeded slowly
"because we were making sure that the patients' safety was the first and
foremost" consideration.

   Six more patients are to be enrolled and treated, and after the completion of
the Phase I trial, if results continue to be favorable, the treatment would be
tried in more patients and at higher doses.

   Dr. Mark A. Kay, head of the human gene therapy program at Stanford
University, said he was "cautiously optimistic" about the early results in both
hemophilia A and hemophilia B.  But, he said, the treatment will have to be
improved to achieve higher levels of the clotting factors.

   Kay said that he has worked on gene therapy for hemophilia for 10 years, "and
this is the first time in my life I've seen signs of therapeutic benefits."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2000


                              44 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    December 5, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH SCIENCE; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 111 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS Stephen Reucroft and John Swain are experimental
particle physicists who teach at Northeastern University.;
MEDICAL MATZOH

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   Gene therapy relies on having some sort of mechanism to ferry foreign DNA
into cells: Usually a virus is pressed into service for the task, but viruses
themselves are complex objects that can be difficult to control. Karen Wooley
and her colleagues at Washington University in St. Louis have managed to replace
viruses with little packages they call knedels, after a type of Polish matzoh
ball. Made of synthetic polymers and about the same size as viruses, the knedels
can penetrate living cells but don't trigger an immune response. They may also
be useful for delivering drugs, or even removing cholesterol from blood.

   ref: Discover, December 2000.


LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2000


                              45 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    DECEMBER 5, 2000, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 559 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Could Help Hemophiliacs;

Experiment shows promising results for producing protein for clotting

SOURCE: Chronicle Medical Writer

BYLINE: Ulysses Torassa

BODY:
In a modest but important step forward for gene therapy, researchers reported
positive results yesterday from an attempt to fix the genetic defect that causes
spontaneous bleeding in people with hemophilia.

    Four of six men enrolled in an initial trial were able to produce more of
the protein needed for their blood to clot. The men, all suffering from
hemophilia A, the most common form of the disease, also had fewer bleeding
episodes. There were no reports of serious side effects in any of the subjects.

    "We're all very excited about this," said David A. Roth, director of
hemophilia clinical research at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and an
author of the study. He presented the findings yesterday at the American Society
of Hematology meeting at the Moscone Center.

    The news is a boost not only for those with hemophilia, but also for
scientists trying to make the promise of gene therapy a reality. Genes involved
in many diseases are now known, but researchers have so far been largely stymied
in attempts to reach into a person's DNA and fix the problem.

    Gene therapy suffered a major setback last year after an 18-year-old man in
Pennsylvania died in one of the early human trials of gene therapy. In that
case, scientists were using a virus to carry a healthy gene into the young man's
cells.

    Roth's team took a different approach -- taking skin cells from patients,
growing them in a laboratory and using an electric current to create an opening
in the cell wall for the working gene to slide in. The cells were then implanted
in the patients' belly fat.

    The subjects who responded made just a small fraction of the normal volume
of clotting factor, but still had fewer episodes of bleeding. Patients got
varying doses of the new cells, and it appears that those who received the most
got the most benefit.

    "The patient who got the largest dose went from bleeding five times a month
to almost a year without any spontaneous hemorrhages," Roth said.

    Hemophilia is a hereditary disease that is passed to male offspring. The 'A'
form is the most common, affecting 1 out of every 10,000 men. About 13,500
people in the United States have hemophilia A.

    Yesterday's good news comes on the heels of even more encouraging results
from a gene therapy trial for hemophilia B, the less common form which affects 1
in 50,000 men.

    Scientists at the Alameda biotech company Avigen and their collaborators
last year reported success in using a virus to carry the working gene into
muscle cells, which in turn produced the 'B' form clotting protein.

    Steven Humes, director of research for the National Hemophilia Foundation,
said the results of these trials -- and others that have yet to announce results
-- are being followed enthusiastically in the hemophilia community.

    "We're very optimistic" that hemophilia will be treated or even cured by
gene therapy, Humes said. "We're banking on it."

    Currently, people with severe hemophilia must receive frequent transfusions
of clotting factor, and many have contracted hepatitis and HIV from supplies
made from human blood donations. The therapy is also extremely expensive,
reaching $100,000 per year in many cases, Humes said.

    "People can max out on their insurance by the time they're in the teens," he
said.E-mail Ulysses Torassa at utorassa@sfchronicle.com.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                              46 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    December 4, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E05

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: Regenerating Approaches in Medicine

BYLINE: Terence Chea , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Some of the country's leading scientific thinkers are gathering in Washington
today to trade ideas about a new kind of medicine that promises to prolong human
lives by harnessing the body's natural ability to grow and heal itself.

   The first conference on regenerative medicine brings together researchers,
physicians and entrepreneurs to review the latest advances in a new branch of
medicine that attempts to tap the powers of human genes, proteins and cells to
repair organs and tissues ravaged by disease and aging.

   The term "regenerative medicine" was coined two years ago by William
Haseltine, the chairman and chief executive of Human Genome Sciences Inc., a
Rockville biotechnology firm that is developing new drugs based on an intimate
understanding of genes. Haseltine, today's featured speaker, edits an online
scientific journal on regenerative medicine and serves as the conference's
chair. In his kickoff to the two-day conference, Haseltine plans to outline his
vision for the future growth of what he calls the "defining concept in medicine
for the next century."

   "We're moving into an era when the fundamental basis of medicine will be our
own human proteins and cells," Haseltine said in an interview. "The notion of
regenerative medicine is to tap into that inherent power the human body has to
repair its own cells and tissues."

   Haseltine believes we have entered a new era in which scientists will use
human proteins and cells to treat disease, grow human organs in laboratories and
turn back the genetic clock in individual cells to rejuvenate aged tissue and
organs.

   Regenerative medicine distinguishes itself from previous medical approaches,
which rely mostly on putting foreign substances into the body to cure illness,
he said. For most of human history, people tapped plants and minerals for their
medicinal powers. Only about 150 years ago did scientists learn how to purify
chemicals and make new ones, which led to the drugs that now line shelves at
modern drug stores and supermarkets.

   "The basis of regenerative medicine is to use substances the body naturally
makes to control, regulate and build itself to do exactly those functions when
the body cannot do them by itself," Haseltine said. "They will be the most
natural of all medicines because they involve substances that are fully human."

   This week's conference features presentations by leading researchers at
biotechnology companies and research institutions in a variety of emerging
medical fields such as gene therapy, cloning and stem-cell biology.

   Among the presenters are Ron McKay of the National Institutes of Health, who
will discuss the medical potential of neural stem cells--the "master" cells that
can grow into any cell in the brain or spinal cord--and Jeffrey Isner of
Boston's St. Elizabeth's Medical Center who will present research on growing new
blood vessels in the heart.

   Haseltine said huge advances in these emerging technologies promise to help
people live longer, healthier lives.

   "We are interested in repairing damage to the young and restoring active
function to the elderly," Haseltine said. "We don't just get older. We stay
healthy as we get older."



   More stories on BIOTECH/MEDICAL online at Washtech.com


LOAD-DATE: December 04, 2000


                              47 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    December 4, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: STYLE; Pg. C09; BOB LEVEY'S WASHINGTON

LENGTH: 847 words

HEADLINE: Marco and a Heart That Children's Fixed

BYLINE: Bob Levey

BODY:


   Each year during our fund-raising campaign for Children's Hospital, I report
on patients with unusual ailments and backgrounds. A recent patient qualified on
both counts. My associate, Grace Hill-Putnam, has the story:


   When you first meet Marco Aguero, you think nothing of his curly hair. His
younger brother, Carlos, has it, as do a brother and sister whose pictures hang
on the wall. But curly hair is a sign of family heart problems, explained Ana
Aguero, the children's mother.

   "When you look at people who have cardiomyopathy, maybe about 30 to 40
percent of the time, if you look very carefully, you'll find that other family
members have it," said Dr. Jeffrey Moak, director of electrophysiology and
pacing in the Children's Hospital cardiology department. Some families share
genetic abnormalities like the Agueros' curly hair gene, he said. They can
indicate heart problems.

   The Agueros' oldest child and only daughter, Yoxileny, and their oldest son,
Mauricio, died of heart failure when the family lived in Costa Rica.

   "She would have been 23 yesterday," Ana Aguero said of Yoxileny, as tears
welled in her eyes. "She was always very healthy. We went on a trip and
everything was fine, but the next day, in the morning, she died. We didn't know
she had a problem until she died" at 12.

   After her death, doctors closely monitored Mauricio, fearing that he might
share Yoxileny's heart condition. He did, but Costa Rican doctors were unable to
help him. He died in 1993, at 13, three years after Yoxileny.

   Four years ago, the Agueros moved to Germantown with hopes that U.S. doctors
could help their surviving children. "The doctors in Costa Rica didn't know
anything about the problem," Ana Aguero said. "Here, they know more."

   They certainly do at Children's Hospital. After a routine physical indicated
an irregular heartbeat, Marco, now 10, was referred to Dr. Moak. He quickly
determined that Marco was a candidate for a defibrillator.

   Cardiomyopathy can lead to poor cardiac output or heart failure. It affects
both the mechanical function and electrical system of the heart.

   "The heart is like a car engine. If the pistons don't go up and down, you're
not going to go anywhere--the mechanical aspect. And the only reason the pistons
work is because spark plugs and a battery ignite the gasoline [the electrical
aspect]," Dr. Moak said.

   Because of his family history, Marco was at high risk for heart failure if
left untreated, Dr. Moak said. Children's implanted a defibrillator under his
skin. It's a pacemaker that senses and corrects irregular heart rhythms.

   Marco takes medicine twice daily to stabilize the mechanical function of his
heart. "On the electrical side, he should be safe now [because of the
defibrillator], but on the mechanical side, we're hopeful that the drugs that
he's on will stabilize the mechanical function of his heart," Dr. Moak
explained.

   Carlos, Marco's 5-year-old brother, has the same heart condition. Dr. Moak
said gene therapy may eventually correct the defect in both brothers. "But
that's way off in the future," he said.

   Before Marco's surgery, it became apparent that he wasn't fond of shots, so
doctors gave him anesthesia first. "People were so nice," his mother said. "They
talked to him and asked him what he wanted; they gave him a choice."

   "They gave me Popsicles and I got to play Nintendo," Marco added.

   Said Ana Aguero: "Dr. Moak is very nice. He's so special with the children.
He's a good doctor."

   "And a funny one, too," Marco chimed in. "He's a smart doctor, and he helped
my heart problem get better. He's my friend."

   "Marco's a great kid. He has a positive attitude," said Dr. Moak. "He's into
Pokemon cards. Some characters have special electrical powers, and he identifies
with these characters," he said with a chuckle.

   Marco wants to be a scientist when he grows up so he can "discover how to
make clones." But his current efforts are dedicated to finishing his Halloween
candy.

   "I've only got a little, see?" he says, as he shakes a bag. He also likes to
play soccer, rollerblade and run with his Boston terrier puppy, Trigger.

   Ana said she is glad that the family came to the United States. Her husband,
William, went home in 1997. She supports the family by cleaning office
buildings.

   "We won't go back to Costa Rica," she said. "The life is better in this
country than in Costa Rica. Better doctors, better education, better everything.
It's better that we stay here."

   "And he feels healthy," she says, hugging Marco. "Thank God for that."


   Our goal by Jan. 19: $ 750,000.

   In hand as of Nov. 30: $ 84,155.96.


   TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE CAMPAIGN:

   Make a check or money order payable to

   Children's Hospital and mail it to Bob Levey,

   The Washington Post, Washington, D.C. 20071.


   BY VISA OR MASTERCARD:

   Call Post-Haste at 202-334-9000 on a

   touch-tone phone. Then punch in K-I-D-S,

   or 5437, and follow instructions.


   TO CONTRIBUTE ONLINE:

   Go to www.washingtonpost.com/

   childrenshospital and follow instructions.


LOAD-DATE: December 04, 2000


                              48 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    November 29, 2000 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 535 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS WARN U.S. COULD FACE BIOLOGICAL WARFARE TERRORISM

BYLINE: By SABRINA EATON; PLAIN DEALER BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Scourges such as smallpox and anthrax are increasingly likely to fall into
terrorist hands as third world nations establish germ warfare programs, a panel
of scientists predicted yesterday.

   The United States is taking the threat seriously, with the Centers for
Disease Control spending more than $275 million in the past two years to prepare
to fight bioterrorism, CDC Director Jeffrey P. Koplan said.

   Its efforts include amassing 40 million doses of smallpox vaccine, preparing
bulk packs of medical supplies that could reach anywhere in the United States
within 12 hours, and conducting mock releases of "pneumonic plague" virus to
test local and national emergency response.

   American scientists also are using the Internet to monitor global pestilence
outbreaks, and developing a computer chip that doctors could use to swiftly
identify the DNA of organisms that cause illness, said Dr. George Poste, chief
executive officer of Health Technology Networks in suburban Philadelphia.

   The Ohio Department of Health's bioterrorism unit is establishing a plan to
coordinate local response to terrorist catastrophes, said department spokeswoman
Mari-jean Siehl. Ohio also participates in a national computerized early warning
system for doctors.

   "We're really working hard on this," said Siehl.

   The threat comes in part from nations like Iran and Iraq, which "can't
challenge the U.S. head-on with stealthy aircraft or technology, so they need
something else to shift the balance of power," Yale University political
scientist Paul Bracken told the Second National Symposium on Medical and Public
Health Response to Bioterrorism, a two-day gathering of experts in public health
and world politics. He said terrorists could then obtain such biological
weapons.

   The Japanese terrorist group Aum Shinrikyo, which released poisonous sarin
gas in the Tokyo subways in 1995, has also tried nine times to infect Tokyo with
anthrax and botulism, scientists said.

   So far, all the bioterrorism scares in the United States have been unfounded,
said the CDC's Koplan. One of the better publicized incidents occurred in 1997,
when the Washington office of B'nai B'rith, a Jewish organization, was
quarantined for nine hours after workers feared a mysterious package contained
bacteria.

   But emergency drills conducted in May showed the need for more hospital beds
in a catastrophe, and for better coordination between federal and local
officials, Koplan said.

   "The immensity of this task is so great that there's no point where we'll
ever be able to say, It's OK. We're ready to go,' " said Koplan.

   Bioterrorism is a more complex threat than nuclear or chemical weapons
because of the variety of plagues that could be used, said Poste, who formerly
headed research for pharmaceutical giant SmithKline Beecham. Advances in gene
therapy to fight existing ailments could be abused by rogue nations or
terrorists to create new, incurable diseases, he added.

   "If Ted Kazinsky were trained in the 1990s, would he have used bombs, or
dumped something into a hamburger plant?" asked Poste. Kazinsky was better known
as the "Unabomber," an anti-technology zealot who mailed deadly, exploding
packages in his protest.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2000


                              49 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                  November 29, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: Researchers Discover Gene That Plays Role in Autism; Finding May Help
Unravel Disorder

BODY:


   Scientists have long theorized that about 15 genes play a role in who is born
with the severe brain disorder autism--and now they've finally found one of
those genes.

   A study of 57 autism patients found that 40 percent carry a mutated version
of the HOXA1 gene, which plays a crucial role in early brain development,
University of Rochester scientists reported this week.

   Children need to inherit just one copy of the mutated gene from one parent to
have autism. In fact, scientists found only one patient, a severe case, who
inherited a copy of the bad gene from both parents. The finding suggests that
when that happens, the fetus usually dies, said lead researcher Patricia Rodier,
who heads the university's autism research center, which is funded by the
National Institutes of Health.

   The NIH called the finding a significant step in understanding what
predisposes people to developing autism. More than 400,000 Americans have the
disorder, characterized by profound social withdrawal, repetitive behavior and
an inability to communicate. Research suggests it is caused when something goes
wrong during critical fetal brain development--a theory supported by the gene
discovery, which was reported in the December issue of the journal Teratology.

   Why don't parents who harbor the defective gene have autism themselves? Some
do have subtle symptoms, suggesting that something else, perhaps some other
gene, keeps the autism-related gene in check, Rodier said.

   HOXA1 is one of a family of genes vital to early embryo development because
genes in the group turn other genes on or off. HOXA1's specific role is in brain
development. Mice that lack the gene have brainstem damage, malformed ears and
other classic signs of autism--one reason Rodier's research team decided to
check the gene's role in people.

   The gene is not the kind that could ever be fixed with gene therapy. But the
discovery may help doctors unravel just how the brain changes when HOXA1 is
abnormal, Rodier said.

   "If you figure out the brain changes, you're on your way, we hope, to finding
better treatments," she said.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2000


                              50 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 28, 2000, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 350 words

HEADLINE: Scientists uncover a mutated gene linked to autism

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Scientists long have theorized that about 15 different genes
play a role in who is born with the severe brain disorder autism - and now
they've finally found one of those genes.

   A study of 57 autism patients found that 40 percent carry a mutated version
of the HOXA1 gene, which plays a crucial role in early brain development,
University of Rochester scientists reported Monday.

   Children need to inherit just one copy of the mutated gene from one parent to
have autism. In fact, scientists found only one patient, an extremely severe
case, who inherited a copy of the bad gene from both parents, suggesting that
when that happens the fetus usually dies, said lead researcher Patricia Rodier,
who heads the university's National Institutes of Health-funded autism research
center.

   The NIH called the finding a significant step in understanding what
predisposes people to developing autism.

   More than 400,000 Americans have the brain disorder, characterized by
profound social withdrawal, repetitive behavior and inability to communicate.

   Research suggests it's caused when something goes wrong during critical fetal
brain development - a theory the gene discovery, in the December issue of the
journal Teratology, supports.

   Why don't parents who harbor the defective gene have autism themselves? Some
do have subtle symptoms, suggesting that something else, perhaps some other
gene, keeps the autism-related gene in check, Rodier said.

   HOXA1 is one of a family of genes vital to early embryo development because
genes in the group turn on or off other genes. HOXA1's specific role is in brain
development.

   Mice that lack this gene have brainstem damage, malformed ears and other
classic signs of autism - one reason Rodier's research team decided to check the
gene's role in people.

   It's not the kind of gene that could ever be fixed with gene therapy. But the
discovery may help doctors unravel just how the brain changes when HOXA1 is
abnormal, Rodier said.

   "If you figure out the brain changes, you're on your way, we hope, to finding
better treatments," she said.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2000


                              51 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 28, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: PITT SCIENTISTS ADVANCE MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY RESEARCH BY TRIMMING A BIG
GENE;
DOWN TO SIZE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Local scientists have overcome a huge obstacle in their quest to develop
effective gene therapy for the most common form of muscular dystrophy.

   They took the Goliath of human genes -- the one that makes dystrophin, the
muscle protein missing in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy -- and cut
it down to a size that makes it practical to use in gene therapy. Moreover, they
showed that the dystrophin protein produced by the so-called minigene functions
in the same way as normal dystrophin.

   The findings are being published in this week's issue of the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.

   Despite the progress of medical science, the lifespan of Duchenne patients
hasn't changed, said lead investigator Xiao Xiao, a scientist in the University
of Pittsburgh's molecular genetics and biochemistry department. Progressive
muscle weakness kills most patients by their late teens or early 20s. One out of
3,500 boys have the disease, which is rare in girls.

   Scientists have long hoped that inserting the dystrophin gene into the
Duchenne patients' muscle cells would cure the disease.

   In gene therapy, a treatment gene is attached to a vector, which is
essentially a virus that has been modified so that it doesn't cause disease.
Though unable to replicate, the virus can still get inside cells, carrying the
treatment gene with it.

   The first human trial of gene therapy for a muscular dystrophy began in
September 1999 at Ohio State University. Two patients with limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy had foot injections of a gene for the protein sarcoglycan attached to
a vector made from adeno-associated virus.

   Ohio State researchers had also planned a gene therapy trial for Duchenne
muscular dystrophy, but that has been delayed while they search for a vector
that is both safe and capable of carrying the giant dystrophin gene.

   Adeno-associated virus, or AAV, which was used in the limb-girdle trial, can
efficiently get inside muscle cells, in part because the virus is small enough
to squeak through the muscle's natural defenses. But the gene for dystrophin is
the largest gene known and is about 640 times bigger than what AAV can carry.

   So Xiao set out to find a way to shrink the dystrophin gene.

   Building on animal research conducted at other centers, Xiao, his wife,
senior research associate Dr. Juan Li, and researcher Dr. Bing Wang examined the
normal dystrophin protein. One end of the protein is anchored inside the muscle
cell and the other attaches to the cell membrane. In between the ends, there are
24 repeating units, like coils on a spring.

   When a muscle fiber contracts, the stress on individual cells is great.
Dystrophin provides structural stability to the cell, with the repetitive middle
links allowing stretch and recoil, Xiao explained.

   The researchers pruned that middle area down to five or six links by deleting
chunks of the dystrophin gene and also removed any section of the gene known to
be nonessential. Altogether, they made three different minigenes that were small
enough to be carried by the AAV vector.

   Each kind was injected into the calf muscles of different mice with the
animal equivalent of Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

   "All three types worked very well," Xiao said. "They restored dystrophin."

   Tests showed that nearly 90 percent of the treated muscle produced
dystrophin. Unlike diseased muscle, the treated tissue looked normal under the
microscope. Also, the smaller version of the protein seemed to function
properly.

   Muscle injuries heal by making replacement muscle cells. Duchenne patients
have muscle that is repeatedly damaged by even routine activity because of the
absence of stabilizing dystrophin. In these patients, a large proportion of
muscle looks like it's under construction.

   After treatment, though, the tissue did not display signs that it was being
repaired.

   When dystrophin is lacking, muscle cell membranes leak and cellular enzymes
escape into the bloodstream. In minigene-treated muscle, the cells didn't leak
even after the mice swam.

   Dystrophin production has continued for at least a year.

   Although the findings are encouraging, many hurdles remain.

   "It's practical for small muscles. The challenge is how to deliver it to the
whole body, or the whole arm or whole leg, or the diaphragm and heart," Xiao
said.

   After all, Duchenne patients "don't die because they don't have dystrophin in
their biceps or in their calf," said muscle expert Johnny Huard, director of the
Center for Cell Therapeutics at Children's Hospital. "They die because they
don't have any dystrophin in their diaphragm" and so the breathing muscle
eventually stops working.

   Ideally, the dystrophin gene would be administered through the bloodstream so
that it can be delivered to muscles throughout the body. But, as Huard put it,
"AAV does not travel very well" this way. He and Xiao are working together to
develop more effective systems for whole body treatment.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2000


                              52 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 27, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1003 words

HEADLINE: Market, Political Forces in Biotech Usher In a Yuletide of
Uncertainty;

Stocks are up 27%, but investors face court cases, profit taking

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
This will be an anxious holiday season for biotech investors, who have watched
the sector's impressive stock gains get whittled down by November nervousness.

    The Nasdaq Biotech stock index, which gauges the performance of 200
companies, is down 7 percent since the beginning of the month.

    While that slide seems ominous, the fact remains that biotech stocks have
performed so well in 2000 that the index is still up 27 percent since the
beginning of the year. Compare that to the Nasdaq composite index, which is
heavily weighted with high-tech stocks: It closed at 2,904.38 on Friday, down 29
percent year to date.

    Therefore, some biotech profit-taking seems not only inevitable but sensible
in a year that saw dozens of money-losing biotech firms go public, taking
advantage of investors' fascination with all things genomic.

    Add to this a pinch of unsettled election, a dash of disturbing retail sales
numbers, and a dollop of inflationary rumblings, and it's a perfect recipe for
the sort of uncertainty that causes financial indigestion.

    Lurking in the background, however, is an issue more specific to biotech
that could, whether justifiably or not, add to the general agitation that has
been depressing the sector.

    Any day now, a federal judge in Boston will issue a ruling in a hotly
contested patent dispute over Epogen, a therapeutic agent that stimulates the
production of red blood cells. Epo, as it's called, is used to treat various
forms of anemia, and other ailments that stifle normal blood production.

    With worldwide sales of roughly $6 billion a year, Epo is the top-selling
product in biotechnology. That fact goes a long way toward explaining why Amgen
Inc., a California company which holds patents on Epo that are good through
2013, is fighting so hard to prevent Transkaryotic Therapies of Massachusetts
from bringing an Epo competitor to market.

    The judge's decision will hinge on technical arguments. Amgen and
Transkaryotic make Epo in two different ways. It will be up to the judge to sift
through all the complicated science and decide whether those differences are
different enough for Transkaryotic's novel production method to trump Amgen's
pre-existing patents.

    Given the size of the Epo market, some biotech observers believe that a loss
for Amgen could spook Wall Street by suggesting the courts are weakening the
patent protections upon which drug and biotech companies depend.

    Such speculation worries executives at Genentech Inc., who fear their stock
will get unfairly trampled if an adverse ruling for Amgen triggers a biotech
selling stampede. In an effort to head off this disaster at the pass,
Genentechers occasionally corral visiting reporters and try to rope them into
disseminating Genentech's view that the Amgen ruling should be considered a
nonevent by any investor who doesn't hold shares in one of the firms that is
directly affected.

    "This is a very special case, and any ruling will have a limited application
to other biotech patents," Genentech research director Dennis Henner insisted
during a recent briefing at the company's South San Francisco headquarters.

    In the long run, Genentech may be correct in asserting that the Epo ruling
will have a limited fallout on other biotech patent holders. Nervous markets,
however, tend to follow the target-shooting principle of ready, fire, aim, never
mind the collateral damage.

    For its part, Amgen would love to convince investors that it can have its
cake and eat it, too. It is fighting strenuously to use its patents to keep the
rival Epo off the market, while simultaneously maintaining that it really won't
matter if Transkaryotic wins the court case because it has a new red-blood
stimulant -- called NESP for short -- poised to hit the market.

    Amgen has taken NESP all the way through the clinical trials process and has
asked the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for permission to sell its Epo
Version 2.0. Although the FDA has not yet given its official approval, Amgen
spokesman David Kaye said the company is confident it will launch NESP "sometime
in the first half" of 2001.

    Amgen will be in San Francisco later this week, when the American Society
for Hematology meets at Moscone Center to tout the latest in blood science. Kaye
said Amgen scientists will present data at the conference to show that NESP
remains in the patient's bloodstream far longer than Epo, and therefore will
have to be administered less frequently -- a plus for patient convenience since
Epo is often administered three times a week.

    Hence, Amgen's public stance regarding the patent trial is: heads Amgen wins
by keeping its rival off the market, tails Transkaryotic loses when a more
convenient NESP wins over doctors and patients.

    The Amgen ruling will complicate life in the biotech sector. For the small
investor, who may have ridden the biotech bull market to its March heights,
survived spring's sickening plunge, and gotten giddy all over again during the
sector's Indian Summer comeback, the Yuletide season will present new perils and
opportunities.

    Should the overall market continue its bearish drift, gravity could drag the
sector down and erase even more of biotech's dwindling gains. On the other hand,
the basic investment thesis of 2000 remains sound: Aging Baby Boomers will
provide an eager market at precisely the time when maturing biotech firms are
poised to bring out innovative therapies.

    And although it looks like a seller's market right now, the outlook could
easily get more optimistic come January, when the Chase H&Q Conference brings
thousands of biotech investors to San Francisco to kick off the sector's new
financial year.

    Alas, it simply isn't clear, between now and then, whether it will be the
Grinch or Santa who arranges the presents for biotech this Christmas.Look for
BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your bio-feedback to Tom
Abate bye-mail, tabate@sfchronicle.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or phone, (415)
777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2000


                              53 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                 November 26, 2000, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 49

LENGTH: 654 words

HEADLINE: HATS OFF TO A BRONX LEGEND

BYLINE: BY LENORE SKENAZY

BODY:
THE MUSIC WAS loud, the lights were low and the joint was jumping. The scene was
the gymnasium of Harlem's Minisink Townhouse a few Saturday nights ago. About
200 of the best-dressed folks you've ever seen - beaded jackets, shimmering
gowns - had come to celebrate the life of a very special woman.

   Their beautician.

   That's right. A woman who has spent the last 34 years pressing, perming,
braiding and setting hair. Maude Smallwood.

   Maude owns The Precise Beauty Salon in the South Bronx, across from Lincoln
Hospital. She opened it 20 years ago, and to this day, said one of her
customers, "You pass by on a Saturday morning at 6 o'clock and people are
waiting for her to open, even in the winter."

   But while most of the guests at this gala were her customers (you should have
seen their hair!), they had come not just to honor the anniversary of their
favorite salon. They came to honor a life well led.

   Maude's history will sound familiar to many African-American New Yorkers. "We
came from the rural area of one of the poorest counties in North Carolina," said
Lillian Coggins-Watson, a Long Island school principal who grew up not far from
Maude (and now has long hair, thanks to her).

   The second of 13 children, Maude spent her youth picking weeds and cotton,
sharecropping. "Sharecropping means you rent the land and give the owner half
[of your crop]," Coggins-Watson explained. "So you do the farming and he sits
back. It's very good - for him."

   For many poor blacks, life in the big city sounded a lot better, especially
because almost everyone seemed to have a brother, cousin or aunt willing to put
them up for a while. That's certainly how Maude did it: She moved in with her
cousin and put herself through the Apex Beauty School in Harlem. When she
graduated, Florine Hassock from La Femme Beauty Box gave her her first job.

   That's who Maude dedicated this gala to.

   "Flo, you really made my life!" Maude announced as she presented her former
employer with a plaque of appreciation at the beginning of the festivities. At
eightysomething, Flo looked not only still glamorous, but pleased.

   How many times in life do we get recognized for the really important things
we've done?

   There are Oscars for acting achievements and parades for the guys who hit
home runs, but the teacher who got us into reading, the counselor who persuaded
us not to join a gang, the cousin who gave us a bed to sleep on - there just
aren't any awards for them. And how many of us ever take the time to thank the
first employer who gave us a shot?

   Plain old role models don't get their share of kudos, either. Maude not only
started her own business, she and her husband raised four children. Her
daughter, Shalanda, graduated from New York University and plans to go to
medical school. "I want to do gene therapy," she said matter-of-factly.

   Did hairdressing ever occur to her?

   "No." She saw how hard her mother worked.

   So did everyone in this room. That's what brought them out on a cold November
night. "A lot of times in the ghetto, you don't even look at these people like
they are mentors," mused Leah Crittenden, a new customer of Maude's because
she's been going there for only six or seven years. "But a lot of us wouldn't be
here today if it hadn't been for these people - the janitors and the
hairdressers. My mom was a domestic worker, my dad was a super," Crittenden
continued, but they provided everything she needed: a work ethic, an income,
love.

   No wonder everyone at this gala looked so happy. Here was a chance to say a
collective thank you to the generation that came up from the South and, with
mops, shears and sweat, paved the way.

   "It's not always the doctors and lawyers and teachers," said Crittenden, who
teach us how to reach our goals. "It's the people sometimes who we don't even
notice."

   That is, until there's a gala. Party on.

   E-mail: lskenazy@edit.nydailynews.comHow often


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2000


                              54 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 25, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 843 words

HEADLINE: March to BIO 2001 is under way

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 The event is still seven months away, but the planning -- and preening -- is
already taking on considerable proportions.

   The BIO 2001 International Biotechnology Convention & Exhibition, the largest
annual gathering of biotechnology professionals and companies in the world, is
coming to town.

   Eventually.  It is scheduled for June 24-27, 2001, to be exact.

   So why work up a sweat about it now?  Because, event planners suggest, San
Diego doesn't know what's about to hit it.

   Protesters, for one.  At this year's BIO gathering in Boston in March, more
than 2,000 protesters descended in more or less orderly fashion to protest
everything from genetically modified foods to economic globalization.

   They also staged, and occasionally upstaged, the biotech conference with a
counter-conference dubbed BIO Devastation.

   Then there's the politics.  When President Whoever is sworn in and the new
Congress convenes next year, thorny health-care issues such as the rising cost
of prescription drugs will take center stage.  For a time, the eyes of
policy-makers and patients also will turn to the BIO conference and its
gathering of specialty drug developers.

   And, because of the protesters and the politics, the media will come.  At the
Boston conference, more than 400 journalists representing newspapers, television
and trade magazines around the world covered the event.  That many, and perhaps
more, will descend on San Diego.

   "This has become one of the fastest growing and most newsworthy meetings to
be held anywhere," said Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, or BIO, the national trade group that organizes the annual event.
"It's like the accelerator is stuck on the floor.

   "For that week, San Diego will be the global focal point for biotechnology."

   With that in mind, 160 San Diego volunteers -- community leaders,
biotechnology executives, consultants -- are meeting regularly with national BIO
organizers to plan the June event, which is expected to draw 12,000 to 15,000
participants.

   Hundreds of biotechnology companies from the United States and 43 other
countries -- drug developers, genomics companies, bioinformatics firms -- will
come to San Diego to meet and mingle.

   They also will court and be courted by investment bankers, venture
capitalists and delegations from foreign and U.S. city governments who hope to
encourage the high-wage salary sector to expand in their regions.

   Already, about 16,000 hotel rooms have been reserved.  About 160,000 square
feet of exhibit space at the San Diego Convention Center essentially is sold
out.

   Local event organizers said the conference will do much to showcase San Diego
County's biotech sector, which is eclipsed only by the San Francisco and Boston
area's biotech clusters, and might encourage investment in the region.

   "We can not only strut our stuff, but for the biotech companies here we put
the world's biotech industry -- from research to manufacturing -- right in our
own back yard," said Julie Meier Wright, president of the San Diego Regional
Economic Development Corp.  "That's an incredible opportunity."

   National and local event planners agree that the San Diego BIO conference
will be the largest ever held.  And they are keeping their fingers crossed that
it also doesn't become the most fractious.

   In 1999, Seattle hosted the then-largest BIO gathering of 5,700 participants.
At that time, about 80 protesters, many of them cheerfully costumed as
genetically modified potatoes and bananas, put in an appearance.

   "Nice kids," recalls Feldbaum, with a laugh.  "They came with their own band
and we let them come through the convention hall."

   This year, however, the biotech industry's national profile rose
dramatically:

   The first rough map of the human genome was completed.  A consumer backlash
against genetically modified foods gained strength.

   Policy-makers grappled with the ethical minefield of embryonic stem cell
research and human cloning.  Regulators, probing the death of a gene therapy
patient in late 1999, imposed new research and patient protection guidelines.

   And, investors flocked early in the year to the biotech sector, pumping
record billions of dollars into new and existing companies.

   In March, the Boston BIO conference, which had anticipated 7,500 biotech
participants, swelled to 11,000. And this time there were more than 2,000
anti-biotech protesters to jeer them.

   Next year, biotech will be just as much in the news and will draw an even
bigger biotech crowd to San Diego, event planners predict.  As for the potential
for protest, few want to hazard a guess.

   Joseph D. Panetta, chief executive of BIOCOM, the San Diego biotech trade
group helping to organize the June BIO conference, said event planners already
are working with security experts to monitor Internet sites of organizations
that might be expected to mount a protest.

   "The police tell us we can expect some protest, but I don't think it will be
of the same magnitude as Boston," Panetta said.  "We are mildly optimistic."


LOAD-DATE: November 27, 2000


                              55 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 25, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: March to BIO 2001 is under way

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The event is still seven months away, but the planning -- and preening -- is
already taking on considerable proportions. The BIO 2001 International
Biotechnology Convention & Exhibition, the largest annual gathering of
biotechnology professionals and companies in the world, is coming to town.
Eventually.

   It is scheduled for June 24-27, 2001, to be exact. So why work up a sweat
about it now?

   Because, event planners suggest, San Diego doesn't know what's about to hit
it. Protesters, for one.

   At this year's BIO gathering in Boston in March, more than 2,000 protesters
descended in more or less orderly fashion to protest everything from genetically
modified foods to economic globalization. They also staged, and occasionally
upstaged, the biotech conference with a counter-conference dubbed BIO
Devastation. Then there's the politics.

   When President Whoever is sworn in and the new Congress convenes next year,
thorny health-care issues such as the rising cost of prescription drugs will
take center stage.

   For a time, the eyes of policy-makers and patients also will turn to the BIO
conference and its gathering of specialty drug developers. And, because of the
protesters and the politics, the media will come.

   At the Boston conference, more than 400 journalists representing newspapers,
television and trade magazines around the world covered the event.

   That many, and perhaps more, will descend on San Diego. "This has become one
of the fastest growing and most newsworthy meetings to be held anywhere," said
Carl Feldbaum, president of the Biotechnology Industry Organization, or BIO, the
national trade group that organizes the annual event.

   "It's like the accelerator is stuck on the floor. "For that week, San Diego
will be the global focal point for biotechnology." With that in mind, 160 San
Diego volunteers -- community leaders, biotechnology executives, consultants --
are meeting regularly with national BIO organizers to plan the June event, which
is expected to draw 12,000 to 15,000 participants. Hundreds of biotechnology
companies from the United States and 43 other countries -- drug developers,
genomics companies, bioinformatics firms -- will come to San Diego to meet and
mingle. They also will court and be courted by investment bankers, venture
capitalists and delegations from foreign and U.S. city governments who hope to
encourage the high-wage salary sector to expand in their regions. Already, about
16,000 hotel rooms have been reserved.

   About 160,000 square feet of exhibit space at the San Diego Convention Center
essentially is sold out. Local event organizers said the conference will do much
to showcase San Diego County's biotech sector, which is eclipsed only by the San
Francisco and Boston area's biotech clusters, and might encourage investment in
the region. "We can not only strut our stuff, but for the biotech companies here
we put the world's biotech industry -- from research to manufacturing -- right
in our own back yard," said Julie Meier Wright, president of the San Diego
Regional Economic Development Corp.

   "That's an incredible opportunity." National and local event planners agree
that the San Diego BIO conference will be the largest ever held.

   And they are keeping their fingers crossed that it also doesn't become the
most fractious. In 1999, Seattle hosted the then-largest BIO gathering of 5,700
participants.

   At that time, about 80 protesters, many of them cheerfully costumed as
genetically modified potatoes and bananas, put in an appearance. "Nice kids,"
recalls Feldbaum, with a laugh.

   "They came with their own band and we let them come through the convention
hall." This year, however, the biotech industry's national profile rose
dramatically: The first rough map of the human genome was completed.

   A consumer backlash against genetically modified foods gained strength.
Policy-makers grappled with the ethical minefield of embryonic stem cell
research and human cloning.

   Regulators, probing the death of a gene therapy patient in late 1999, imposed
new research and patient protection guidelines. And, investors flocked early in
the year to the biotech sector, pumping record billions of dollars into new and
existing companies. In March, the Boston BIO conference, which had anticipated
7,500 biotech participants, swelled to 11,000. And this time there were more
than 2,000 anti-biotech protesters to jeer them. Next year, biotech will be just
as much in the news and will draw an even bigger biotech crowd to San Diego,
event planners predict.

   As for the potential for protest, few want to hazard a guess. Joseph D.
Panetta, chief executive of BIOCOM, the San Diego biotech trade group helping to
organize the June BIO conference, said event planners already are working with
security experts to monitor Internet sites of organizations that might be
expected to mount a protest. "The police tell us we can expect some protest, but
I don't think it will be of the same magnitude as Boston," Panetta said.

   "We are mildly optimistic."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              56 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           November 24, 2000, Friday

SECTION: NWANEWS; Pg. A2

LENGTH: 411 words

HEADLINE: Rats' livers made insulin in research Gene therapy treats type of
diabetes in rodents

BYLINE: RICK CALLAHAN, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
Scientists eliminated juvenile diabetes in rodents by using gene therapy to turn
their livers into insulin factories that regulated blood sugar at near-normal
levels for months.
Researchers who did not participate in the Korean-Canadian study said while the
results were a good start, it remains unclear whether they can be applied to
human diabetics.
"It's fair to say that this is the most efficient insulin gene therapy that's
been reported thus far. It's a nice first step, but there are a number of things
that need to be worked out," said Dr. Robert Sherwin, president of the American
Diabetes Association.
Although insulin activity in the treated rats and mice was only 20 percent to 40
percent that of normal rodents, it was enough to regulate blood sugar.
The study, spearheaded by Hyun Chul Lee of the Yonsei University Medical School
in Seoul, South Korea, and three colleagues, appeared in Thursday's issue of the
journal Nature.
In juvenile diabetes, also called Type 1 diabetes, the body mistakenly destroys
cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin, a hormone needed to help metabolize
blood sugar into energy.
Previous attempts at treating diabetes have been hampered by the immune system's
relentless assault on insulin-producing pancreas cells, even when patients
receive new cells or an entire new pancreas. Transplant patients must take
anti-rejection drugs.
The Korean-Canadian team circumvented that problem by altering cells in the
liver to assume the insulin-producing duties normally handled in the pancreas.
Researchers inserted a gene that produces an insulin-like substance into an
adeno-associated virus, which is often used in gene therapy and is thought to be
harmless. The virus was then engineered to be controlled by a second gene, one
that senses glucose levels in the liver.
When injected into the livers of diabetic rats and mice, the altered virus
integrated into the liver's chromosomal DNA.
After a few weeks, the new DNA structure took hold, responding to changes in
blood-sugar by producing the insulin substitute, which then held blood-sugar
levels at near-normal range for at least eight months.
The rodents experienced no detectable side effects, and their livers were not
harmed, said one of the researchers, Ji-Won Yoon, a professor of microbiology
and immunology at the University of Calgary.
"They are very similar to normal rats and mice -- very healthy and very active,"
he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2001


                              57 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    November 24, 2000 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: ARTS AND LIVING; Pg. 30, Movies Levy's High Five

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: LEVY'S HIGH FIVE 1. "BILLY ELLIOTT" EASILY THE MOST EMOTIONALLY

SOURCE: SHAWN LEVY - of The Oregonian staff

BODY:

   LEVY'S HIGH FIVE

   Here are the top five recent releases recommended by A&E's film critic, Shawn
Levy:

   1. "Billy Elliott" Easily the most emotionally rich film out there, capable
of evoking tears of either laughter or pathos. The story of a boy from a
hardscrabble English mining town who discovers his unlikely passion and aptitude
for ballet, it follows the lines of a traditional story but is filled with fresh
energy and performances. The R rating is for the f-word; other than that, it's a
great film for young teens -- and anyone older. [multiple theaters]

   2. "Human Resources" A simple film that blooms into complexity and emotional
depth. Director Laurent Cantet tells the story of a college boy who returns to
his French hometown to work in management at the factory where his dad has
toiled for decades; a labor struggle is under way, and the boy's ambition leads
him to assist management. [Fox Tower]

   3. "Unbreakable" For his follow-up to "The Sixth Sense," writer-director M.
Night Shyamalan concocts a creepy and mysterious film that cements his
reputation as an exquisite craftsman, while making some provocative arguments
about pop culture, religious faith and the nature of evil. Bruce Willis is a man
who may be more unusual that he dare imagine, and Samuel L. Jackson is a sickly,
brilliant fellow who whispers amazing things into his ear. It's not as stunning
as "Sixth," but it builds to a double-shock ending and is absorbing, if at its
own slow pace. [multiple theaters]

   4. "Me and Isaac Newton" A portrait of seven scientists of varying
disciplines, backgrounds and temperaments, director Michael Apted's film puts a
human face on such arcane pursuits as theoretical physics, cognitive psychology
and the pursuit of gene-therapy treatments for cancer. The film engagingly makes
the case that brilliant scientists are people just like you and me -- sort of.
Three days only at the Northwest Film Center. [Whitsell Auditorium]

   5. "Requiem for a Dream" Demanding, even punishing, this adaptation of Hubert
Selby Jr.'s cult novel is notable for Ellen Burstyn's harrowing performance as a
widowed homemaker haunted by addiction and meager hope, and for the direction of
Darren Aronofsky ["Pi"], who brings both tenderness and beauty to a dark and
explicit subject. [Fox Tower]

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2000


                              58 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    November 24, 2000 Friday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: ARTS AND LIVING; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS UNDER DIRECTOR'S MICROSCOPIC LENS

SOURCE: SHAWN LEVY - of The Oregonian staff Movie Review

BODY:

   We live in a world built and described for us by scientists, but scientists
remain for many of us mysterious as people. What sort of person is drawn to live
among lemurs in the rain forest of Madagascar? What drives someone to spend
decades struggling to answer a question virtually nobody else can even
understand? Who are the people who invent medicines, build robots, win Nobel
prizes?

   It's a big question, but "Me and Isaac Newton," a documentary by English
director Michael Apted, takes as its laudable task to begin forming an answer.
Like Apted's famous "7-Up" films, which have looked in on a dozen or so Britons
every seven years since the '60s, "Me and Isaac Newton" balances portraits of
various subjects into a handsome and satisfying whole. It doesn't have the
cinematic chops or aesthetic eccentricities of Errol Morris' "Fast, Cheap and
Out of Control," but it's an absorbing and illuminating work in many ways.

   In telling us about the youth, work, hopes and "Eureka moments" of his seven
protagonists, Apted humanizes science while making its mysteries and challenges
seem more impressive.

   His subjects range from Nobel laureate Gertrude Elion, who helped discover
inhibitors for childhood leukemia; to Ashok Gadgil, who has invented a cheap
means of disinfecting water by using ultraviolet light; to Patricia Wright, the
MacArthur grant-winner who has helped create a national park in Madagascar so as
to protect scientifically precious lemurs; to Karol Sikora, an English
researcher who is working on gene therapies to fight cancer.

   Apted visits them in their homes and their labs. He follows them through the
streets of New York, Los Angeles, India and Lyon. He shows us their childhood
home movies, their college yearbook photos and their prizes and public
appearances.

   Mostly, as in his film about artists, "Inspirations," Apted puts a human face
on pursuits that are almost inhumanly arcane to most of us. We see cognitive
psychologist Steven Pinker as a teen on a quiz show, theoretical physicist
Michio Kaku performing dazzling figure-skating moves, robotics scientist Maja
Mataric jogging with her baby and a trio of robots on the track at UCLA.

   In every case, the normality of the person is emphasized -- the articulate
and engaging Kaku declares that the best scientists also happen to be lucky --
and we are left with an image of the universe as an even richer place than we
understood it to be before the film.

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2000


                              59 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    November 24, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:



   Diabetes Erased in Rodents


   Scientists eliminated juvenile diabetes in rodents by using gene therapy to
turn the rodents' livers into insulin factories that regulated blood sugar at
near-normal levels for months.

   Although insulin activity in the treated rats and mice was only 20 percent to
40 percent that of normal rodents, it was enough to regulate blood sugar.

   The study, spearheaded by Hyun Chul Lee of the Yonsei University Medical
School in Seoul and three colleagues, appeared in yesterday's issue of the
journal Nature.

   With juvenile diabetes, also called Type 1 diabetes, the body mistakenly
destroys cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin, a hormone needed to help
metabolize blood sugar into energy. Patients must take several insulin shots a
day and monitor their blood-sugar levels. Untreated, diabetes can lead to
cardiovascular disease, nerve and kidney damage and blindness.

   Previous attempts at treating diabetes have been hampered by the immune
system's relentless assault on insulin-producing pancreatic cells, even when
patients receive new cells or a new pancreas. Transplant patients must take
anti-rejection drugs.

   The Korean-Canadian team circumvented that problem by altering cells in the
liver to assume the insulin-producing duties normally handled in the pancreas.

   Researchers inserted a gene that produces an insulin-like substance into an
adeno-associated virus, which is often used in gene therapy and is thought to be
harmless. The virus was then engineered to be controlled by a second gene, one
that senses glucose levels in the liver.

   When injected into the livers of diabetic rats and mice, the altered virus
integrated into the liver's chromosomal DNA.

   After a few weeks, the new DNA structure took hold, responding to changes in
blood-sugar by producing the insulin substitute, which then held blood-sugar
levels at near-normal range for at least eight months.


   Protecting Hips of the Elderly


   Frail elderly people are much less likely to break their hips in falls if
they wear hard-shelled hip protectors, a study has found.

   About 10 hip protectors are on the market, including a Finnish one described
by Pekka Kannus, one of the designers, in yesterday's New England Journal of
Medicine. His study of 1,801 people, ages 75 to 87, is the largest in a field
that is burgeoning worldwide.

   Several other protectors have gone through clinical studies, some with 650 to
750 patients. More studies, some involving thousands of patients, are underway,
including in Ireland, Canada, New Zealand and England.


   Steroid Eases Pain of Shingles


   Injecting a steroid directly into the spine can ease the debilitating pain of
shingles when nothing else helps, a Japanese study has found.

   Patients who got a steroid-anesthetic mixture reported that the extent and
severity of their pain was reduced by more than 70 percent--and that the relief
was lasting, researchers at the University of Hirosaki School of Medicine
report.

   Those who got the anesthetic alone did little better than a comparison group
that got no extra treatment, Naoki Kotani wrote in yesterday's issue of the New
England Journal of Medicine.

   All of the patients had suffered for at least a year with pain that did not
yield to any other treatment.


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              60 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 23, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: FDA'S DECISION DELAYS TKT DRUG MORE DATA REQUESTED ON ANEMIA
TREATMENT; COMPANY'S SHARES FALL

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. slid $2.25 to $37.81 yesterday after
it said federal regulators called for new data that will delay the introduction
of Dynepo, an anemia-fighting drug that rivals Epogen from Amgen Inc.

   Although Cambridge-based TKT developed Dynepo, the call for new data stems
from a change in how the drug is produced by TKT's partner, Aventis Pharma, the
pharmaceutical unit of Avenits S.A. TKT said the US Food and Drug Administration
decision delays the introduction of the drug by six months.

      However, some Wall Street analysts said the delay could be longer. This
would enable Amgen to continue to control the market without competition,
especially if its successor drug to Epogen, called NESP, gains FDA approval
early next year.

   Epogen is used for treating anemia in patients undergoing kidney dialysis,
and Amgen has licensed Johnson & Johnson to market and sell the drug for other
medical uses.

   "Though understandably disappointed, we remain optimistic that Dynepo will
become an accepted tool in the treatment of anemia," Richard Selden, TKT founder
and chief executive, said in a statement.

   TKT said the FDA wants more data on additional runs of Dynepo because Aventis
altered its manufacturing process. The large European pharmaceutical maker
scaled up production by switching from using 2,000-liter bioreactors to bigger
5,000-liter bioreactors. These are stainless steel tanks used to grow large
batches of biochemical cultures to produce enzymes and antibiotics.

   Although Aventis has successfully produced Dynepo at the 5,000-liter scale,
the FDA wants additional process validation data, according to TKT.

   "A lot of the blame goes to Aventis in their filing with the FDA, as there
may have been some miscommunication," said Eric T. Schmidt, biotechnology
analyst at S.G. Cowen Securities Corp. "There is nothing wrong with the clinical
data."

   Several other Wall Street analysts questioned whether the FDA delay will
affect Aventis' plans for marketing Dynepo in Europe, where the drug is expected
to be introduced late next year.

   "There are residual questions over what the European regulators have to say
now that the FDA has voiced their manufacturing concerns," said Dennis Harp,
biotech analyst for Deutsche Bank Securities. He said that Dynepo probably won't
get US regulatory approval until May 2002.

   Harp said the delay may also affect a $7.5 million milestone payment that TKT
was expecting to receive from Aventis.

   Aventis and TKT are counting on Dynepo to enter the anemia market against
rival Amgen. Epogen sales from Amgen and Johnson & Johnson were about $4 billion
last year, making it the world's best-selling biotech drug.

   Hoping to stop Aventis and TKT from entering the lucrative market, Amgen sued
TKT and Aventis's predecessor, Hoechst Marion Roussel, for infringing on five of
its Epogen patents. The trial, in US District Court in Boston, ended in
September. A decision is expected shortly.

   Amgen shares rose 69 cents to close at $65.31 yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2000


                              61 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    November 23, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 044

LENGTH: 332 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   Getronics' shares fall

   Shares in Getronics NV, the Dutch computer services company that took over
Wang Global, fell 42 percent after it announced that it will lose money in the
first half of next year. Getronics took over the 1980s computer giant,
Billerica-based Wang Global, in May 1999 in a deal worth about $ 2 billion. The
company employs about 1,000 people in Massachusetts. - BLOOMBERG NEWS

   Airlines complain

   Both United Airlines and Northwest Airlines went to court yesterday, claiming
mechanics for the two carriers were violating temporary restraining orders and
causing slowdowns just before the busy Thanksgiving travel period. No action was
taken by either judge, although both sides in the United situation were asked to
return to court on Monday. - REUTERS

   Specialists hired

   State Street Corp. announced yesterday it has hired a 12-person team of
institutional fixed-income specialists, formerly of Wachovia Securities Inc. The
team left Wachovia when the company got out of municipal finance. - HERALD STAFF

   HMO, N.H. settle

   Tufts Health Plan has settled a lawsuit brought by New Hampshire officials
after the HMO announced it was leaving the state. Under the agreement, subject
to court approval, Tufts will pay all covered claims for services provided
through February. The final cost is not yet known. - HERALD STAFF

   Request delays drug

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. has been asked by the Food and Drug
administration to supply more data on Dynepo, a drug it is developing to treat
anemia. The request will delay approval and launch of the product by six to nine
months, officials said. - HERALD STAFF

   Firm lays off 100

   Walker Digital Corp., the Connecticut company that developed the
Priceline.com concept of buying airline tickets over the Internet, has laid off
100 of the 125 employees at its headquarters.

   The cuts, announced Tuesday, include the closing of three early stage
companies in Atlanta, Los Angeles and San Francisco. - ASSOCIATED PRESS


LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2000


                              62 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 23, 2000, Thursday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 511 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   President signs measure boosting health research


   WASHINGTON - Comparing it to the battle for civil rights, President Clinton
on Wednesday signed into law legislation boosting research into health problems
that hit blacks and other minority groups hardest.

   The so-called "Health Care Fairness Act" frees up over $ 150 million to
create a new National Center for Research on Minority Health and Health
Disparities at the National Institutes of Health. It also will provide funding
to increase medical training for minorities.

   "It is unacceptable that African-American men have a higher overall cancer
incidence and infant mortality rates than any other racial or ethnic group;
Hispanic and Native Americans suffer much greater rates of diabetes, and
Asian-Americans and Pacific Islanders are afflicted with extraordinarily high
levels of cancer of the liver," Clinton said.


   Aspirin touted as help to reduce heart attacks


   WASHINGTON- Taking aspirin on a regular basis reduces the risk of heart
attacks by more than 30 percent in people who have never experienced heart
trouble, according to a study from the Yale School of Medicine.

   Published Tuesday in the school's Archives of Internal Medicine, the study
"shows aspirin remains a good preventive measure."


   Florida court reinstates court victory for smoker


   TALLAHASSEE, Fla. - The state Supreme Court ruled on Wednesday that a lower
court was wrong to overturn a $ 750,000 award for a former smoker against the
nation's third largest cigarette maker.

   The decision reinstates the award against Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp. to
Grady Carter, said Carter's lawyer Floyd Matthews.

   The award was only the second time in 40 years of anti-smoking litigation
that a tobacco company was ordered to pay damages. The first award was
overturned on appeal, and the lawsuit was later dropped.


   Gene therapy study on diabetes offers hope


   Scientists eliminated juvenile diabetes in rodents by using gene therapy to
turn their livers into insulin factories that regulated blood sugar at
near-normal levels for months.

   Researchers who did not participate in the Korean-Canadian study said that
while the results were a good start, it remains unclear whether they can be
applied to human diabetics.

   "It's fair to say that this is the most efficient insulin gene therapy that's
been reported thus far. It's a nice first step, but there are a number of things
that need to be worked out," said Dr. Robert Sherwin, president of the American
Diabetes Association.


   Gay midshipman won't have to pay for education


   ANNAPOLIS, Md. - A former midshipman who resigned from the Naval Academy amid
accusations of homosexuality won't have to repay the government for his
education, the Navy has ruled.

   The decision released Tuesday means that Tommie Watkins, 25, will not have to
reimburse the Navy the $ 86,000 that covered his training and tuition, plus
interest.

   Watkins, president of his class and an aspiring Navy pilot, said he was
pressured to resign.

   After leaving, he acknowledged being gay.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              63 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      November 23, 2000, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; MEDICINE ; Pg. 22A

LENGTH: 539 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy targets diabetes ; Blood sugar regulated in rodent study

BYLINE: Rick Callahan


BODY:  Scientists eliminated juvenile diabetes in rodents by using gene therapy
to turn their livers into insulin factories that regulated blood sugar at
near-normal levels for months.

    Researchers who didn't participate in the Korean-Canadian study said that
while the results were a good start, it remains unclear whether they can be
applied to human diabetics.

    "It's fair to say that this is the most efficient insulin gene therapy
that's been reported thus far. It's a nice first step, but there are a number of
things that need to be worked out," said Dr. Robert Sherwin, president of the
American Diabetes Association.

    Although insulin activity in the treated rats and mice was only 20 percent
to 40 percent that of normal rodents, it was enough to regulate blood sugar.

    The study, spearheaded by Hyun Chul Lee of the Yonsei University Medical
School in Seoul, South Korea, and three colleagues, appears in today's issue of
the journal Nature.

    In juvenile diabetes, also called Type 1 diabetes, the body mistakenly
destroys cells in the pancreas that secrete insulin, a hormone needed to help
metabolize blood sugar into energy.

    Patients must take several insulin shots a day and monitor their blood sugar
levels. Untreated, diabetes can lead to cardiovascular disease, nerve and kidney
damage and blindness.

    Previous attempts at treating diabetes have been hampered by the immune
system's relentless assault on insulin-producing pancreas cells, even when
patients receive new cells or an entire new pancreas. Transplant patients must
take anti-rejection drugs.

    The Korean-Canadian team circumvented that problem by altering cells in the
liver to assume the insulin-producing duties normally handled in the pancreas.

    Researchers inserted a gene that produces an insulin-like substance into an
adeno-associated virus, which often is used in gene therapy and is thought to be
harmless. The virus then was engineered to be controlled by a second gene, one
that senses glucose levels in the liver.

    When injected into the livers of diabetic rats and mice, the altered virus
integrated into the liver's chromosomal DNA.

    After a few weeks, the new DNA structure took hold, responding to changes in
blood sugar by producing the insulin substitute, which then held blood sugar
levels at near-normal range for at least eight months.

    The rodents experienced no detectable side effects, and their livers were
not harmed, said one of the researchers, Ji-Won Yoon, a professor of
microbiology and immunology at the University of Calgary.

    "They are very similar to normal rats and mice - very healthy and very
active," he said.

    Kenneth Polonsky of Washington University's School of Medicine in St. Louis
praised the team's innovation but said the therapy might pose a "significant
problem" that would prevent its use in humans.

    While a normal pancreas instantly produces insulin after a blood sugar
shift, the response of the rodents' livers to such fluctuations was delayed,
sometimes by hours.

    Some 1 million Americans have Type 1 diabetes, and about 29,000 new cases
are diagnosed annually in the United States, mostly among children and young
adults.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              64 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           November 23, 2000 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: Medical Roundup

BODY:

   Steroid-anesthetic mix   aids shingles sufferers    BOSTON - Injecting a
steroid directly into the spine can ease the debilitating pain of shingles when
nothing else helps, a Japanese study published by the New England Journal of
Medicine has found.

    Patients who got a steroid-anesthetic mixture reported that the extent and
severity of their pain was reduced by more than 70 percent - and that the relief
was lasting, researchers at the University of Hirosaki School of Medicine
report.

    Those who got the anesthetic alone did little better than a comparison group
that got no extra treatment at all, Naoki Kotani wrote in today's issue of the
New England Journal of Medicine.

    All of the patients had suffered for at least a year with pain that did not
yield to any other treatment.

     Study uses livers to end

    diabetes in lab rodents

    SEOUL, South Korea - Scientists eliminated juvenile diabetes in rodents by
using gene therapy to turn their livers into insulin factories that regulated
blood sugar at near-normal levels for months.

    Researchers who did not participate in the Korean-Canadian study said that
while the results were a good start, it remains unclear whether they can be
applied to human diabetics.

    Although insulin activity in the treated rats and mice was only 20 to 40
percent that of normal rodents, it was enough to regulate blood sugar.

    The study, spearheaded by Hyun Chul Lee of the Yonsei University Medical
School in Seoul and three colleagues, appears in today's issue of the journal
Nature.

    Protective devices save

     seniors from broken hips

    BOSTON - Frail elderly people are much less likely to break their hips in
falls if they wear hard-shelled hip protectors, a study has found - good news
for aging baby boomers throughout the country.

    An estimated 250,000 people break their hips every year in the United
States, and the National Institutes of Health predict that an aging population
will push that to 650,000 by mid-century.

    About 10 different hip protectors are on the market, including a Finnish one
described by Pekka Kannus, one of the designers, in today's New England Journal
of Medicine.

    His study of 1,801 people, ages 75 to 87, is the largest so far in a field
that is burgeoning worldwide.

     British experts fashion

    prosthetic hand for kids

    LONDON - British scientists unveiled a new electronically powered artificial
hand yesterday that will allow handicapped children to perform everyday tasks
with both hands at the same time.

    Unlike other artificial limbs, the new hand is designed for children with a
congenital abnormality or a partial hand amputation at the wrist or below.

    "It is the first proven prosthesis of its kind," said Julie Scarle, a
spokeswoman at Nottingham City Hospital, where the Prodigits device was tested.
"The fingers are powered with small motors," she said in a telephone interview.

   Children can slip their arm into the bionic hand, which is encased is a
silicon glove, and holds bicycle handlebars, cuts paper, opens a packet of candy
or holds a book. The thumb and forefinger open and close when pressure is
applied to an electrode attached to tiny motors and gearboxes inside the hand.

    "No one has ever made a prosthetic hand which could fit these types of
patients before and no one has ever tried using silicon in this way, so our
research and trials have achieved something completely new which opens up
possibilities for many children and adults in the future," said John Ronald of
RSL Steeper Ltd., a privately owned Edinburgh company that developed the bionic
hand with Lothian Primary Care NHS Trust in Scotland.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                              65 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 22, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. F-5

LENGTH: 1262 words

HEADLINE: Gene deficiency targeted in addiction

BYLINE: Linda Carroll; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 In a quiet, dark room at the University of Pennsylvania, Edward Coleman, 30,
lies back and watches a videotape of addicts like him smoking crack while a PET
scanner records each neurochemical nuance of his brain.

   Normally, the images would spark an irresistible craving for the drug.  His
heart would start to race; his ears would begin to buzz; and a spot deep inside
his brain would flash brightly on the scan.

   But today it is different.  Before starting the videotape, Dr. Anna Rose
Childress gave Coleman a medication that may someday help him, and others,
combat the craving that lures so many back to their addictions.

   After the video, Coleman admits the images evoked an urge to use cocaine, but
not such a strong one.  The PET scan backs him up: his amygdala -- the small
almond-shaped brain structure that helps humans and animals remember all the
details associated with pleasurable events -- flickers only weakly.

   "Edward can still remember what the cocaine high is like, but while taking
baclofen in the right dose range, he doesn't feel pulled to go out and find it,"
said Childress, a research associate professor in the department of psychiatry
at the Treatment Research Center of the University of Pennsylvania.  "For a
patient wishing to stop cocaine, this could provide a desperately needed tool."

   Basic reasons

   As the war on drugs has marched into the scientist's lab, researchers have
devised a paradigm that may help explain why some people get hooked after a
single "taste" of an illegal drug while others can use it for years and quit
when they choose.  Once thought of as weak-willed people who lacked the moral
strength to just say no to drugs, addicts are now viewed as victims of genes
that make them susceptible to the powerful pull of mind-altering substances.

   Scientists in research centers around the country are studying how drugs
affect the brain.  They tweak various neurotransmitters, searching for ways to
alter both an addict's genetic wiring and the rewiring of the brain that drugs
initiate.

   Some researchers seek ways to rev up the "stop" circuitry of the forebrain --
the part that considers consequences -- while others look for ways to tune down
the "go" circuitry of the limbic system -- a part of the brain involved in
processing emotion.

   While researchers emphasize that environmental factors are also crucial, many
population studies have pointed to the importance of genetics.  For example,
studies of twins have found that identical twins are more likely than fraternal
twins to share a tendency to become addicted.

   But the predilection may be even more specific.  Dr. Ming Tsuang, a professor
of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School, has found that people inherit not only
a general susceptibility to substance abuse but also a vulnerability to
particular drugs.

   "Our group is interested in finding the actual gene that is specific for
heroin addiction," Tsuang says.  "If we can find the gene and learn what the
gene's products are, we may be able to prevent people from abusing heroin."

   Dopamine connection

   When it comes to a general genetic susceptibility, the leading suspect is a
defect in the dopamine system, experts say.  In the past decade or so,
researchers have discovered that although drugs affect a variety of
neurotransmitters, virtually all of them increase the levels of dopamine in the
brain's mesolimbic region, which is involved in pleasure, reward and motivation.

   Research has also shown that, compared with those who do not use drugs,
addicts tend to be deficient in a certain type of dopamine receptor, dubbed DR2.
That receptor leads to feelings of pleasure when stimulated by dopamine.  Some
scientists have assumed that this deficiency was the brain's reaction to a
drug-induced overload of dopamine by cutting back on the number of receptors
available to pick up the neurotransmitter.

   An experiment with monkeys that were allowed to self-administer cocaine for a
year showed that this was at least partly true.  The five addicted monkeys ended
up with a 15 percent to 20 percent decrease in dopamine receptors, says Dr.
Michael Nader, an associate professor of physiology and pharmacology at Wake
Forest University's medical school in Winston-Salem, N.C. Nine months after the
monkeys were deprived of cocaine, three had returned to normal, but two had not.

   Still, several recent studies have suggested that some people may be born
with a defect in the gene that doles out dopamine receptors.  Those born with
the defect end up with fewer DR2s and as a consequence experience life with less
intensity and joy, said Dr. Ernest P. Noble, a professor of psychiatry at
University of California Los Angeles.

   "These people often say they don't feel the normal rewards and pleasures in
life," Noble said.  "For example, a man will describe the experience of going to
the beach with a girlfriend to view a beautiful sunset and say, 'I hardly felt
anything.' Or he will describe how he went to a concert where his buddies all
feel exhilarated, but not him."

   These patients often report that the first time they really felt normal was
after their first drink or dose of an illegal drug, Noble said.

   The experiments

   After determining that severe alcoholism was associated with a mutation of
the gene that doles out DR2s, Noble and his colleagues tried treating alcoholics
with bromocriptine, a medicine that boosts the amount of dopamine available to
the brain.  The medication quieted craving and ultimately helped alcoholics
fight their addiction, Noble said.

   In another experiment designed to discover whether the "taste" for drugs
might be related to inherited brain chemistry, researchers at Brookhaven
National Laboratory tested a group of people who had no experience with illegal
drugs.  After using a PET scanner to determine how many dopamine receptors each
person had, the researchers injected each with a small amount of the stimulant
Ritalin.

   "And, lo and behold, the people with low levels of dopamine receptors in
their brains were the ones who liked the way the Ritalin made them feel," said
Dr. Nora Volkow, associate laboratory director for life science at Brookhaven
National Laboratory.  "Those who had high concentrations of receptors in their
brains said the Ritalin made them feel very unpleasant.  They felt like they
were losing control.  One almost had a panic attack."

   In a follow-up experiment to test whether an increase in dopamine receptors
could prevent drug abuse, Panayotis Thanos, a scientist at Brookhaven, used gene
therapy to boost the number of dopamine receptors in rats that had developed a
taste for alcohol.  The result: The rats quit drinking, Volkow said.

   In New York, researchers are looking at a different dopamine receptor -- DR1.
Scientists suspect that DR1, which gives a sensation of satiety when stimulated
by dopamine, is a sort of check to DR2, said Dr. Marc Laruelle, an associate
professor of psychiatry at the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons.

   In an attempt to discover whether DR1 levels can make a difference in an
addict's ability to postpone gratification, Laruelle and his colleagues are
giving volunteer addicts small doses of cocaine and then offering them the
choice of a $5 dose of the drug or a $10 bill.

   "We want to see if they go for the money or the cocaine," Laruelle said.
"The hope is that the ratio of DR1 to DR2 will be predictive.  And then,
perhaps, we will be able to identify addicts with very low levels of DR1 and
give them a drug to stimulate DR1 more effectively."


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1,2. The New York Times photos.; 1. Edward Coleman, a cocaine
addict working with drug researcher Dr. Anna Childress, underwent a brain scan
at the University of Pennsylvania. 2. PET scans show how the brain responds when
volunteers watch nature videos compared with when they take cocaine.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              66 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                  November 22, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 919 words

HEADLINE: DNA strands weave a good yarn

BYLINE: Richard Willing

BODY:

   Abraham Lincoln's DNA and Other Adventures in Genetics

   By Philip R. Reilly

   Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press

   339 pp., $ 25

   ---

   Philip R. Reilly is a lawyer, a physician, a geneticist, a biotech
executive and -- blast him! -- a clear, sweet writer in the bargain.

   But the good doctor's greatest gift may be that, by his own admission,
he enjoys going to cocktail parties. And it is at cocktail parties
that Reilly has learned one of life's most important lessons:
While few may understand science, everybody likes to hear a good
story.

   That's the idea behind this informative and highly entertaining
book, which uses real-life tales to compose a kind of a primer
of what informed citizens should know about the cutting-edge science
of genetics. And because Reilly is a master entertainer as well
as a major "science boy," as we used to say at school, the stories
aren't just about single nucleotide polymorphisms, or autosomes,
or 22q11 deletion syndrome.


   Or at least they appear not to be.

   But by the time Reilly's done telling the stories of the crippled
genius Toulouse-Lautrec, of the star-crossed Russian royal family,
the Romanovs, of Dolly the cloned sheep, and of dozens of ordinary
citizens cleared of crimes or reunited with families or diagnosed
for diseases through DNA testing, you'll know all that stuff,
too.

   In fact, you'll know enough to be able to decode the stories about
gene therapy, cloning, DNA exonerations, genetically modified
food and other biochemical subjects that suddenly are flooding
our newspapers and magazines. And if your experience is like mine,
you'll have had a good time doing it.

   Genetics "is a fascinating topic, and I've found there are a
helluva lot of people who've heard enough to be interested,"
Reilly said in an interview. "The trick is to hook them without
scaring them off."

   Reilly uses Abraham Lincoln's DNA to teach the science's basics.

   We all carry DNA, a cellular acid that creates most of our characteristics,
in tiny chemical bundles called genes. Genes, in turn, are packaged
on 23 pairs of chromosomes, with one half of each pair being donated
by Mom, the other half by Dad, during conception.

   But DNA sequences occasionally mutate, at conception or during
subsequent cell division, fouling up the genetic code and creating
too much or too little of a particular life chemical. That produces
illness or, as may have been the case with our 16th president,
unusual and sometimes fatal conditions such as Marfan syndrome.
Marfan sufferers have weak hearts and abnormally long skeletons.

   In the early 1990s, Reilly participated in a project that sought
to extract DNA from some of Lincoln's hair fragments and to search
his DNA for a Marfan's mutation.

   The project was scotched before that happened, but it left a lingering
question that is the subtext of this book: What happens -- to
our society, to ourselves -- when we use DNA tests? Put another
way, because science permits us to do something, should we?

   Reilly follows this thread through a passel of fascinating cases.

   We meet patients at risk for breast and ovarian cancer who must
decide whether they want to learn through genetic tests if they
are likely to get the disease. We see doctors arguing whether
such tests should even be given, because no cure is available.
And we see how, and whether, mental and emotional states, and
not just physical attributes, can be created or substantially
influenced by DNA.

   "Will defendants someday be found to be not guilty by reason
of genes?" Reilly asks, amid evidence that defense attorneys
are beginning to advance that argument. His stories are full of
such questions.

   Reilly imparts opinions as well as knowledge, and you may not
agree with all of them. I found him a little too trusting of society's
ability to protect an individual's genetic secrets from discrimination
by employers and insurers. And his take on human cloning -- that
it's unlikely because of scientific and social disapproval --
may strike some as blithe.

   But Reilly's pace is always fast, and his descriptive powers are
a joy. To make the point that few conditions are caused by a single
faulty gene, he uses the analogy of a minuet.

   "The interaction of gene pairs, the biochemical dance of dominance
and recessiveness, is played out trillions of times from the moment
of conception until death," Reilly writes.

   In the end, Reilly argues that learning how genes work may be
the easy part. Understanding and living with the consequences
may be the harder part.

   In the meantime, he seems to say, remember that the genome giveth
while it taketh away. So Reilly uses the story of Toulouse-Lautrec,
the stunted genius of the Moulin Rouge, to show how a debilitating
skeletal condition can be passed along by two evidently healthy
first cousins who make the mistake of marrying.

   But Reilly goes further. He traces artistic talent back four generations
on the painter's paternal side, concluding that genes, "talent"
genes, if you will, illuminated Toulouse-Lautrec's life as surely
as the genes that shrank his skeleton confined it.

   "In a span lasting less than 20 years," Reilly writes, the artist
produced "737 canvases, 275 watercolors, 368 prints and posters,
and 5,084 drawings. As one turns the pages of an art book or strolls
through the museum at Albi, it is hard to think of Toulouse-Lautrec
as a man with a disability."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Meserve-Kunhardt Collection; PHOTO, B/W, Reuters; PHOTO,
B/W, AP; Six score and 15 years ago: Abraham Lincoln's assassination may only
have hastened his end if he was afflicted with Marfan syndrome. DNA success
stories: Dolly the sheep, above, was cloned in 1997; the skeletal remains of
Czar Nicholas II were positively identified through DNA analysis in 1995.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2000


                              67 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      November 21, 2000 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: SCN; Pg. F-02

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: Designers light up runway

BYLINE: Joanne Davidson, SEEN,

BODY:

   Every designer wants his or her creations to light up the  fashion runway,
but until the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation's Shane  Co. 2000 Gala: Carnival in
Venice, we'd always considered this  'light up the runway' thing another figure
of speech.

   Turns out some evening gowns do.

   Designer Carol Mathers, dressmaker Janet McCollum and metal  artist Steve
Vallejo pooled their considerable talent to produce  'Venetian Lights,' a gown
that judges Arlene Hirschfeld, Warren  Cohen, Joy Johnson, Richard Branch and
Suzanne Brown awarded first  prize in the Best Use of Materials creativity
category.

   The silky number's illuminating effect? An elaborate crystal  chandelier
fitted to the model's waist.

   Carnival in Venice, a dinner and show held at the Marriott  City Center,
spotlighted the creativity of Denver's design  community.

   And with tables priced from $ 1,800 to $ 25,000, it also raised a  tidy sum
for the research, gene therapy and specialty care centers  funded by the Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation.

   Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease affecting approximately  30,000 children
and adults nationwide. It causes the body to  produce an abnormally thick,
sticky mucus which clogs the airways  and leads to life-threatening lung
infections.

   Amy Green, whose husband, News4 weatherman Larry Green, emceed  the benefit,
lost one sister to CF and has another who continues  to battle it.

   The Greens chaired Carnival in Venice with title sponsors Tom  and Valere
Shane; Jamie Ladd Jones; News4 anchor Aimee Sporer and  her husband, attorney
Dan Caplis; and Regina and Mark Musyl.

   Warren and Denise Cohen and Dianne and Mike St. John  represented the
presenting sponsors, the Denver Design Center and  Rush Creek Solutions.

   The St. Johns, whose daughter, Lauren, was one of the evening's  child
models, also purchased 'Kensington Palace,' a gown by Cass  Daley.

   Carylyn Bell bought 'The Dougess of Venice,' designed and  constructed by
Denverite Gabriel Conroy, whose exquisite creations  are a favorite with Holly
Kylberg, Andi Smith and other of the  city's young philanthropists. Sharon
Magness modeled - and was the  high bidder on - 'Shimmering Silk in San Marco
Square,' designed  by her good friend, David Alexander.

   Colorado Symphony trustee Judi Wolf used the true story of a  little boy who
thought his mother was talking about '65 roses'  when in fact she was describing
cystic fibrosis as the inspiration  for the scarlet gown that she modeled to
strains of an Ethel  Merman recording of 'Everything's Coming Up Roses.'

   Her husband, Marvin, was high bidder on the dress, made by  Clara Dittli from
Judi's 'ever-changing sketches.'

   Aimee Sporer designed her gown, too, from silver and white  chiffon imprinted
with the CBS 'eye.'

   Not to be outdone, Kathy Sabine of 9News had her station's  graphic designer,
Johanna Parker, create an ensemble that included  the NBC peacock in a headdress
and the network's rainbow of colors  in the skirt.

   'I'm not sure this is going to fit through the door,' Sabine  mused as her
husband, Todd, helped her get ready backstage.

   Other models joining the pros from Donna Baldwin Talent were  youngsters Jen
Fernandez, Marina Finnell, Erin O'Brien and Lauren  St. John; Stomper and
Nelson, the goodwill ambassadors of Colorado  Greyhound Companions, an
organization that arranges adoptions of  retired and injured greyhounds; and
Dasha and Princess Sofia,  dachshunds owned by interior designer Frank Lavin.

   The 550 guests included the president of Webb-Waring  Institute, Dr. John
Repine and his wife, eye surgeon Karen Repine;  OnCommand's CEO, Jerry Kern, and
his wife, Mary Rossick Kern;  developer Paul Powers and his wife, MJ; financial
planner Angel  Chi, the high bidder on a gown called 'Level Playing Field;'
Realtors Rollie Jordan and Susie Dews; Joel Robins, a vice  president with
Pinnacle Distributing, and his wife, Jackie;  attorney Marco Chayet and his
wife, Paige, a new certified public  accountant; 9News' Mark Koebrich and his
wife, Kathy; and boutique  owner Max Martinez.

   Best in Show went to 'Vermeil,' a voluminous, futuristic ball  gown designed
by Jeff Elliott and made by Abbey Miller.

   Denver Post Society Editor Joanne Davidson's column runs every  day except
Saturdays. E-mail her at jmdpost@aol.com.

   Antoine Du Chez stylists prep News4 anchor Aimee Sporer for her turn on the
runway.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO:Special to The Post/Barbara Ruley Antoine Du Chez stylists prep
News4 anchor Aimee Sporer for her turn on the runway.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                              68 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                  November 20, 2000 Monday City final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 522 words

HEADLINE: Human guinea pigs need protection

BODY:

   Our position: Congress should pass a bill increasing oversight of clinical
trials involving humans.

   The near-explosion of medical research has a dark side: the proliferation of
clinical trials that ignore established rules, don't report adverse reactions
and fail to fully inform participants of the risks involved.

   Federally sponsored researchers have grossly shirked their responsibility to
report injuries and deaths resulting from experiments, charged Adil Shamoo of
the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "Thousands of deaths go
unreported involving human research subjects," he said, following a study of
"institutional incident reports" submitted to the National Institutes of Health
by its sponsored researchers.

   Shamoo estimates the government sponsors 5,000 clinical human trials of drugs
and medical treatments at 47,000 sites around the country. About 7 million
people participate. In addition, 12 million others participate in privately
funded clinical trials. Yet in the past decade, there were only 878 reports of
adverse events, a number Shamoo called "absurdly low."

   Concern about the oversight of federally funded research came to a head last
year with the death of an Arizona teen-ager in a University of Pennsylvania
clinical trial on gene therapy. The university's gene therapy center is one of
the largest of its kind in the world. It has an annual budget of about $25
million and connections to private biotechnology firms.

   The trial was suspended but not until it was discovered that half of the
people enrolled had not been told what kind of procedures would be conducted on
them or the risks of such procedures. There was no documentation that
participants even met eligibility requirements; the university did not properly
monitor the health of the volunteers and researchers misplaced several lots of
experimental genes.

   Also, a conflict of interest was cited. The lead researcher founded a
biotechnology company in which both he and the university hold stock. Indeed,
academic scientists who do not have financial ties to private industry are
becoming rare, according to a New York Times report published in February.

   Federal regulators, bioethics experts and lawmakers claim they "are troubled
that so many researchers have a financial stake in companies testing their
discoveries -- companies whose fortunes, with those of the scientist, can rise
and fall on a single product," the Times said. It notes that a 1996 analysis of
articles in medical journals found that 34 percent of authors had a financial
interest in their subject matter.

   No sensible person wants to discourage the development of promising new drugs
or curative therapies. But it is increasingly clear that the first principle of
legitimate research must be the welfare of people being tested. Congress can
help assure that is the case by passing legislation to increase oversight of all
human-subject research.

   A bill to that effect was introduced in the House in June but not acted upon.
Another try is in order. The current system is not fulfilling its first
obligation: protecting the guinea pigs.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2002


                              69 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            November 20, 2000 Monday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: Human guinea pigs need protection

BODY:

   Our position: Congress should pass a bill increasing oversight of clinical
trials involving humans.

   The near-explosion of medical research has a dark side: the proliferation of
clinical trials that ignore established rules, don't report adverse reactions
and fail to fully inform participants of the risks involved.

   Federally sponsored researchers have grossly shirked their responsibility to
report injuries and deaths resulting from experiments, charged Adil Shamoo of
the University of Maryland School of Medicine. "Thousands of deaths go
unreported involving human research subjects," he said, following a study of
"institutional incident reports" submitted to the National Institutes of Health
by its sponsored researchers.

   Shamoo estimates the government sponsors 5,000 clinical human trials of drugs
and medical treatments at 47,000 sites around the country. About 7 million
people participate. In addition, 12 million others participate in privately
funded clinical trials. Yet in the past decade, there were only 878 reports of
adverse events, a number Shamoo called "absurdly low."

   Concern about the oversight of federally funded research came to a head last
year with the death of an Arizona teen-ager in a University of Pennsylvania
clinical trial on gene therapy. The university's gene therapy center is one of
the largest of its kind in the world. It has an annual budget of about $25
million and connections to private biotechnology firms.

   The trial was suspended but not until it was discovered that half of the
people enrolled had not been told what kind of procedures would be conducted on
them or the risks of such procedures. There was no documentation that
participants even met eligibility requirements; the university did not properly
monitor the health of the volunteers and researchers misplaced several lots of
experimental genes.

   Also, a conflict of interest was cited. The lead researcher founded a
biotechnology company in which both he and the university hold stock. Indeed,
academic scientists who do not have financial ties to private industry are
becoming rare, according to a New York Times report published in February.

   Federal regulators, bioethics experts and lawmakers claim they "are troubled
that so many researchers have a financial stake in companies testing their
discoveries -- companies whose fortunes, with those of the scientist, can rise
and fall on a single product," the Times said. It notes that a 1996 analysis of
articles in medical journals found that 34 percent of authors had a financial
interest in their subject matter.

   No sensible person wants to discourage the development of promising new drugs
or curative therapies. But it is increasingly clear that the first principle of
legitimate research must be the welfare of people being tested. Congress can
help assure that is the case by passing legislation to increase oversight of all
human-subject research.

   A bill to that effect was introduced in the House in June but not acted upon.
Another try is in order. The current system is not fulfilling its first
obligation: protecting the guinea pigs.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                              70 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     November 20, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 742 words

HEADLINE: Sit tight, or get going? It's up to you;
Sensible diet, exercise still the best options

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Feeling lucky today?

   Maybe you've already started the morning with a nutritious plate of bacon and
eggs and a jelly doughnut chaser and now have settled in for a marathon of
roosting at a desk, in a car or in front of the TV.

   And maybe you're not too concerned about the consequences.

   For those who are willing to gamble with their cardiovascular health, there's
encouraging news: The odds are that in coming years modern medicine will come up
with many new therapies that could largely negate a sloppy diet and sedentary
living.

   Just last week in New Orleans researchers at an American Heart Association
conference announced a series of promising genetic therapies for failing hearts
as well as an experimental procedure that involves transplanting thigh muscle
cells into non-functioning sections of heart muscle to restore pumping power.

   Of course, a cure for cancer has been "just around the corner" for the last
30 years.

   My point?

   There's still plenty of evidence that the best way to ensure that your heart
stays pumping and your veins remain open is through a lifestyle that includes
regular exercise and a sensible diet.

   A flurry of studies in recent weeks hammered home that point.

   One report indicated that the best way to avoid a second heart attack was by
staying physically active after a first heart attack.

   The study involved 406 Mexican-American and non-Hispanic residents of the
Corpus Christi, Texas, area who had suffered a first heart attack. Those who
increased their activity levels after the heart attack had about 80% less chance
of having a second heart attack than those who remained sedentary.

   Those who were active before the first heart attack and remained active
afterward had a 60% less chance of having a second heart attack.

   "We encourage people to enroll in cardiac rehabilitation following a heart
attack, " said Lyn Steffen-Batey, an assistant professor of epidemiology at the
University of Texas School of Public Health in Houston. "Afterward, they can
continue their home exercise program under the direction of their physician."

   I know, there are some in our midst who will argue that vigorous activity
should be avoided at all costs, because every time someone breaks a sweat they
face a calculated risk of encountering sudden death -- a risk that increases
even more for those who are sedentary or those who are recovering from a heart
attack.

   While there is a modicum of truth to those claims, the risk is extremely
small, and it diminishes to insignificant once a person has become a regular
exerciser.

   In fact, a recent study in the New England Journal of Medicine found that the
best way to avoid a heart attack during vigorous exercise was to get plenty of
vigorous exercise.

   The 12-year study of 21,481 male physicians found that those who exercised at
least five times a week were seven times less likely to die of sudden cardiac
arrest than those who exercised once a week.

   For those who want numbers, the researchers calculated that the risk of death
during any 30-minute exercise session and the 30 minutes that followed -- the
hour that they dubiously dubbed the " hazard period" -- was one death for every
1.5 million sessions.

   By my calculations, at five exercise sessions a week a person would have to
live 5, 769 years to experience 1.5 million hazard periods. After all that
working out, they at least would be a trim and fit looking corpse.

   And as long as we are on the topic of odds, here's another tidbit that came
out at the Heart Association conference: Eating an unusually heavy meal can
temporarily increase your chances of having a heart attack.

   The study, which examined the eating activities of nearly 2,000 heart
patients, found that in the hour immediately after eating a heavy meal, the risk
of having a heart attack was nine times greater. Heavy meals can temporarily
raise blood pressure and also adversely affect the inner lining of arteries.

   These contrasting approaches to life were never more evident than last week
in New Orleans, a city known for its sinful food and portly residents, where
40,000 cardiologists and others who should know better spent several days
learning what modern medicine and common sense could do for the human heart.

   So the choice is yours: eat with abandon and stay seated or practice a little
self control and stay active.

   ------------

   John Fauber can be reached at 223-5479 or by e- mail at jfauber@onwis.com

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                              71 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 20, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1096 words

HEADLINE: Bayer to Invest in Alameda Biotech Firm's Hemophilia Research;

Drug company to help develop Avigen gene therapy

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
A deal between a German drugmaker and an Alameda biotech firm provides a case
study in the calculus of science, faith and hope that creates the therapies that
change patients' lives.

    Bayer, the company whose aspirins launched the modern drug industry a
century ago, agreed Friday to invest $60 million to help finish the clinical
trials and ultimately win the right to sell a gene therapy for hemophilia that
is being developed by Avigen Inc.

    Hemophiliacs lack one of the two proteins that help blood clot. Most
hemophiliacs suffer from the loss of protein A. Avigen is working on the rarer
form of the disease, which affects people missing protein B.

    Whether they are missing protein A or protein B, however, the effect is the
same. People with this inherited disease suffer painful and crippling bleeding
episodes throughout their lives.

    Today, severe hemophiliacs control their disease by taking regular
injections of whichever of the two proteins they lack.

    Bayer's investment represents a bet on a radical new approach to curing the
rarer form of hemophilia with a single shot. Although the potential market for
hemophilia B remedies is relatively small, just $350 million a year, Bayer is
buying into the cutting edge of biotechnology.

    Gene therapy is a technology that has been hyped for years. Until now, it
has failed to deliver. But tiny Avigen could be the company that breaks the gene
therapy jinx.

    Avigen has injected seven hemophiliacs with a virus containing the gene that
makes the protein B. The virus is the delivery vehicle. It burrows into muscle
cells and deposits the gene for clotting factor B. In human tests so far, the
gene has actually been shown to manufacture the clotting factor. (See related
stories on Avigen in The Chronicle's Business section on April 12 and Dec. 7,
1999.)

    Although Avigen is in only the first stage of human testing, Bayer Vice
President Anthony Nagle said his company is convinced that future experiments
will persuade the U.S. Food and Drug Administration that Avigen's Coagulin-B
should be the first gene therapy approved for ordinary use.

    Tests on seven human patients may not seem conclusive. But Nagle said
hemophilia B is so rare -- only 150 cases are diagnosed annually -- that seven
subjects are probably representative of those in the general population who
suffer from this rare bleeding disorder.

    Even in the best of circumstances, however, Bayer and Avigen must still put
Coagulin-B through four more years of tests before they can hope to bring the
drug to market sometime in 2006, Nagle said.

    If all goes according to plan, that waiting will certainly be worthwhile for
the roughly 8,000 people in the developed world who suffer from hemophilia B.

    Nagle said Bayer expects that a single injection of the Avigen gene therapy
will give severe hemophiliacs the ability to produce about

    5 percent of the normal level of clotting factor B.

    "That would allow these people to lead normal lives," Nagle said, and free
them from the need to take several injections of protein clotting factors each
week to control their bleeding.

    Shareholders in Bayer and Avigen hope to profit from what might cautiously
be called a cure for hemophilia B. Today, said Nagle, a person with severe
hemophilia B -- or rather that person's health insurer -- pays $120,000 to
$150,000 a year for injections of clotting factor.

    How much will Bayer charge for a single gene therapy treatment that could
replace years' worth of today's treatment?

    "We're dealing with those issues right now," said Nagle. "We know it won't
be any more than the cost of current treatments."

    But that leaves a lot of room for negotiation with the insurers who will
ultimately foot the bill. Does Bayer mean no more than the cost of a single
year's worth of injection treatments? Or the cost of a lifetime's supply of
treatments for a teenage patient?

    "Fortunately, we have several years to work this out," Nagle said.

    Avigen, for its part, timed the Bayer announcement to coincide with its
annual shareholder meeting, which it held in the new factory in Alameda, where
the company one day expects to manufacture Coagulin-B and other gene therapy
drugs.

    Leonard Cohen, M.D., a financial analyst with AmeriCal Securities in San
Francisco, said investors don't appreciate just how good a deal Avigen cut with
Bayer.

    Avigen shares fell $2.69 Friday, to close at $40.75. The stock hit a 52-week
high of $89 in March.

    Cohen said that, although terms of the deal were not disclosed, he expects
Avigen will get to keep a majority of the proceeds from the eventual sales of
Coagulin-B. Most biotech firms would feel lucky to keep 20 percent of sales when
they sell the marketing rights to their drugs.

    Furthermore, Cohen said, by retaining control of the manufacturing process,
Avigen is laying the groundwork to manufacture future gene therapy drugs.

    Avigen is already performing animal tests of a gene therapy for the more
common form of hemophilia A. The company hopes to begin testing this new gene
therapy on human patients in 2001. Cohen said protein injections to curb
hemophilia A represent a market of $1.6 billion in the United States, more than
four times the market for hemophilia B.

    "Wall Street just doesn't understand this company yet," said Cohen, whose
firm recently took a large stake in Avigen shares.

    One of the keys to understanding the rationale behind the Bayer-Avigen
collaboration is visible from Interstate 80 in Berkeley, where Bayer employs
1,400 people at a plant that makes the clotting proteins for hemophilia A.

    This is the more common form of hemophilia. Avigen's current project doesn't
affect Bayer's Berkeley plant, because the gene therapy is aimed at the less
common hemophilia B.

    But let's imagine Avigen is successful in creating a gene therapy for
hemophilia A. That one-shot remedy would be a direct threat to Bayer, which has
invested $350 million in the Berkeley factory over the past few years, and has
$120 million in new plans on the drawing board.

    Given the glacial pace of drug development, that speculative threat couldn't
possibly materialize for five to seven years. Even so, by getting in with Avigen
now, Bayer presumably gets a leg up on a future licensing deal, if and when the
Alameda firm makes gene therapy possible for hemophilia A.Look for BioScope
every Monday in the Business section. Send your biofeedback to Tom Abate by
e-mail, tabate@sfchronicle.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                              72 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                    November 19, 2000, Sunday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 16C

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: HONOR ROLL

BODY:


   Carmine A. Grande, Buffalo State College vice president for advancement and
development, recently achieved the professional designation of advanced
certified fund-raising executive.

   Only 48 of 22,000 members of the National Society of Fund-Raising Executives
have achieved the designation, which is conferred by the Certification Board of
the National Society of Fund-Raising Executives, of Alexandria, Va.

   Grande joined Buffalo State in 1997. He previously was president of the
Children's Hospital of Buffalo Foundation and its Women and Children's Health
Research Foundation. He also had worked as vice president for development at the
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation and was a vice president for Citicorp.

   He received a bachelor of science degree from City College of New York, a
master of business administration from Baruch College and a professional studies
doctorate in marketing and management from Pace University.

   The Community Foundation for Greater Buffalo recently presented Clotilde
Perez-Bode Dedecker the Burt P. Flickinger Jr. Leadership Award for community
leadership.

   Dedecker is executive director of the Erie County Commission on the Status of
Women. The award was given to her for outstanding community service that
exemplifies the work of the late Burt P. Flickinger Jr.

   Dedecker has served on a variety of boards, ranging from Albright-Knox Art
Gallery and Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra to the New York State Council on the
Arts, Buffalo Prep, Nardin Academy, Nativity of Our Lord School and the
University at Buffalo.

   New members of St. Bonaventure University's board of trustees include:

   John F. Connors of Sanibel Island, Fla., a 1958 graduate who played center
for the Bona basketball team. He is president of Newstec, a newspaper systems
company.

   Raymond C. Dee of Pottsville, Pa., a 1964 graduate who is currently an
adviser to Sapa, a Swedish industrial company that is acquiring aluminum
companies in the United States. He is also equity owner of Valley Technologies,
Tamaqua, and Marketmembers.com.

   The Rev. Thomas M. Gallagher, a Franciscan priest who is director of novices
and guardian of St. Paul's Friary in Wilmington, Del.

   The Rev. Joseph M. Hertel, director of development for the Franciscans of
Holy Name Province of the Order of Friars Minor in New York City.

   Richard P. Kearns of Williston, a 1972 Bona graduate who is a partner and
member of the senior management team of PricewaterhouseCoopers.

   Dorothy M. Bellanti, an administrator at D'Youville College, was recently
appointed project director of the federally funded GEAR-UP (Gaining Early
Awareness and Readiness for Undergraduate Programs), with headquarters at the
college.

   She replaces Millicent Thomas, former vice president of program operations
for the Buffalo and Rochester urban leagues.

   Bellanti has served as director of student support services and assistant
director of the Learning Center at D'Youville and was an elementary school
teacher in Buffalo before joining D'Youville in 1980.

   She is a D'Youville graduate and also has a master's degree in education from
Buffalo State College.

   GEAR-UP is a U.S. Department of Education program to help children from
low-income families prepare for college. D'Youville is lead administrator of a $
3.5 million, five-year grant to develop the program locally.

   Eight Buffalo and Lackawanna public schools and eight area colleges take part
in the project, which is further supported by a number of local agencies,
businesses and community organizations making up the Greater Buffalo GEAR-UP
Coalition.

   About 900 middle school students are expected to get the preparation and
support needed to succeed in college through the local GEAR-UP effort.

   Peter J. Martinelli of Amherst, a U.S. administrative law judge for the
Social Security Administration, has been appointed hearing office chief for the
agency's Springfield, Mass., hearing office.

   He plans to move from Amherst to Springfield.

   Martinelli was appointed a U.S. administrative law judge in October 1996 and
has served most of his tenure in the Fresno, Calif., office. Most recently, he
served a brief term in Johnstown, Pa.

   Prior to his federal appointment, he served in a similar capacity in the
Buffalo and Rochester offices of the New York State Unemployment Insurance
Appeal Board, Other previous positions include working as litigation attorney
for the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance, chief of civil and
family services for the Legal Aid Bureau of Buffalo and assistant professor at
Fredonia State College.

   He received a bachelor of science degree in business administration from the
University at Buffalo in 1971 and a law degree from New England School of Law in
1978. Five Western New Yorkers are recent graduates of basic military training
at Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas, where they learned the Air Force
mission, organization and customs.

   The graduates include Airman Chad M. Conert, son of Gerald and Cindy Conert
of Middleport and a 1999 graduate of Barker Central High School; Reserve Airman
Dennis M. Stornelli Jr., son of Sally J. Manicki of Middleport and Dennis M.
Stornelli Sr. of Lewiston and a 1999 graduate of Royalton-Hartland Central
School, Middleport; and Airman Michael R. Wydysh, son of Michael and Peggy
Wydysh of North Tonawanda and a 1999 graduate of North Tonawanda High School.

   Also, Airman Robert J. Alvarado, son of Wilson and Patricia Alvarado of
Cheektowaga and a 1997 graduate of West Seneca East Senior High School; and Air
National Guard Airman 1st Class Matthew E. Burns, son of Kevin and Kathy Burns
of Ransomville.

   Lisa Caparaso-Cyran, an eighth-grade English teacher at Aurora Middle School,
has been selected by the New York State English Council as a "2000 Educator of
Excellence."

   In 1994, she received the educator of excellence award for her work at the
second-grade level at Hillview School.

   She received the award at the recent 50th annual New York State English
Council Conference in Albany.

   She received the 1993 Elementary Education and Reading Alumni Scholarship
from Buffalo State College for her work in the graduate reading program and was
nominated for the New York State Teacher of the Year Award by the Lancaster
School Board in 1995.

   Three faculty members in the University at Buffalo's School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences have received National Science Foundation Faculty Early
Career Development awards ranging from $ 200,000 to $ 500,000.

   The recipients are Stelios T. Andreadis, of Williamsville, assistant
professor of chemical engineering; Ann M. Bisantz of Batavia, assistant
professor of industrial engineering, and Ashim Garg of Williamsville, assistant
professor of computer science and engineering.

   Bisantz will receive $ 300,000 over four years to conduct research on
understanding, modeling and supporting human decision-making in complex
situations.

   Andreadis, a faculty member since 1998, will use his four-year, $ 200,000
award to study gene therapy.

   Garg, a faculty member since 1997, received a four-year, $ 200,000 grant to
conduct information visua;ization research. He said he hopes his research
eventually results in the development of software that would benefit users of
data mining, computer graphics and interactive visualization application.

GRAPHIC: Carmine A. Grande, Lisa Caparaso-Cyran

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                              73 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 19, 2000, Sunday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-7

LENGTH: 586 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy thrives in San Diego County

BODY:
 Numerous gene-therapy companies are established in San Diego County, many of
them with roots in academic research done at the University of California San
Diego, the Salk Institute and the Scripps Research Institute.

   Among those companies are:

   [] Canji Inc.: Acquired in 1996 by Schering-Plough, Canji is the
pharmaceutical giant's center for gene-therapy discovery, focusing primarily on
treating cancer and eye diseases.

   Canji is in Phase III clinical trials for its p53 gene therapy to treat
ovarian cancer.  P53 is one of a group of genes that act to protect cells from
becoming cancerous.  The company has developed a gene-delivery system using a
modified adenovirus -- the common cold virus -- to deliver genes like p53 to
cancer cells.

   [] Collateral Therapeutics: The publicly traded biotech focuses on gene
therapies to treat heart disease.

   The company uses human growth-factor genes that have been inserted into a
virus and then delivered directly to the heart through a catheter.  Once there,
the genes promote angiogenesis, or the growth of new blood vessels, that helps
restore blood flow impaired by coronary artery damage.

   [] GenStar Therapeutics: The publicly traded biotech is developing
gene-therapy products for the treatment of hemophilia A, prostate cancer and
AIDS.

   The company plans to launch a Phase I clinical trial to test its lead
gene-therapy product for hemophilia A by the end of this year.

   GenStar delivers its gene therapy through an adenovirus that has been
genetically modified.  It replaces the genes responsible for transmitting the
virus with therapeutic genes responsible for the production of Factor VIII, a
critical blood-clotting agent.

   [] Immune Response Corp.: The publicly traded biotech is developing a
targeted delivery technology for gene therapy.  It is being designed to enable
the delivery of genes directly to the liver after an intravenous injection.

   The company's gene-therapy program is focused on diseases of the liver and is
in preclinical studies for the treatment of hemophilia and hepatitis.

   [] Selected Genetics: The privately held company was formed in 1998 through
the merger of Prizm Pharmaceuticals and Matrigen.  The company develops gene
therapies to promote tissue repair and regeneration.

   Its lead product for diabetic foot ulcers is expected to enter Phase I
clinical trials by the end of the year.

   The product consists of human growth-factor genes suspended in a gel or
paste.  The paste is applied to a tissue injury, where cells from the edge of
the wound absorb the growth-factor genes and are spurred to increase production
of new tissue.

   [] Viagene: Acquired in 1995 by Chiron Corp., Viagene is now that
pharmaceutical company's gene-therapy division.

   The company's lead gene-therapy product to treat hemophilia A is designed to
restore levels of Factor VIII. The product is in early Phase I clinical trials,
but Chiron recently announced that it is seeking a corporate partner for the
program.

   [] Vical Inc.: The publicly traded biotech's lead gene therapy, Allovectin-7,
is in final Phase III testing in patients with malignant melanoma, an aggressive
form of skin cancer, and in Phase II clinical trials for patients with
persistent or recurrent head and neck cancer.

   Allovectin-7 consists of a braided strand of DNA that includes a gene that
alerts the immune system to recognize and kill foreign tissue.  It is designed
to be injected directly into a tumor, where malignant cancer cells absorb it.


CORRECTION-DATE: November 22, 2000

CORRECTION:

   FOR THE RECORD | An article in Sunday's Business section incorrectly
identified the name of the biotechnology company Selective Genetics.  The
Union-Tribune regrets the error.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              74 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 19, 2000, Sunday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 1229 words

HEADLINE: On the threshold; After fitful start, gene therapy seems poised to
make people well

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 For more than a decade, gene therapy has been a promising idea that failed to
deliver.

   Now gene-therapy companies, whose progress has been steady rather than
spectacular, say the field is poised for rejuvenation.  New and better ways to
deliver genes to diseased or defective cells are being devised, and a smattering
of gene-therapy clinical trials are showing promise for cancer, heart disease
and hemophilia patients.

   In San Diego County, home of one of the nation's largest clusters of
gene-therapy companies and academic researchers, at least two companies -- Vical
Inc. and Canji, a gene-therapy subsidiary of Schering-Plough -- have
gene-therapy candidates in late-stage human testing.

   Several other companies, both publicly traded and private, also are
developing novel gene therapies.  The companies include Collateral Therapeutics,
GenStar Therapeutics, Selected Genetics, Immune Response Corp. and Viagene, a
local gene-therapy division of Chiron Corp.

   So far, none of the companies has produced products or profits, and some
investors have cooled toward the sector in the wake of the death last year of a
patient enrolled in a gene-therapy clinical trial.

   But more recent events, including the success last spring of French
scientists who used gene therapy to boost the immune system of babies born with
a rare genetic disorder, might cause skeptics to reconsider.

   "The initial hope of very rapid application for gene therapy has not been
realized, but people are slowly trying to peck away at the issues that have
prevented clinical success," says Robert Abbott, chief executive of Selected
Genetics, a privately-held company in San Diego that is developing gene
therapies to treat tissue and bone injury.

   "A lot of times some sizzling technology gets hot in the eyes of investors
long before their commercial time -- but it is too powerful a technology to be
ignored."

   The idea behind gene therapy is deceptively simple: Use the body's own
genetic material as a drug to cure or prevent illness by replacing missing or
defective genes with healthy ones.

   It was a concept that led to much excitement in the late 1980s and early
1990s when gene therapy first gained wide attention.  Academic researchers and
biotechnology companies rushed to get in on the ground floor.

   Yet turning the concept into a practical therapy proved more problematic,
says Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a pioneering researcher in the field and director
of the Human Gene Therapy program at the University of California San Diego.

   "It seemed a simple job -- you had a gene, you had a person, (and) all you
had to do was put the gene in the person's cell and have a cure," Friedmann
says.  "It turned out to be a more complicated affair."

   The problem was, and still is, one of gene delivery and expression: getting
the gene to the cell at the right amount and keeping it expressed, or active, at
the right level.

   Early on, gene-therapy researchers embraced the notion of encasing a
corrective gene or genes into an adenovirus, a weakened form of the common cold
virus.  The adenovirus remains a favored vector -- a vehicle that ferries the
gene into the cell -- because the very nature of the virus makes it ideal for
invading and infecting a cell.

   In the case of gene therapy, the goal is to infect the cell with therapeutic
genetic material.

   Yet such vectors have problems.  The weakened cold virus might reactivate and
infect the cell, creating potentially life-threatening problems, or it could be
destroyed by the body's immune system defenses before therapeutic genes could be
delivered in a strong enough or sustained enough manner.

   Over the past few years companies have made strides in vector technology,
tweaking the viruses to make them better at delivering the genes.  Other
companies have also come up with different vectors or, in the case of Vical, no
real vector at all.

   Vical, one of San Diego's oldest gene-therapy companies, is testing its gene
therapy, Allovectin 7, in Phase III clinical trials on patients with advanced
melanoma, a deadly skin cancer.  Phase III is the last crucial test of a drug in
humans before a company can seek regulatory approval to market it.

   Using so-called naked DNA technology, Vical injects a braid of therapeutic
DNA, encased in a fatty, protective coating, directly into a cancer patient's
tumor.  Once there, the gene mixture alerts the immune system to recognize and
kill foreign tissue.

   In preliminary results of a study of 70 patients with advanced melanoma,
Vical found that 10 percent of patients responded very well, with tumors
shrinking in size by 50 percent or more.  In another 15 percent of patients, the
gene therapy stopped the disease from progressing.

   While the percentages might not seem impressive, Vical spokesman Alan
Engbring notes they become very significant to cancer patients for whom all
other treatment options have failed.

   "These are patients that have exhausted conventional therapy, and if left
untreated will most certainly die, most within a year," Engbring says.  "These
patients don't have a lot of choices left."

   The new vectors

   GenStar Therapeutics, a local company that is developing gene therapies to
treat hemophilia and prostate cancer, is bringing a new twist to an old vector.

   GenStar uses an adenovirus to deliver its therapeutic genes, but the company
has removed all the adenovirus' genes.  Since those genes can't activate, the
immune system isn't alerted to a foreign presence and doesn't mount an attack on
cells infected with the therapeutic genes.

   In October, the company received clearance from the National Institutes of
Health to begin testing the therapy in humans, which it will begin by the end of
the year.

   "This is a case where increased knowledge and advances in technology, have
been applied to provide the next generation of vectors," says Dr. Robert Sobol,
chief executive of GenStar.  "We've benefited by learning from the shortcomings
of early approaches."

   Setbacks, successes

   While many gene therapy experts say the gene-therapy industry is making solid
strides, most agree it has a way to go.

   In the past 14 months, the field has experienced both its worst blow and its
sweetest victory.

   In September 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, a teen-ager from Tucson, died in a
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.  The death had a
ripple effect through the industry, prompting new guidelines for clinical trials
and tougher government oversight.

   Then, last April, gene therapy tasted its first unequivocal success.  French
scientists reported they had used gene therapy to successfully restore the
defective immune system of three infants born with severe combined immune
deficiency, or SCID, a rare disorder that often forces sufferers to live in
germ-free bubbles.

   Such setbacks, and successes, add up to an industry that is "still in its
post-adolescent phase," says John McCamant, a biotechnology stock analyst.

   "With gene therapy, the devil is always in the details.  How do you get the
genes in the cells and how do you get them to work," says McCamant, editor of
the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley.

   "There are lots of early Phase II clinical trials, and a few Phase III, so
it's not an area that is ready to rush to market, but in the next three to five
years we should see the first gene therapy approved."


CORRECTION-DATE: November 22, 2000

CORRECTION:

   FOR THE RECORD | An article in Sunday's Business section incorrectly
identified the name of the biotechnology company Selective Genetics.  The
Union-Tribune regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune; Michele Lahey works with bacteria
cultures in a lab at Collateral Therapeutics, which is testing an experimental
gene therapy to treat heart disease. Collateral is a member of a significant
cluster of gene-therapy companies in San Diego County.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000


                              75 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 19, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 1216 words

HEADLINE: On the threshold;
After fitful start, gene therapy seems poised to make people well

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For more than a decade, gene therapy has been a promising idea that failed to
deliver. Now gene-therapy companies, whose progress has been steady rather than
spectacular, say the field is poised for rejuvenation.

   New and better ways to deliver genes to diseased or defective cells are being
devised, and a smattering of gene-therapy clinical trials are showing promise
for cancer, heart disease and hemophilia patients. In San Diego County, home of
one of the nation's largest clusters of gene-therapy companies and academic
researchers, at least two companies -- Vical Inc. and Canji, a gene-therapy
subsidiary of Schering-Plough -- have gene-therapy candidates in late-stage
human testing. Several other companies, both publicly traded and private, also
are developing novel gene therapies.

   The companies include Collateral Therapeutics, GenStar Therapeutics, Selected
Genetics, Immune Response Corp. and Viagene, a local gene-therapy division of
Chiron Corp. So far, none of the companies has produced products or profits, and
some investors have cooled toward the sector in the wake of the death last year
of a patient enrolled in a gene-therapy clinical trial. But more recent events,
including the success last spring of French scientists who used gene therapy to
boost the immune system of babies born with a rare genetic disorder, might cause
skeptics to reconsider. "The initial hope of very rapid application for gene
therapy has not been realized, but people are slowly trying to peck away at the
issues that have prevented clinical success," says Robert Abbott, chief
executive of Selected Genetics, a privately-held company in San Diego that is
developing gene therapies to treat tissue and bone injury. "A lot of times some
sizzling technology gets hot in the eyes of investors long before their
commercial time -- but it is too powerful a technology to be ignored." The idea
behind gene therapy is deceptively simple: Use the body's own genetic material
as a drug to cure or prevent illness by replacing missing or defective genes
with healthy ones. It was a concept that led to much excitement in the late
1980s and early 1990s when gene therapy first gained wide attention.

   Academic researchers and biotechnology companies rushed to get in on the
ground floor. Yet turning the concept into a practical therapy proved more
problematic, says Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a pioneering researcher in the field
and director of the Human Gene Therapy program at the University of California
San Diego. "It seemed a simple job -- you had a gene, you had a person, (and)
all you had to do was put the gene in the person's cell and have a cure,"
Friedmann says.

   "It turned out to be a more complicated affair." The problem was, and still
is, one of gene delivery and expression: getting the gene to the cell at the
right amount and keeping it expressed, or active, at the right level. Early on,
gene-therapy researchers embraced the notion of encasing a corrective gene or
genes into an adenovirus, a weakened form of the common cold virus.

   The adenovirus remains a favored vector -- a vehicle that ferries the gene
into the cell -- because the very nature of the virus makes it ideal for
invading and infecting a cell. In the case of gene therapy, the goal is to
infect the cell with therapeutic genetic material. Yet such vectors have
problems.

   The weakened cold virus might reactivate and infect the cell, creating
potentially life-threatening problems, or it could be destroyed by the body's
immune system defenses before therapeutic genes could be delivered in a strong
enough or sustained enough manner. Over the past few years companies have made
strides in vector technology, tweaking the viruses to make them better at
delivering the genes.

   Other companies have also come up with different vectors or, in the case of
Vical, no real vector at all. Vical, one of San Diego's oldest gene-therapy
companies, is testing its gene therapy, Allovectin 7, in Phase III clinical
trials on patients with advanced melanoma, a deadly skin cancer.

   Phase III is the last crucial test of a drug in humans before a company can
seek regulatory approval to market it. Using so-called naked DNA technology,
Vical injects a braid of therapeutic DNA, encased in a fatty, protective
coating, directly into a cancer patient's tumor.

   Once there, the gene mixture alerts the immune system to recognize and kill
foreign tissue. In preliminary results of a study of 70 patients with advanced
melanoma, Vical found that 10 percent of patients responded very well, with
tumors shrinking in size by 50 percent or more.

   In another 15 percent of patients, the gene therapy stopped the disease from
progressing. While the percentages might not seem impressive, Vical spokesman
Alan Engbring notes they become very significant to cancer patients for whom all
other treatment options have failed. "These are patients that have exhausted
conventional therapy, and if left untreated will most certainly die, most within
a year," Engbring says. "These patients don't have a lot of choices left." The
new vectors GenStar Therapeutics, a local company that is developing gene
therapies to treat hemophilia and prostate cancer, is bringing a new twist to an
old vector. GenStar uses an adenovirus to deliver its therapeutic genes, but the
company has removed all the adenovirus' genes.

   Since those genes can't activate, the immune system isn't alerted to a
foreign presence and doesn't mount an attack on cells infected with the
therapeutic genes. In October, the company received clearance from the National
Institutes of Health to begin testing the therapy in humans, which it will begin
by the end of the year. "This is a case where increased knowledge and advances
in technology, have been applied to provide the next generation of vectors,"
says Dr. Robert Sobol, chief executive of GenStar.

   "We've benefited by learning from the shortcomings of early approaches."
Setbacks, successes While many gene therapy experts say the gene-therapy
industry is making solid strides, most agree it has a way to go. In the past 14
months, the field has experienced both its worst blow and its sweetest victory.
In September 1999, Jesse Gelsinger, a teen-ager from Tucson, died in a
gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The death had a ripple effect through the industry, prompting new guidelines
for clinical trials and tougher government oversight. Then, last April, gene
therapy tasted its first unequivocal success.

   French scientists reported they had used gene therapy to successfully restore
the defective immune system of three infants born with severe combined immune
deficiency, or SCID, a rare disorder that often forces sufferers to live in
germ-free bubbles. Such setbacks, and successes, add up to an industry that is
"still in its post-adolescent phase," says John McCamant, a biotechnology stock
analyst. "With gene therapy, the devil is always in the details.

   How do you get the genes in the cells and how do you get them to work," says
McCamant, editor of the Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley. "There are
lots of early Phase II clinical trials, and a few Phase III, so it's not an area
that is ready to rush to market, but in the next three to five years we should
see the first gene therapy approved."

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Michele Lahey works with bacteria cultures in a lab at
Collateral Therapeutics, which is testing an experimental gene therapy to treat
heart disease. Collateral is a member of a significant cluster of gene-therapy
companies in San Diego County.; PHOTOBY: John Gastaldo / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              76 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 19, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-7

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy thrives in San Diego County

BODY:

   Numerous gene-therapy companies are established in San Diego County, many of
them with roots in academic research done at the University of California San
Diego, the Salk Institute and the Scripps Research Institute. Among those
companies are: [] Canji Inc.: Acquired in 1996 by Schering-Plough, Canji is the
pharmaceutical giant's center for gene-therapy discovery, focusing primarily on
treating cancer and eye diseases. Canji is in Phase III clinical trials for its
p53 gene therapy to treat ovarian cancer.

   P53 is one of a group of genes that act to protect cells from becoming
cancerous.

   The company has developed a gene-delivery system using a modified adenovirus
-- the common cold virus -- to deliver genes like p53 to cancer cells. []
Collateral Therapeutics: The publicly traded biotech focuses on gene therapies
to treat heart disease. The company uses human growth-factor genes that have
been inserted into a virus and then delivered directly to the heart through a
catheter.

   Once there, the genes promote angiogenesis, or the growth of new blood
vessels, that helps restore blood flow impaired by coronary artery damage. []
GenStar Therapeutics: The publicly traded biotech is developing gene-therapy
products for the treatment of hemophilia A, prostate cancer and AIDS. The
company plans to launch a Phase I clinical trial to test its lead gene-therapy
product for hemophilia A by the end of this year. GenStar delivers its gene
therapy through an adenovirus that has been genetically modified.

   It replaces the genes responsible for transmitting the virus with therapeutic
genes responsible for the production of Factor VIII, a critical blood-clotting
agent. [] Immune Response Corp.: The publicly traded biotech is developing a
targeted delivery technology for gene therapy.

   It is being designed to enable the delivery of genes directly to the liver
after an intravenous injection. The company's gene-therapy program is focused on
diseases of the liver and is in preclinical studies for the treatment of
hemophilia and hepatitis. [] Selected Genetics: The privately held company was
formed in 1998 through the merger of Prizm Pharmaceuticals and Matrigen.

   The company develops gene therapies to promote tissue repair and
regeneration. Its lead product for diabetic foot ulcers is expected to enter
Phase I clinical trials by the end of the year. The product consists of human
growth-factor genes suspended in a gel or paste.

   The paste is applied to a tissue injury, where cells from the edge of the
wound absorb the growth-factor genes and are spurred to increase production of
new tissue. [] Viagene: Acquired in 1995 by Chiron Corp., Viagene is now that
pharmaceutical company's gene-therapy division. The company's lead gene-therapy
product to treat hemophilia A is designed to restore levels of Factor VIII. The
product is in early Phase I clinical trials, but Chiron recently announced that
it is seeking a corporate partner for the program. [] Vical Inc.: The publicly
traded biotech's lead gene therapy, Allovectin-7, is in final Phase III testing
in patients with malignant melanoma, an aggressive form of skin cancer, and in
Phase II clinical trials for patients with persistent or recurrent head and neck
cancer. Allovectin-7 consists of a braided strand of DNA that includes a gene
that alerts the immune system to recognize and kill foreign tissue.

   It is designed to be injected directly into a tumor, where malignant cancer
cells absorb it.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              77 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   November 18, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition,
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Business; Pg. 2H

LENGTH: 2685 words

HEADLINE: DAILY BRIEFING

BYLINE: Staff reports and news services

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
> Denotes item of particular local interest.

DEALS: Royal Philips to buy Agilent medical unit
Amsterdam, Netherlands --- Royal Philips Electronics NV, Europe's largest
consumer electronics company, agreed to buy Agilent Technologies Inc.'s medical
business for $ 1.7 billion to add home diagnostic equipment to its health care
unit. The purchase will increase Philips' sales of hospital diagnostic equipment
and bring it faster-growing businesses such as heart defibrillators and home
care technology. Philips trails General Electric Co. and Siemens AG in medical
technology sales.

United Technologies unit to buy two La. businesses
Hartford, Conn. --- United Technologies Corp.'s Carrier unit, the No. 1 maker of
air-conditioning and heating systems, agreed to buy two Louisiana distributors
of its residential and light commercial products to cut costs. Terms weren't
disclosed. Shollmier Distributing Inc. and Magnolia Air Conditioning & Supply,
both based in New Orleans, have a total of 110 employees. They are expected to
have about $ 58 million in revenue this year, said Carrier spokesman Rick
Fedrizzi.

JPS Industries agrees to sell apparel unit
Greenville, S.C. --- JPS Industries Inc., which makes chemical products used in
a variety of applications including clothing, medical components and surfboards,
agreed to sell its apparel unit to JPSA Acquisition Corp. for about $ 27 million
to exit the textiles business. JPS will sell apparel manufacturing and
administrative facilities in South Carolina, Virginia, New York and Los Angeles.
The transaction doesn't include assets from the JPS' glass or elastomerics
units, which make products used in circuit boards, aerospace parts and
insulation, said Charles R. Tutterow, chief financial officer.

Edgewater Technology sells IntelliMark unit
Fayetteville, Ark. --- Edgewater Technology Inc., which develops and maintains
Web sites and electronic commerce software for other companies, said it sold its
IntelliMark unit to Charlesbank Equity Fund V for about $ 42. 7 million in cash.
Edgewater, formerly known as StaffMark Inc., said the unit, which provides
staffing for information technology companies, had declining sales and profit.
Edgewater made the announcement in a press release distributed by PR Newswire
and couldn't immediately be reached for confirmation.

Also ...
TeamStaff Inc.: The provider of human resources services to companies agreed to
buy closely held Paradyme Human Resources Corp. to gain the ability to offer
payroll processing and other items on the Internet. Terms weren't disclosed.

FINANCE: Paragon Technologies exploring its options
Easton, Pa. --- Paragon Technologies Inc., a maker of conveyor belts and
assembly line systems, said it hired ING Groep NV's ING Barings LLC unit to
review options to boost the company's share price. ING Barings will provide
investment banking services. Alternatives for Easton-based Paragon include a
possible sale of the company or the purchase of another company, executives
said. Paragon's customers include General Electric, General Motors and IBM.

Former Medaphis execs settle federal charges
> Washington --- Two former officials of Atlanta-based Medaphis Corp. settled
federal fraud charges that they used improper accounting procedures to boost
earnings for 1995 and the first two quarters of 1996. Per-Se Technologies,
formerly Medaphis, also settled the regulators' charges that the company kept
improper books and records and filed inaccurate reports with the government for
the same periods, the Securities and Exchange Commission said. The two officials
are Glen Donald Lang, former president and chief executive officer of Imonics
Corp., a Medaphis subsidiary in Cary, N.C., and James Steele Douglass,
ex-controller and chief accounting office of Medaphis.

Sunbeam acknowledges possible charges by SEC
Boca Raton, Fla. --- Sunbeam Corp., the troubled maker of appliances, said the
Securities and Exchange Commission may file charges after concluding a two-year
investigation of its accounting practices. The company is in talks with the SEC,
and the outcome remains unclear, Sunbeam said in a regulatory filing. The agency
began an inquiry into Sunbeam's accounting in June 1998, two days after its
board fired Chairman Albert Dunlap following two quarters of losses. Dunlap
overstated Sunbeam's results in 1997 by recording sales too early and combining
operating expenses with a restructuring charge, Sunbeam said when it restated
three years of results two years ago.

Printer Bowne & Co. to close two offices
New York --- Bowne & Co., the world's largest printer of financial documents,
said Friday it will close two of its offices in the United States, resulting in
the loss of 70 jobs. New York-based Bowne said it is also considering other
cost-cutting measures. The company has 7,200 employees in 90 offices around the
world. It did not disclose the locations of the offices it will shutter.

HEALTH CARE: Bayer buys rights to hemophilia B therapy
Alameda, Calif. --- Avigen Inc. said it gave Bayer AG, Germany's biggest drug
maker, exclusive worldwide marketing and distribution rights to its gene therapy
treatment for hemophilia B in an agreement valued at $ 60 million. The pact
includes a purchase of Avigen shares worth $ 15 million, milestone payments and
the assumption of trial and manufacturing costs by Bayer. Avigen will receive a
''substantial'' part of Coagulin-B sales.

LAWSUITS: Internet monitoring firm sues former executives
Los Angeles --- NetCurrents Inc., which monitors Internet message boards for
defamatory comments about companies, sued two former executives for allegedly
defaming the self-described ''Internet intelligence agency'' on the Web.
NetCurrents sued Victor Holtorf, the company's former chief operating officer,
and James Maloney, former senior sales executive, this week in Los Angeles
Superior Court. NetCurrents seeks damages and an injunction to prevent the
defendants from allegedly posting more Internet messages.

MANUFACTURING: ObjectSoft trims staff, sells 25% stake
Hackensack, N.J. --- ObjectSoft Corp., a maker of computers used in video stores
to show movie clips, cut 12 jobs, or 35 percent of its 31 workers, while an
undisclosed group of investors buys about 25 percent of the company for $ 1.9
million in cash. ObjectSoft said the purchase includes a $ 1 million investment
and $ 900,000 in loans from institutional investors, said David Sarna, chief
executive and chairman.

PEOPLE: American Express CEO ceding duties Dec. 31
New York --- American Express Co. Chief Executive Harvey Golub will pass the
reins to his successor, Kenneth Chenault, on Dec. 31, moving forward his
expected retirement by four months. Golub, 61, will remain chairman until the
annual meeting in April. He doesn't plan to stay on as a director. He said two
years ago he planned to leave in April 2001. Chenault, his successor, will
become the first black chief executive of one of the 30 blue chip companies
whose stocks make up the Dow Jones industrial average.

Software maker Veritas taps Oracle exec to be CEO
San Francisco --- Veritas Software Corp., a maker of software for running Web
sites, named Oracle Corp. executive Gary Bloom as chief executive, replacing
Mark Leslie. Bloom is the latest high-profile executive to depart Oracle,
following President Ray Lane, who resigned in July. Bloom was one of three
executives tapped to assume Lane's duties. Leslie will remain chairman,
spokeswoman Jill Stevenson said.

RETAIL: Pets.com restructures executives' severance
Washington --- Pets.com Inc., less than a month before announcing it would
close, changed terms of severance agreements so 10 executives could get more
than $ 1 million of cash retention bonuses if they stay to wind down the online
pet supply retailer's business. The company announced Nov. 7 that it would cease
business after failing to find a buyer or other financing. The company went
public in February and accumulated $ 146.6 million of losses through Sept. 30.

Footstar to purchase J. Baker's shoe unit
Mahwah, N.J. --- Footstar Inc., a seller of shoes and clothing, agreed to buy
the footwear business of J. Baker Inc. for $ 57.8 million to expand its sales of
higher-priced shoes in other retail chains. Footstar is buying J. Baker's 1,318
footwear departments in shops run by retailers including Ames Department Stores
Inc. and Bradlees Inc. J. Baker's higher-end shoes are sold in Stein Mart Inc.,
Spiegel Inc., Today's Man Inc. and Gottschalks Inc. stores. Footstar operates
departments in Kmart and Rite Aid Corp. stores and runs the Footaction and Just
for Feet chains.

TECHNOLOGY: After stock swoon, Unify cuts 20% of work force
Sacramento, Calif. --- Unify Corp., a maker of electronic commerce software
whose shares have fallen 99 percent this year, said it cut 26 jobs, or 20
percent of its work force, and named Todd Wille chief executive and president.
The company is reorganizing its business into two units and has reduced its work
force from 132 since July. Wille had been chief operating officer and acting
chief financial officer. He replaces Reza Mikailli, who was fired after having
been on administrative leave since July 31, when the company found revenue was
improperly stated.

ZipLink suspends operations, lays off 80
Lowell, Mass. --- ZipLink Inc., a company that provided wholesale Internet
services, announced Friday it was suspending operations and laying off about 80
employees. The company, which went public last year, said it was hurting because
of a recent default on payments by its second-largest customer. Meanwhile,
efforts begun in March have failed to raise new capital or find a buyer. Shares
fell 9 cents to 41 cents Friday before trading was halted on Nasdaq.

TELECOMS: WorldCom to sell most of Intermedia's assets
Clinton, Miss. --- WorldCom Inc. agreed to sell all of Intermedia Communications
Inc.'s assets, except for its controlling interest in Digex Inc., in an effort
to gain regulatory approval for its acquisition of Intermedia from the Justice
Department. The company said a consent decree filed with the federal district
court in Washington outlined those terms and specified that it would sell the
Intermedia assets within six months of the close of the merger, before which
WorldCom would operate Intermedia as a separate business.

Symbian products licensed for cell phones
San Francisco --- Symbian Ltd., a closely held maker of software for cell phones
that can be used to log on to the Internet, expects to license its products to
every major cell-phone maker, Chief Executive Colly Myers said. Symbian is
partly owned by, and has licensed its operating system to cell- phone makers
including Ericsson AB, Motorola Inc., Nokia Oyj and Matsushita Electric Works
Ltd. The company is targeting other handset makers, including Samsung
Electronics, Alcatel SA, Siemens AG and NEC Corp., Myers said.

TRANSPORTATION: German exec chosen to run troubled Chrysler
Detroit --- With its appointment Friday of Dieter Zetsche to run Chrysler,
DaimlerChrysler AG has chosen a trusted lieutenant to fix the division's
problems before they begin to severely harm the rest of Chairman Juergen
Schrempp's automotive empire. Zetsche, a Turkish-born German electrical
engineer, will face tremendous pressure to achieve quick results, analysts said.
His selection came as DaimlerChrysler warned that the embattled U.S. division
will fall short of fourth-quarter expectations. The company also said Friday
that higher U.S. incentives, inventories and production cuts would push results
''below the last forecast.'' DaimlerChrysler did not provide specific numbers.

Nissan still seeking to upgrade image
Tokyo --- Two weeks after Nissan posted its biggest half-year operating profit
in a decade, its president warned on Friday that the company has yet to overhaul
its image as a maker of unattractive cars. ''From the beginning, we knew that
Nissan had a brand deficiency,'' said Carlos Ghosn. ''It takes a long time to
build one.'' That's why Nissan cars sell for an average of $ 1, 000 less than
competitors' models in the United States, he said. To leave its dull image in
the dust, Nissan has announced plans for 15 new models for the Japanese market
by 2003, and the return of the sporty Z-car in the U.S. market by the 2002 model
year.

United union ordered to halt job actions
Chicago --- UAL Corp.'s United Airlines won a court order requiring its
mechanics union to end ''illegal job actions'' that the carrier said were
forcing it to cancel flights as the busy Thanksgiving travel season begins. U.
S. District Judge William Hibbler granted a temporary restraining order against
the union that will be in effect until a Dec. 13 hearing on whether to extend
it, United said. The world's largest airline claimed the International
Association of Machinists District 141M's leadership orchestrated a job slowdown
as contract talks stalled on issues such as pay. The IAM, which had denied
United's claim, wouldn't immediately comment on the order.

Audiovox to supply Ford SUV video consoles
Hauppauge, N.Y. --- Audiovox Corp., a maker of automotive electronics and
cellular telephones, said it's supplying video consoles for some Ford Motor
sport-utility vehicles, as automakers add entertainment features. Contract terms
weren't disclosed. The consoles, being used in Eddie Bauer models of the 2001
Ford Expedition sport-utility, include a 6.8-inch screen and a videocassette
player. The systems also have a remote control and wireless headphones.

Bridgestone/Firestone to lay off 1,100 workers
Detroit --- Stuck with a huge inventory of Firestone tires and slow sales
because of the current recall, Bridgestone/Firestone Inc. announced Friday its
second round of job cuts in a month, saying that nearly 1,100 factory workers
would be laid off for at least five months. The layoffs were the latest sign
that sales of Firestone tires have not recovered from the recall on Aug. 9 of
14.4 million Firestone ATX and Wilderness tires that were mounted mainly on Ford
Explorer sport-utility vehicles.

Autoweb.com to cut work force by 25%
Santa Clara, Calif. --- Autoweb.com Inc. plans to cut its work force by about 25
percent, tighten its focus on core operations and reduce costs. The company said
the move will result in annual savings of more than $ 10 million, speeding its
path to profitability. The company plans to concentrate on a business strategy
centered around customer relationship management, its Automotive Information
Center content, data and technology offerings, as well as on increasing
automotive shoppers' options.

Also ...
Intel Corp.: Will introduce its long-awaited turbo-charged Pentium 4 chip
Monday, reclaiming the title from rival Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. as the
maker of the fastest chip in the personal computer market.

WORKPLACE: Time Warner agrees to settle lawsuit
New York ---Time Warner Inc. said it agreed to pay $ 5.5 million to settle a
lawsuit with the Labor Department, which accused it of improperly classifying
full-time workers as temporary workers to avoid paying health and retirement
benefits. The media group said the settlement isn't an admission of any
liability or wrongdoing by the company or its Time Inc. publishing unit.

Amazon workers seek union representation
Seattle --- Amazon.com Inc.'s customer-service workers at the Internet
retailer's Seattle headquarters have started a drive for union representation,
saying they want better job security and input on overtime and holiday
scheduling. The organizing effort by some of the company's more than 400
customer-service representatives is being supported by the Washington Alliance
of Technology Workers, which posted news of the drive on its Internet site. The
union local is an affiliate of the Communications Workers of America.
--- Staff, Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Dow Jones News Service

CORRECTION-DATE: November 21, 2000

CORRECTION:
page A/2: A Daily Briefing item in Saturday Business misidentified the offices
that Bowne & Co. is closing. The company is closing two offices of its Immersant
Internet consulting and development unit. Neither of the two offices is in
Atlanta.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2000


                              78 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 17, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY BRIEFING: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
BAYER TO SELL GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By Andrew Pollack

BODY:

   Bayer has obtained exclusive worldwide marketing and distribution rights to a
gene therapy treatment for hemophilia B being developed by Avigen Inc., the
companies are expected to announce today. The treatment, still in clinical
trials, has shown signs of becoming one of the first gene therapies that
actually works. In tests reported last year, three patients injected with the
gene for Factor IX, the blood clotting agent the patients lack, began producing
some clotting factor, reducing the need for injections. Hemophilia B is only a
fifth as common as hemophilia A. Bayer will buy $15 million of Avigen stock at a
premium to market price, giving it a small stake in the company, and will
finance further clinical trials. Avigen, of Alameda, Calif., said total payments
from Bayer could reach $60 million.   Andrew Pollack (NYT)

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2000


                              79 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            November 17, 2000 Friday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1811 words

HEADLINE: WHAT'S WRONG WITH THIS PICTURE?;
Financial incentives and a beneficial exchange rate make Canada an easier place
to film than N.O., producers say

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton; Business writer

BODY:

   Next month, Viacom Inc.'s MTV cable channel will broadcast "Love Song," a
made-for-television romantic feature set amid the streets, music clubs and
mansions of New Orleans.

   But anyone expecting to see Crescent City landmarks in the picture will be
out of luck: The movie was made in Montreal.

   The reason was simple. The producers could make the film more cheaply in
Canada, said Paul Mason, head of production for Viacom Productions in Los
Angeles.

   The film's director and stars wanted to be in New Orleans, Mason said. And
Viacom went so far as to make a budget comparing production costs for New
Orleans vs. Montreal. Montreal prevailed.

   "We like New Orleans. We wanted to be there," Mason said. "But the difference
was well over a quarter of a million" dollars.

   Such is the trend in show biz. Drawn by Canada's favorable currency exchange
rate and a wealth of financial incentives, producers are increasingly going
north of the border. Movie executives call this phenomenon "runaway
productions." While the trend is hardly new -- Hollywood, for instance, has been
battered by Canada -- the pinch has recently been tightening on people in the
New Orleans movie business.

   After peaking in 1996 at $71 million, direct spending on film and television
production in New Orleans dropped by more than 50 percent in 1999, to $35.2
million, according to the New Orleans Film and Video Commission, a division of
the Mayor's Office of Tourism, Arts and Entertainment.

   Part of that decline was caused by the cancellation of "The Big Easy" and
"Orleans," said Kim Carbo, executive director of the New Orleans Film
Commission. Filmed in 1996, those television series spun off considerable work
for New Orleans artisans, and it hurt when they left, Carbo said.

   Now, the Canadian effect is taking a toll.

   "I'm sorry to tell you that's true," said Al Salzer, a Los Angeles-based
filmmaker who was co-producer of "The Big Easy" series. "Some of them come (to
New Orleans) and do a couple of days of exterior shooting," he said. "Some of
them don't even bother."

   "Canada over the last couple of years has really given us a hard time," said
Joe Catalanotto, owner of Independent Studios Inc. in New Orleans, which opened
in 1960. "It's the worst I've ever seen it since I've been in business."

   "You know the saying the dog ate my homework? Well, it's like Canada ate my
career," said Stephanie Dupuy, a location manager and producer whose resume
includes work on "JFK," "Angel Heart" and "Primary Colors," all with scenes shot
locally.

   State film officials are trying to combat the Canadian effect. Mark Smith,
the acting assistant secretary of the Louisiana Office of Film and Video, is
drafting a state-of-the-industry report for Louisiana's top film officials, Lt.
Gov. Kathleen Blanco and Phillip Jones, secretary of the Louisiana Department of
Culture, Recreation and Tourism. The report, due in a few weeks, will include
information about the film industry in the United States and Canada and about
what incentives Louisiana might offer to compete more effectively with other
locations, Smith said.

   The report is timely. Earlier this month, Louisiana voters overwhelmingly
rejected Gov. Foster's proposed amendment to replace the Louisiana Department of
Economic Development with Louisiana Inc., a private, nonprofit company. Under
Foster's plan, Louisiana Inc. would have attempted to nurture the state's
economy by focusing on various industry clusters, including the entertainment
industry. Under Foster's proposal, the Office of Film and Video would have been
transferred to Louisiana Inc.

   Smith said Louisiana Inc.'s failure should not prevent the state from
focusing on the film industry for economic development.

   "It's global, it's high-tech, it's nonpolluting and it's high-paying," Smith
said. "It's not artsy fartsy; it's a business, and that's my focus."

Still rolling in N.O.

   The film industry is hardly dead in New Orleans. Producers are now shooting a
feature film in town called "Tempted," starring Burt Reynolds. Another film, a
low-budget independent feature called "Happy Here and Now," is scheduled to
begin shooting next month.

   And Sulzer hopes to produce two other low-budget movies in New Orleans --
each will cost about $1 million -- early next year.

   Carbo said the New Orleans Film and Video Commission is talking to the
producers of a national television series about shooting at least one episode in
New Orleans.

   Holly Vega, executive producer for Morrison Productions in New Orleans, said
the runaway production trend is not hurting her company's television commercial
business much; however, she said Morrison Productions has seen more competition
from hungry Los Angeles commercial producers who in the past did not compete
much for regional work.

   Still, there appears little doubt New Orleans is losing business to Canada.
Take the vampire movie "D2K," for example. Produced by Carfax Productions Ltd.,
the movie is set in New Orleans, and the filmmakers spent two and a half weeks
here this year shooting exteriors. But the filmmakers are saving money by
filming part of the movie in Ontario.

   While that sort of thing hardly pleases New Orleans film workers, what really
irritates them are movies like "Vendetta," a television movie made by Time
Warner Inc.'s HBO Studio Productions and broadcast on HBO last year. A
historical film based on the murder of New Orleans Police Chief David Hennessy,
the movie was made entirely in Kingston, Ontario, which was dressed up to look
like turn-of-the-century New Orleans.

   There was a port, a "French Market," and a public space that might have been
Jackson Square, but the filmmakers never shot in New Orleans. And to some people
the result was entirely unconvincing.

   "Verisimilitude is not in their vocabulary," Dupuy said of the producers of
"Vendetta."

In town for a second

   "Love Song," the MTV romance set in New Orleans, suffers the same lack of
realism.

   Produced in Montreal, the movie contains several seconds of footage of the
French Quarter and the Mississippi River, but that's about it.

   The film's director, Julie Dash, appears to have made a valiant effort to
find places in Montreal that looked like New Orleans, but natives won't be
fooled.

   The bachelorette pad where the female lead lives resembles a house in
Mid-City or Uptown, but could just as well be in Ohio. A stone mansion where one
character lives looks vaguely like a mansion on St. Charles Avenue, except it is
on a hill. The movie contains snippets of real French Quarter footage, but the
stars never appear in these jump-cut scenes. And when the characters visit "Club
Brass" on a date, there's not a trumpet to be heard, much less a tuba or
trombone.

   Viacom had little choice but to shoot in Montreal, given the vast differences
in production cost, Mason said.

   The company saved about $300,000 by shooting in Montreal, he said. Although
he declined to say what percentage of the overall budget that was, he did say it
was "a very substantial portion of the picture."

   Beyond financial considerations, Mason said, there are other factors that
make New Orleans difficult for movie makers. The city is not a movie set, but a
real community with its own priorities and schedules. As a result, the prettiest
parts of the French Quarter are sometimes inaccessible, he said. And hotels are
often hard to book at the discounts movie makers want for their big casts and
crews.

Canadian tax breaks

   What makes Canada so cheap are the Canadian dollar and tax breaks.

   Ten years ago, one U.S. dollar could be traded for about $1.15 in Canadian
currency, but today a U.S. dollar is worth $1.55 Canadian.

   Ontario is the California of Canadian filming. This fall and winter there are
42 feature films and television shows being shot in the province, according to
the "Toronto, Ontario On Location" Web site.

   Foreign companies are eligible for tax credits equal to 22 percent of the
money they spend on local labor, including actors and technicians.

   The Ontario government offers similar credits for computer animation and
digital media production, incentives that are most aimed at building the local
industries. Also, the Canadian government has an agency, Telefilm Canada, that
makes equity investments in movies made in the country.

   "I had one producer who told me, 'It's cheaper to build Jackson Square (in
Canada) with the incentives I get,' " Carbo said.

Fighting back

   New Orleans and Louisiana are trying to fight back.

   Louisiana's main incentive is a sales tax rebate for companies that spend $1
million making films in Louisiana. While that can mean a refund of 4 percent of
purchases related to a film, Smith said he wants to make the program more
aggressive. To do that, he would replace the rebate with a sales tax exemption,
which would give filmmakers more immediate cash.

   Such a proposal would have to be approved by the Legislature, and for it to
happen within the next year, Gov. Foster would have to put it on the agenda for
a special legislative session, Smith said.

   Smith has set up a meeting this week to discuss this and other film matters
with Don Hutchinson, secretary of the Louisiana Department of Economic
Development.

   Smith also wants to address what he said is a pervasive perception that the
Office of Film and Video is subject to political influence.

   "I cannot just dismiss the perception," he said. "I have to deal with the
perception." To do that, Smith said, he wants to establish minimum
qualifications or hiring procedures for the next Film and Video Office director,
who will take over for Smith in June. Smith said he would like to conduct a
national search for the new director.

   Meanwhile on the local level, officials are attempting to make the city more
film-friendly.

   David McCarty, a location manager who worked on the films "Double Jeopardy,"
"Out of Sight" and "Down by Law," said city officials have begun waiving parking
meter fees for films and making public spaces more accessible.

   Civic leaders also are getting involved. Among them is William Hines, a New
Orleans lawyer who is vice chairman of economic development for the New Orleans
Regional Chamber of Commerce. Hines is trying to create a chamber committee to
support the arts as economic engines.

   Hines acknowledges this effort lacks the ambition of other economic
development campaigns, such as the drive to make New Orleans a national center
for gene therapy or computer technology. But Hines said New Orleans' wealth of
talent makes an arts initiative easy to achieve.

   "We need to get some small successes," Hines said. "We need to hit some
singles and doubles along the way."

   That should not be hard in the film business, Mason said.

   "The good news is, everyone loves New Orleans," he said. "People want to go
there."

GRAPHIC: CANADIAN FAKIN' The pictures on this page are from the movies
'Vendetta' (1,2) and 'Love Song' (3,4), both set in New Orleans yet made in
Canada. What New Orleans sites of neighborhoods were these scenes meant to stand
for? 1) Jackson Square 2) The French Market 3) A 'New Orleans mansion' 4) The
French Market

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                              80 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 16, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1568 words

HEADLINE: A niche-knack guy; Local entrepreneur builds companies from ground up

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In his self-described quest to build the perfect company, former UCSD professor
Harry Gruber has tinkered with everything from making heart drugs to
broadcasting President Clinton's videotaped grand jury deposition over the
Internet.

   These days, Gruber is looking for a profit from the nonprofit sector, by
creating online fund-raising drives for charities.

   "The nonprofit sector is the largest market opportunity that I've ever come
across," Gruber said, noting that Americans donated $190 billion to nonpolitical
nonprofits last year.

   Gruber's newest firm -- Kintera -- has already managed to gain a dozen
charity clients, including San Diego Fleet Week, the San Diego Arthritis
Foundation and Chabad House, a Jewish religious organization.

   Kintera's services don't come cheap.  First, there's a set-up fee of $10,000
to $20,000 to build the Web site.  Then there's a maintenance fee of $500 to
$5,000 per month, as Kintera keeps track of the donations coming in.  And
finally, Kintera takes a percentage of the donations.

   Gruber faces an uphill battle as he expands the business.  Not only do many
charities operate their Web sites in-house, but there also are a number of
e-commerce companies specializing in nonprofits, with names like WebCharity.com
and WeCareToo.com.

   "The market for online fund raising is competitive and confusing," said Mark
Rovner, a fund-raising consultant with Virginia-based CMS Interactive.  "The
market is very crowded right now because the need for online tools and
infrastructure is so great."

   Tom Snyder, publisher of NonProfitXpress, a review of online charities, said
"the field of e-philanthropy has really come into its own.  But there is a
shakeout coming.  Survival will go to the most useful."

   Judging from experience, Gruber stands a good a chance of carving a niche in
e-philanthropy.  His chief talent seems to be developing a company to the point
where it can be sold -- and selling it before there's any change in its
fortunes.

   "I never want to sell anything," Gruber said.  "But I'm enough of a
pragmatist to know when the forces are aligned towards a sale."

   Gruber did not start out as an entrepreneur.  His education at the University
of Pennsylvania in the 1970s focused on genetics and rheumatology.  He continued
his medical research after coming to the University of California San Diego in
1977, where he worked as a researcher and professor.

   In the early 1980s, Gruber's experiments seeking a treatment for autism
brought him to the attention of San Diego attorney Samuel Alhadeff, whose son
Michael is autistic.  After hearing about Gruber's work, Alhadeff donated a
substantial amount of money to UCSD to help with the research.

   Making key contacts

   "Up to that point, I had not met Harry," Alhadeff said.  "But when I walked
into my law office one day, there was this nice, quiet, unassuming man sitting
in the lobby who said he had to thank me personally for the donation.  That's
how we met."

   In a subsequent visit to UCSD, Alhadeff suggested that Gruber should launch a
biotech company.  Over the next few months, Gruber and Paul Laikind, his
research partner at UCSD, developed an idea for a company that would specialize
in treating heart disease and nerve disorders.  In the meantime, Alhadeff
contacted his lawyer friends to see if they would join him as financial angels
for the project.

   In 1986, Alhadeff and half a dozen friends pooled $100,000 to help launch the
company, which was named Gensia.  Gruber and Alhadeff began visiting venture
capital firms, armed only with a white board that they used to sketch out their
ideas.

   Gensia picked up $15.8 million from companies such as Kleiner, Perkins,
Caufield & Byers, using the money to recruit a 60-person team from labs
including Johnson & Johnson, Eli Lilly and Schering-Plough.  As David Hale, a
pioneer of the local biotech sector, took charge of Gensia's management, Gruber
and Laikind went back to the lab to oversee product development.

   "We brought in management because we figured we didn't know a lot about
business.  We were just scientists," Gruber said.  At the height of the biotech
craze, Gensia's stock shot sky-high, fueled by hopes that its drug Protara would
help reduce stress from heart attacks.  As the stock was still spiraling upward,
Gruber left Gensia to head a spinoff, Viagene, specializing in gene therapy for
nerve disorders.

   Gruber left just in time.  In 1994, Gensia's stock was cut in half when
Protara failed to achieve meaningful results in clinical tests.  Gensia merged
with another biotech, Sicor, and shifted its attention to specialty drugs.

   Gruber remains convinced that Protara failed only because it did not have a
large enough test.  "The drug worked but the study didn't have statistical
significance," he says.  "By the time the test was over, people didn't have the
will to do another one."

   In the meantime, Viagene was showing enough promise to become attractive to a
much larger competitor, Chiron, which bought the company in 1994. But it has not
yet brought a product to market.

   "Viagene had some interesting technology, but the whole gene therapy area has
taken a long time to produce any products," said Jim McCamant, a market analyst
with the Medical Technologies Stock Letter.  "Selling the company was the wise
thing to do.  Producing gene therapy products turned out to take longer even
than pessimists expected."

   Gruber's next stint was as head of Vascular Genomics, a biotech company that
was exploring a way to target drugs to specific tissues without affecting nearby
areas.  As Vascular entered a tentative agreement to be acquired by Corvas
International in 1997 -- a deal that has since unraveled -- Gruber shifted away
from biotech and into the next new thing, the Internet.

   In the early 1990s, Gruber and some co-workers from Gensia and Viagene
started developing a way to deliver video messages over the Web. Initially,
Gruber did not have much luck when seeking money for the project.

   "The venture capital people said, 'Listen, you're a biotech guy moving to
high-tech.  We've never seen that succeed,' " Gruber said.  Undaunted, Gruber
turned to his old financial angels to help launch the company.  Alhadeff, who
had made out quite well from his investment in Gensia, willingly jumped into
Gruber's new venture, dubbed InterVu. Thanks to the boom in Internet companies,
InterVu proved to be the fastest-growing and most lucrative of Gruber's
ventures.

   InterVu hired its first employee on January 1996. By November 1997, it went
public after eking out just $164,000 in revenues.

   The video delivery market was highly competitive.  But with the Wall Street
firms of Josephthal and Cruttenden Roth as underwriters, InterVu raised a quick
$20 million.  And as it picked up CNN, NBC and Turner Broadcasting as customers,
it collected $200 million in a pair of secondary offerings.

   An early boost for InterVu was the impeachment of President Clinton.

   In September 1998, InterVu was among a handful of companies that put
Clinton's videotaped depositions onto the Web when they were released by
prosecutor Kenneth Starr.  Internet traffic slowed throughout the nation as
millions of computer users vied to view the depositions firsthand.

   New ventures

   InterVu's stock, which hit the market at $9.50 per share in 1997, was worth
$140 early this year on Nasdaq.  In February, InterVu competitor Akamai
Technologies inked a deal to buy the company for $2.8 billion in stock.

   The collapse of the Nasdaq market ate into the value of the deal, which was
consummated in April.  During that six-week period, Akamai's $235 share price
was cut in half, mirroring the rest of the market.  It is now selling in the $50
range.

   Nevertheless, Gruber and his fellow investors feel they made a healthy profit
on the deal.  "I'm definitely hanging onto my Akamai stock," Gruber said.  And
the buyout gave Gruber the time and money to devote to his next project,
Kintera.

   The idea behind Kintera is simple.  The company develops Web sites that help
charities solicit, collect and keep track of donations online.

   "It's a very innovative way for people to be able to give to an organization
so they can give at any time," said Ginger Hovenic, president of the San Diego
Regional Chamber of Commerce Foundation, which hired Kintera to develop a Web
site to raise money for Fleet Week.

   During the eight weeks the sdfleetweek.org Web site has been running, it has
picked up $12,000 to $14,000 in donations.

   "The Web site lets people give all year round, rather than just during a
specific event," Hovenic said.  "And people can give 24 hours a day, instead of
just during office hours."

   Investors are beginning to line up.  In the last two months, Kintera lined up
$20 million in financing from financial angels and institutional investors, as
well as a $5 million stock swap to gain billboard advertising space.

   But Kintera's customers say the price tag is worth it.

   "I don't know of any other company that really does this in this way,
checking up on the Web site, watching that everything's working and asking if
anything can be done better," Hovenic said.

   For Gruber, that translates into a perfect company: something that combines
state-of-the-art technology, a humanitarian purpose -- and a decent return to
investors.


GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; Photo illustration / Union-Tribune; Former UCSD
professor Harry Gruber hopes Web site development for nonprofit organizations
will be a profitable venture for his newest company, Kintera.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                              81 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 16, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 1532 words

HEADLINE: A niche-knack guy;
Local entrepreneur builds companies from ground up

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In his self-described quest to build the perfect company, former UCSD
professor Harry Gruber has tinkered with everything from making heart drugs to
broadcasting President Clinton's videotaped grand jury deposition over the
Internet. These days, Gruber is looking for a profit from the nonprofit sector,
by creating online fund-raising drives for charities. "The nonprofit sector is
the largest market opportunity that I've ever come across," Gruber said, noting
that Americans donated $190 billion to nonpolitical nonprofits last year.
Gruber's newest firm -- Kintera -- has already managed to gain a dozen charity
clients, including San Diego Fleet Week, the San Diego Arthritis Foundation and
Chabad House, a Jewish religious organization. Kintera's services don't come
cheap.

   First, there's a set-up fee of $10,000 to $20,000 to build the Web site.

   Then there's a maintenance fee of $500 to $5,000 per month, as Kintera keeps
track of the donations coming in.

   And finally, Kintera takes a percentage of the donations. Gruber faces an
uphill battle as he expands the business.

   Not only do many charities operate their Web sites in-house, but there also
are a number of e-commerce companies specializing in nonprofits, with names like
WebCharity.com and WeCareToo.com. "The market for online fund raising is
competitive and confusing," said Mark Rovner, a fund-raising consultant with
Virginia-based CMS Interactive. "The market is very crowded right now because
the need for online tools and infrastructure is so great." Tom Snyder, publisher
of NonProfitXpress, a review of online charities, said "the field of
e-philanthropy has really come into its own.

   But there is a shakeout coming.

   Survival will go to the most useful." Judging from experience, Gruber stands
a good a chance of carving a niche in e-philanthropy.

   His chief talent seems to be developing a company to the point where it can
be sold -- and selling it before there's any change in its fortunes. "I never
want to sell anything," Gruber said.

   "But I'm enough of a pragmatist to know when the forces are aligned towards a
sale." Gruber did not start out as an entrepreneur.

   His education at the University of Pennsylvania in the 1970s focused on
genetics and rheumatology.

   He continued his medical research after coming to the University of
California San Diego in 1977, where he worked as a researcher and professor. In
the early 1980s, Gruber's experiments seeking a treatment for autism brought him
to the attention of San Diego attorney Samuel Alhadeff, whose son Michael is
autistic.

   After hearing about Gruber's work, Alhadeff donated a substantial amount of
money to UCSD to help with the research. Making key contacts "Up to that point,
I had not met Harry," Alhadeff said.

   "But when I walked into my law office one day, there was this nice, quiet,
unassuming man sitting in the lobby who said he had to thank me personally for
the donation.

   That's how we met." In a subsequent visit to UCSD, Alhadeff suggested that
Gruber should launch a biotech company.

   Over the next few months, Gruber and Paul Laikind, his research partner at
UCSD, developed an idea for a company that would specialize in treating heart
disease and nerve disorders.

   In the meantime, Alhadeff contacted his lawyer friends to see if they would
join him as financial angels for the project. In 1986, Alhadeff and half a dozen
friends pooled $100,000 to help launch the company, which was named Gensia.

   Gruber and Alhadeff began visiting venture capital firms, armed only with a
white board that they used to sketch out their ideas. Gensia picked up $15.8
million from companies such as Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers, using the
money to recruit a 60-person team from labs including Johnson & Johnson, Eli
Lilly and Schering-Plough.

   As David Hale, a pioneer of the local biotech sector, took charge of Gensia's
management, Gruber and Laikind went back to the lab to oversee product
development. "We brought in management because we figured we didn't know a lot
about business.

   We were just scientists," Gruber said.

   At the height of the biotech craze, Gensia's stock shot sky-high, fueled by
hopes that its drug Protara would help reduce stress from heart attacks.

   As the stock was still spiraling upward, Gruber left Gensia to head a
spinoff, Viagene, specializing in gene therapy for nerve disorders. Gruber left
just in time.

   In 1994, Gensia's stock was cut in half when Protara failed to achieve
meaningful results in clinical tests.

   Gensia merged with another biotech, Sicor, and shifted its attention to
specialty drugs. Gruber remains convinced that Protara failed only because it
did not have a large enough test.

   "The drug worked but the study didn't have statistical significance," he
says.

   "By the time the test was over, people didn't have the will to do another
one." In the meantime, Viagene was showing enough promise to become attractive
to a much larger competitor, Chiron, which bought the company in 1994. But it
has not yet brought a product to market. "Viagene had some interesting
technology, but the whole gene therapy area has taken a long time to produce any
products," said Jim McCamant, a market analyst with the Medical Technologies
Stock Letter.

   "Selling the company was the wise thing to do.

   Producing gene therapy products turned out to take longer even than
pessimists expected." Gruber's next stint was as head of Vascular Genomics, a
biotech company that was exploring a way to target drugs to specific tissues
without affecting nearby areas.

   As Vascular entered a tentative agreement to be acquired by Corvas
International in 1997 -- a deal that has since unraveled -- Gruber shifted away
from biotech and into the next new thing, the Internet. In the early 1990s,
Gruber and some co-workers from Gensia and Viagene started developing a way to
deliver video messages over the Web. Initially, Gruber did not have much luck
when seeking money for the project. "The venture capital people said, `Listen,
you're a biotech guy moving to high-tech.

   We've never seen that succeed,' " Gruber said.

   Undaunted, Gruber turned to his old financial angels to help launch the
company.

   Alhadeff, who had made out quite well from his investment in Gensia,
willingly jumped into Gruber's new venture, dubbed InterVu. Thanks to the boom
in Internet companies, InterVu proved to be the fastest-growing and most
lucrative of Gruber's ventures. InterVu hired its first employee on January
1996. By November 1997, it went public after eking out just $164,000 in
revenues. The video delivery market was highly competitive.

   But with the Wall Street firms of Josephthal and Cruttenden Roth as
underwriters, InterVu raised a quick $20 million.

   And as it picked up CNN, NBC and Turner Broadcasting as customers, it
collected $200 million in a pair of secondary offerings. An early boost for
InterVu was the impeachment of President Clinton. In September 1998, InterVu was
among a handful of companies that put Clinton's videotaped depositions onto the
Web when they were released by prosecutor Kenneth Starr.

   Internet traffic slowed throughout the nation as millions of computer users
vied to view the depositions firsthand. New ventures InterVu's stock, which hit
the market at $9.50 per share in 1997, was worth $140 early this year on Nasdaq.

   In February, InterVu competitor Akamai Technologies inked a deal to buy the
company for $2.8 billion in stock. The collapse of the Nasdaq market ate into
the value of the deal, which was consummated in April.

   During that six-week period, Akamai's $235 share price was cut in half,
mirroring the rest of the market.

   It is now selling in the $50 range. Nevertheless, Gruber and his fellow
investors feel they made a healthy profit on the deal.

   "I'm definitely hanging onto my Akamai stock," Gruber said.

   And the buyout gave Gruber the time and money to devote to his next project,
Kintera. The idea behind Kintera is simple.

   The company develops Web sites that help charities solicit, collect and keep
track of donations online. "It's a very innovative way for people to be able to
give to an organization so they can give at any time," said Ginger Hovenic,
president of the San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce Foundation, which hired
Kintera to develop a Web site to raise money for Fleet Week. During the eight
weeks the sdfleetweek.org Web site has been running, it has picked up $12,000 to
$14,000 in donations. "The Web site lets people give all year round, rather than
just during a specific event," Hovenic said.

   "And people can give 24 hours a day, instead of just during office hours."
Investors are beginning to line up.

   In the last two months, Kintera lined up $20 million in financing from
financial angels and institutional investors, as well as a $5 million stock swap
to gain billboard advertising space. But Kintera's customers say the price tag
is worth it. "I don't know of any other company that really does this in this
way, checking up on the Web site, watching that everything's working and asking
if anything can be done better," Hovenic said. For Gruber, that translates into
a perfect company: something that combines state-of-the-art technology, a
humanitarian purpose -- and a decent return to investors.

GRAPHIC: 1 ILLUSTRATION; CAPTIONS: Former UCSD professor Harry Gruber hopes Web
site development for nonprofit organizations will be a profitable venture for
his newest company, Kintera.; PHOTOBY: Photo illustration / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              82 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 15, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: Several retailers beat expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Several of the nation's largest retailers managed to meet or beat Wall Street
earnings expectations despite the increasingly difficult climate for consumer
spending.

   Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s third-quarter profits rose 5.8 percent, meeting
analysts' expectations.  J.C. Penney Co. reported a $30 million loss for the
quarter, but was able to beat estimates.

   Target Corp., which operates Target, Dayton's, Hudson's, Marshall Fields and
Mervyn's, reported its earnings fell 10 percent, but it still beat analysts'
forecasts.

   Wal-Mart earned $1.37 billion, or 31 cents per share, in the three months
ended Oct. 31. That was up from a profit of $1.29 billion, or 29 cents per
share, in the year-ago quarter.  Analysts had predicted earnings of 31 cents.

   Revenues rose 13 percent to $45.67 billion, from $40.43 billion a year ago.

   Penney, the nation's fourth-largest retailer, which has been struggling with
weakened sales in its department stores, reported a loss excluding one-time
expenses of $23 million, or 12 cents per share, in the quarter ended Oct. 28.
That compared with earnings of $142 million, or 51 cents per share, in the
year-ago period.

   When one-time expenses, which include restructuring costs, are included,
Plano, Texas-based Penney reported a loss of $30 million, or 15 cents per share.

   Total sales were down 1.2 percent to $7.74 billion from $7.83 billion, while
department store sales declined 3.7 percent for stores open at least one year.

   Target earned $216 million, or 24 cents a share, compared with $241 million
or 27 cents a share, a year earlier.

   The results do not include a charge of $1 million in the latest quarter and a
charge of $9 million a year earlier, both related to the retirement of debt.

   Revenues rose 8 percent to $8.58 billion.

   In local earnings news:

   Natural Alternatives International earned $205,000 in its first quarter,
compared with profits of $87,000 in the same period a year ago.  Revenue fell 33
percent, to $10.2 million.

   The San Marcos-based company makes nutritional supplements.  NAI's stock,
which trades under the ticker symbol NAII, rose almost 2 percent to close at
$3.25.

   Collateral Therapeutics Inc. lost $3.5 million for the third quarter,
compared with a loss of $1.6 million for the same period a year ago.  Revenue
fell 70 percent to $500,000.

   The decrease in revenue reflects reduced reimbursement of costs to the
company from its research partner, Schering AG. The San Diego gene therapy
company reported cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments of $30.9
million at September 30, 2000. Collateral's stock, which trades under the ticker
symbol CLTX, fell less than 1 percent to close at $26.81.

   Epimmune Inc. reported a $1.5 million loss in the third quarter, compared
with a loss of $2.8 million for the same period a year ago.  Revenue fell 80
percent, to $500,000.

   The decrease in revenue reflects the difference in milestone payments made by
research collaboration partners from one year to the next.

   The San Diego therapeutic vaccine developer said earlier this week that its
research partner, Pharmacia Corporation, has terminated its collaboration
agreement.

   Epimmune's stock, which trades under the ticker symbol EPMN, fell more than 3
percent to close at $3.88.


LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2000


                              83 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          November 15, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 538 words

HEADLINE: Several retailers beat expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Several of the nation's largest retailers managed to meet or beat Wall Street
earnings expectations despite the increasingly difficult climate for consumer
spending. Wal-Mart Stores Inc.'s third-quarter profits rose 5.8 percent, meeting
analysts' expectations.

   J.C. Penney Co. reported a $30 million loss for the quarter, but was able to
beat estimates. Target Corp., which operates Target, Dayton's, Hudson's,
Marshall Fields and Mervyn's, reported its earnings fell 10 percent, but it
still beat analysts' forecasts. Wal-Mart earned $1.37 billion, or 31 cents per
share, in the three months ended Oct. 31. That was up from a profit of $1.29
billion, or 29 cents per share, in the year-ago quarter.

   Analysts had predicted earnings of 31 cents. Revenues rose 13 percent to
$45.67 billion, from $40.43 billion a year ago. Penney, the nation's
fourth-largest retailer, which has been struggling with weakened sales in its
department stores, reported a loss excluding one-time expenses of $23 million,
or 12 cents per share, in the quarter ended Oct. 28. That compared with earnings
of $142 million, or 51 cents per share, in the year-ago period. When one-time
expenses, which include restructuring costs, are included, Plano, Texas-based
Penney reported a loss of $30 million, or 15 cents per share. Total sales were
down 1.2 percent to $7.74 billion from $7.83 billion, while department store
sales declined 3.7 percent for stores open at least one year. Target earned $216
million, or 24 cents a share, compared with $241 million or 27 cents a share, a
year earlier. The results do not include a charge of $1 million in the latest
quarter and a charge of $9 million a year earlier, both related to the
retirement of debt. Revenues rose 8 percent to $8.58 billion. In local earnings
news: Natural Alternatives International earned $205,000 in its first quarter,
compared with profits of $87,000 in the same period a year ago.

   Revenue fell 33 percent, to $10.2 million. The San Marcos-based company makes
nutritional supplements.

   NAI's stock, which trades under the ticker symbol NAII, rose almost 2 percent
to close at $3.25. Collateral Therapeutics Inc. lost $3.5 million for the third
quarter, compared with a loss of $1.6 million for the same period a year ago.
Revenue fell 70 percent to $500,000. The decrease in revenue reflects reduced
reimbursement of costs to the company from its research partner, Schering AG.
The San Diego gene therapy company reported cash, cash equivalents, and
short-term investments of $30.9 million at September 30, 2000. Collateral's
stock, which trades under the ticker symbol CLTX, fell less than 1 percent to
close at $26.81. Epimmune Inc. reported a $1.5 million loss in the third
quarter, compared with a loss of $2.8 million for the same period a year ago.

   Revenue fell 80 percent, to $500,000. The decrease in revenue reflects the
difference in milestone payments made by research collaboration partners from
one year to the next. The San Diego therapeutic vaccine developer said earlier
this week that its research partner, Pharmacia Corporation, has terminated its
collaboration agreement. Epimmune's stock, which trades under the ticker symbol
EPMN, fell more than 3 percent to close at $3.88.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                              84 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   November 14, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B14

LENGTH: 249 words

HEADLINE: BOSTON RESEARCHER TO RESUME GENE STUDY

BYLINE: BY ALICE DEMBNER

BODY:

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, whose gene therapy experiments at St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center were shut down last spring by the US Food and Drug
Administration, is planning to resume one study this week, a hospital
spokeswoman said.

   The study, to regrow blood vessels in the legs of patients with arterial
disease, is sponsored by Genzyme Corp.

      Isner's other studies, sponsored by a company in which he and the hospital
have equity, remain on hold. They involve a different gene product.

   "Our understanding is that we received correspondence from the FDA that lifts
the hold on Dr. Isner as a researcher for the Genzyme study," said spokeswoman
Maria Foley. "There are still some issues we're working on regarding the VGI
research," she said, referring to Vascular Genetics Inc., the for-profit company
formed by Isner, the hospital and other investors to market the gene therapy.

   Isner announced the resumption of the trials at a conference in New Orleans,
catching hospital officials by surprise. Reached in New Orleans, Isner declined
to speak to the Globe.

   Genzyme officials could not be reached for comment.

   The FDA suspended the experiments at St. Elizabeth's following the deaths of
two patients and other problems regarding the safety of subjects in the
experiment. Isner and the hospital have defended the experiments and said the
health and safety of their patients are their primary concern. They have been
working with the FDA to resolve the problems with the studies.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2000


                              85 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 14, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 6; Column 1; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 1728 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Studies Promise a Path to Better Treatment of Addictions

BYLINE: By LINDA CARROLL

BODY:

   In a quiet, dark room at the University of Pennsylvania, Edward Coleman, 30,
lies back and watches a videotape of addicts like him smoking crack while a PET
scanner records each neurochemical nuance of his brain.

   Normally, the images would spark an irresistible craving for the drug. His
heart would start to race; his ears would begin to buzz; and a spot deep inside
his brain would flash brightly on the scan. But today it is different. Before
starting the videotape, Dr. Anna Rose Childress gave Mr. Coleman a medication
that may someday help him, and others, combat the craving that lures so many
back to their addictions.

    After the video Mr. Coleman admits the images evoked an urge to use cocaine,
but not such a strong one. And the PET scan backs him up: his amygdala -- the
small almond-shaped brain structure that helps humans and animals remember all
the details associated with pleasurable events -- flickers only weakly.

   "Edward can still remember what the cocaine high is like, but while taking
baclofen in the right dose range, he doesn't feel pulled to go out and find it,"
said Dr. Childress, a research associate professor in the department of
psychiatry at the Treatment Research Center of the University of Pennsylvania.
"For a patient wishing to stop cocaine, this could provide a desperately needed
tool."

   As the war on drugs has marched into the scientist's lab, researchers have
devised a paradigm that may help explain why some people get hooked after a
single "taste" of an illegal drug while others can use it for years and quit
when they choose. Once thought of as weak-willed people who lacked the moral
strength to just say no to drugs, addicts are now viewed as victims of genes
that make them susceptible to the powerful pull of mind-altering substances.

   Scientists in research centers around the country are studying how drugs
affect the brain. They tweak various neurotransmitters, searching for ways to
alter both an addict's genetic wiring and the rewiring of the brain that drugs
initiate. Some researchers seek ways to rev up the "stop" circuitry of the
forebrain -- the part that considers consequences -- while others look for ways
to tune down the "go" circuitry of the limbic system -- a part of the brain
involved in processing emotion.

   While researchers emphasize that environmental factors are also crucial, many
population studies have pointed to the importance of genetics. For example,
studies of twins have found that identical twins are more likely than fraternal
twins to share a tendency to become addicted. But the predilection may be even
more specific. Dr. Ming Tsuang, a a professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical
School, has found that people inherit not only a general susceptibility to
substance abuse but also a vulnerability to particular drugs.

   "Our group is interested in finding the actual gene that is specific for
heroin addiction," Dr. Tsuang says. "If we can find the gene and learn what the
gene's products are, we may be able to prevent people from abusing heroin."

   When it comes to a general genetic susceptibility, the leading suspect is a
defect in the dopamine system, experts say. In the past decade or so,
researchers have discovered that although drugs affect a variety of
neurotransmitters, virtually all of them increase the levels of dopamine in the
brain's mesolimbic region, which is involved in pleasure, reward and motivation.

   Research has also shown that compared with those who do not use drugs,
addicts tend to be deficient in a certain type of dopamine receptor, dubbed DR2.
That receptor leads to feelings of pleasure when stimulated by dopamine. Some
scientists have assumed that this deficiency was simply the result of the
brain's reaction to a drug-induced overload of dopamine by cutting back on the
number of receptors available to pick up the neurotransmitter.

   And an experiment that followed with monkeys that were allowed to
self-administer cocaine for a year showed that this was at least partly true.
The five addicted monkeys ended up with a 15 percent to 20 percent decrease in
dopamine receptors, says Dr. Michael Nader, an associate professor of physiology
and pharmacology at the Wake Forest University's medical school in
Winston-Salem, N.C. Nine months after the monkeys were deprived of cocaine,
three had returned to normal, but two had not.

   Still, several recent studies have suggested that some people may be born
with a defect in the gene that doles out dopamine receptors. Those born with the
defect end up with fewer DR2s and as a consequence experience life with less
intensity and joy, said Dr. Ernest P. Noble, a professor of psychiatry and
biobehavioral sciences and the director of the Alcohol Research Center at the
University of California at Los Angeles.

   "These people often say they don't feel the normal rewards and pleasures in
life," Dr. Noble said. "For example, a man will describe the experience of going
to the beach with a girlfriend to view a beautiful sunset and say, 'I hardly
felt anything.' Or he will describe how he went to a concert where his buddies
all feel exhilarated, but not him."

   These patients often report that the first time they really felt normal was
after their first drink or dose of an illegal drug, Dr. Noble said.

   After determining that severe alcoholism was associated with a mutation of
the gene that doles out DR2s, Dr. Noble and his colleagues tried treating
alcoholics with bromocriptine, a medicine that boosts the amount of dopamine
available to the brain. The medication quieted craving and ultimately helped
alcoholics fight their addiction, Dr. Noble said.

   In another experiment designed to discover whether the "taste" for drugs
might be related to inherited brain chemistry, researchers at Brookhaven
National Laboratory tested a group of people who had no experience with illegal
drugs. After using a PET scanner to determine how many dopamine receptors each
person had, the researchers injected each with a small amount of the stimulant
Ritalin.

   "And, lo and behold, the people with low levels of dopamine receptors in
their brains were the ones who liked the way the Ritalin made them feel," said
Dr. Nora Volkow, associate laboratory director for life science at Brookhaven
National Laborator. "Those who had high concentrations of receptors in their
brains said the Ritalin made them feel very unpleasant. They felt like they were
losing control. One almost had a panic attack."

   In a follow-up experiment designed to test whether an increase in dopamine
receptors could prevent drug abuse, Dr. Panayotis Thanos, a scientist at
Brookhaven, used gene therapy to boost the number of dopamine receptors in rats
that had developed a taste for alcohol. The result: the rats quit drinking, Dr.
Volkow said.

   In New York, researchers are looking at a different dopamine receptor -- DR1.
Scientists suspect that DR1, which gives a sensation of satiety when stimulated
by dopamine, is a sort of check to DR2, said Dr. Marc Laruelle, an associate
professor of psychiatry and radiology at the Columbia College of Physicians and
Surgeons. In an attempt to discover whether DR1 levels can make a difference in
an addict's ability to postpone gratification, Dr. Laruelle and his colleagues
are giving volunteer addicts small doses of cocaine and then offering them the
choice of a $5 dose of the drug or a $10 bill.

   "We want to see if they go for the money or the cocaine," Dr. Laruelle said.
"The hope is that the ratio of DR1 to DR2 will be predictive. And then, perhaps,
we will be able to identify addicts with very low levels of DR1 and give them a
drug to stimulate DR1 more effectively."

   Perhaps as important as the issue of genetic susceptibility is the effect
drugs have on the wiring of the brain. Drugs lure people back because they tap
into a very primal system in the human brain. In essence, drugs of abuse hijack
the brain circuitry that has evolved to help people find their way back to food
sources or a sexual partners to reproduce, Dr. Childress said. Once people
experience a pleasurable -- or terrible -- moment, the amygdala helps the brain
remember how it got that feeling and how to get it or avoid it in the future.

   "Monkeys with amygdalar damage stare expressionless at a banana across a
Plexiglas screen," Dr. Childress said. "Normally this would drive them into a
frenzy of excited anticipation. People with severe amygdalar damage quite
literally have difficulty staying alive. They will cross the street in front of
oncoming cars, as the normal signals for fear have been undone."

   And when we see cues to positive experiences -- a picture of a syringe or a
mound of white powder, in the case of the addict -- the brain releases a small
spurt of dopamine that reminds us of the pleasurable experience, Dr. Childress
explained.

   "This increase in dopamine feels similar to a small dose of the drug itself,"
she added. Some even feel they can taste the drug in the back of their throats.

   For many recovering addicts, that little "taste" of the drug is often too
strong a temptation to ignore, Dr. Childress said.

   A possible therapy is to find a drug to tone down the dopamine system and
give the thinking part of the brain a better chance at remembering the
consequences of drug use.

   Baclofen is one candidate. An older medication, used for years to treat
muscle spasms, baclofen latches onto the GABA receptor, which acts as a set of
brakes to the dopamine system. It appears to quiet craving and to blunt the high
associated with drugs of abuse.

   In a pilot study, Dr. Childress found that baclofen can soothe craving. She
was about to start a study of the long-term effects of the medication to
determine, among other things, whether it would continue to quiet the desire for
drugs when she discovered Mr. Coleman.

   Mr. Coleman, a paraplegic, had been taking baclofen for spasms in his legs
for years. On his own, Mr. Coleman had discovered the powers of baclofen. He had
experimented with different doses and discovered that it would block his high if
he took the baclofen too close to the time he took cocaine. He learned that the
medication could reduce his craving when cocaine was unavailable. He also
figured out that it quieted his craving for alcohol and cigarettes.

   "In a way," Dr. Childress ssid, "he's done my experiment for me."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Edward Coleman, a cocaine addict working with Dr. Anna Rose
Childress, above, to combat his cravings, underwent a brain scan at the
University of Pennsylvania. PET scans, below, show brain responses to nature
videos and to videos of people taking drugs. (Michelle V. Agins/The New York
Times)

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2000


                              86 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 14, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH, Pg. F-5, RESEARCH FRONT

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL EXPANDING RESEARCH BASE

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   As Children's Hospital officials make plans to relocate to larger facilities,
they also are expanding their strong base of pediatric research.

   During the next five years, about 10 Centers of Excellence will be developed
and as many as 30 investigators could be recruited to the Rangos Research Center
in Oakland.

   "It became very clear that medicine in general and pediatrics in specific are
so enormous that no one institution can do it all," said Dr. Nina Schor, who was
appointed the first scientific director of the research programs. "We are going
to have to carve out for ourselves who and what we are."

   Schor in 1972 became the first female student to win first prize in what was
then the Westinghouse Science Talent Search for high school students. When she
arrived at Children's 15 years ago as a pediatric neurologist, the hospital was
well known for its clinical expertise but was "not on the map" in terms of
research, she said.

   The construction a decade ago of the Rangos center marked a surge of interest
in basic pediatric research. For the past five years, the hospital has ranked in
the top 10 for funding from the National Institutes of Health. Research has been
particularly strong in endocrinology, especially juvenile diabetes, and
otolaryngology and neurology.

   The hospital will be expanding these specialities and developing promising
fields that have attracted little attention, she said.

   Schor heads the new Pediatric Center for Neuroscience, which concentrates on
tumors, epilepsy and developmental diseases of the nervous system. Researchers
in the Center for Cell Therapeutics are working on gene therapy, tissue
engineering and stem cell treatments for application to muscular dystrophy and
other musculoskeletal diseases. Bone marrow stem cells are the focus in the
Center for Hematopoietic Stem Cell Biology and Therapy. The Center for Diabetes
Research has been also been firmly established.

   The Center for Health Services and Outcomes Research will make the most of
information technology. A database of age, sex, disease, treatment and results
and complications could be constructed from the hospital's vast records. A
systematic review of such information could reveal patterns that haven't been
noticed before.

   "Because we haven't organized and assembled these databases, there are
questions we haven't even thought to ask yet," Schor said. "I think it's going
to drive research in addition to finding answers for already existing
questions."

   Next on the list is a center for pediatric behavioral medicine and brain
development, she added.

   A multidisciplinary approach is common to all the centers and communication
among them is encouraged by Schor.

   "I don't view the centers as being cloistered," she said. "I view them as
being part of a continuum, and I suspect that there will be many problems we
solve by passing an issue from one to the next and back again."

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2000


                              87 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 13, 2000, Monday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: New life for heart cells studied

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: LEIGH HOPPER, Houston Chronicle Medical Writer

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

   NEW ORLEANS - Scientists are looking at innovative ways to give new life to
dead heart muscle: by injecting cells from other parts of the body directly into
the area of damage and by introducing substances that encourage new blood
vessels to grow.

   Their findings were presented Sunday during the American Heart Association's
scientific meeting this week.

   Cell transplantation and cultivation are important pieces of the cardiac
treatment puzzle because unlike cells in other parts of the body, heart cells
cannot replace or repair themselves once they die. Instead of adding new cells,
the heart grows after birth by enlarging the cells it has.

   In one intriguing experiment, doctors took muscle cells from the thigh of a
72-year-old man with a failing heart scarred from a heart attack. The muscle
cells were grown and multiplied in a lab dish for two weeks, then implanted into
the scarred area using a microscopic needle. The patient also had two artery
bypasses performed on another area of his heart.

   Five months after the operation, the patient's heart had improved, thanks in
part to the bypasses. But using echocardiology and metabolic tests, doctors also
saw signs that dead areas of the heart regained some function and were
contracting.

   "It's not normal, but it's better," said study coordinator Dr. Philippe
Menasche of Paris. Menasche said he will perform the procedure on eight more
patients within the next 12 months in France.

   In another study, Dr. Timothy Henry of the University of Minnesota in
Minneapolis presented the one-year results of an experiment designed to test the
safety of a protein used in gene therapy. Vascular endothelial growth factor, or
VEGF, prods new vessel growth in hopes that blood flow to the heart will be
boosted in people with arteries narrowed by fatty deposits.

   One worry about VEGF is that by increasing blood vessel growth, one might
also increase the risk of developing cancerous tumors or cause new blood vessels
to grow into the walls of arteries and speed up the growth of fatty deposits. In
this study, the percentage of patients who suffered those problems was low.

   Henry's experiment looked at 178 patients with severe chest pain who were not
helped by other treatments. Ninety percent had undergone at least one bypass and
almost 75 percent had undergone at least one angioplasty to open their arteries.

   Patients were divided into three groups: One received a placebo, the second
group received a low dose of VEGF, and the third received a high dose of VEGF.

   At the end of one year, 3 percent of those in the placebo group, none in the
low-dose group and 6 percent in the high-dose group had suffered a heart attack.
As for cancer, 8 percent in the placebo group, 3 percent in the low-dose group
and none in the high-dose group developed the disease.

   The impact on patients' chest pain also was encouraging. Forty percent of
patients on high-dose VEGF had little or no chest pain after one year.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2000


                              88 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     November 13, 2000 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 02A

LENGTH: 698 words

HEADLINE: French surgeons say they can mend a wounded heart;
Researchers report using 'cell patch' from thigh muscle

BYLINE: JOHN FAUBER of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   New Orleans, La. -- Using cells derived from a patient's own thigh muscle,
researchers for the first time have been able to surgically apply a " cell
patch" to a scarred section of heart wall and restore the area's ability to
contract.

   The breakthrough was one of several new cell transplant and gene therapy
innovations for repairing badly damaged hearts announced Sunday at the American
Heart Association's Scientific Sessions 2000.

   "The progress of science at the basic level has been phenomenal," said Rose
Marie Robertson, president of the association. "The promise is immense."

   Researchers from the United States, Canada and France presented six new
potential genetic or cellular approaches to treating heart failure, a condition
that affects 4.6 million Americans, half of whom die within five years of
diagnosis.

   The condition, which can be caused by heart attacks, high blood pressure and
other factors, also can dramatically lessen a person's quality of life,
inhibiting one's ability to walk, sleep and breathe. Heart failure results from
the death of heart-muscle cells, a condition in which the heart cannot pump
enough blood for the body's needs.

   Unlike skeletal muscle, heart muscle cells cannot replace themselves. At
birth, humans have all the heart muscle cells they will have for the rest of
their lives. Only by enlarging existing cells can the heart grow.

   In the case of the thigh muscle transplant, French doctors removed a section
of thigh myoblast cells and cultured the cells in a laboratory dish. After two
weeks, about 800 million cells were grafted around a scarred area of dead cells
in the posterior wall of the man's left ventricle.

   Doctors accomplished the feat by using micro-needles to make multiple
injections in an area about the size of a half dollar.

   Five months after the operation, the patched area is contracting again.

   "It does not look like a normal contraction, but there is a definite
improvement," said Philippe Menasche, a professor of cardiac surgery at a Paris
hospital.

   One of the benefits of the procedure is that because the patient's own cells
are used, there is no problem with rejection.

   Menasche said eight more patients would undergo the procedure in coming
months.

   For many patients suffering from severe congestive heart failure, a heart
transplant is the only medical option. Menasche said if muscle cell transplant
proves to work on other patients, it could someday become another option to a
heart transplant.

   Creating blood vessels

   In another development announced Sunday, University of Minnesota researchers
said they had shown that so-called angiogenesis therapy for heart disease
appears to relieve chest pain and does not increase the risk of cancer.

   Angiogenesis refers to the creation of new blood vessels.  This new approach
to treating heart disease is to prompt the growth of new coronary blood vessels
as a way to increase the blood supply to the hearts of people whose arteries are
clogged with plaque. These fatty deposits reduce blood flow and oxygen to the
heart and often cause the severe chest pain known as angina.

   The Minnesota researchers are using a protein known as vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). So far they have enrolled 178 patients in their study.

   After one year, patients receiving the highest dose of VEGF had less chest
pain than those in a control group who received a placebo. In addition, there
were no deaths or cancer in the VEGF patients.

   The lack of cancer cases was an encouraging finding because there has been a
concern that VEGF might also contribute to an overgrowth of other cells in the
body, which could lead to cancer.

   Timothy Henry, an associate professor of medicine at the University of
Minnesota, said the next step was to enroll more patients in the study and use
even higher doses of VEGF.

   In the future, there may be several different drugs that promote
angiogenesis, he said.

   " You'll get a special cocktail to fit your defect," he said.

   In other developments, researchers reported encouraging results from animal
studies in which cell transplants were used to create viable new heart muscle
and new blood vessels in the heart.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2000


                              89 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 13, 2000, Monday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 402 words

HEADLINE: Halted gene therapy trials OK'd to restart; Patient died during
experiment in 1999

BYLINE: Maggie Fox; REUTERS

BODY:
 NEW ORLEANS -- Gene therapy trials suspended in a government crackdown after an
18-year-old patient died have been allowed to start again and will be up and
running soon, the researcher in charge said yesterday.

   Dr. Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University and St. Elizabeth's Hospital in Boston,
who had been conducting three separate gene therapy trials aimed at helping
patients grow new blood vessels to alleviate diseases of the heart and artery,
said he hoped to restart them this week.

   "We are now, as of this coming week, able to resume our trials of gene
therapy," Isner told a news conference at a meeting of the American Heart
Association.

   "All the issues that were raised have been satisfactorily addressed," Isner
added in an interview later.

   Isner has been working to help patients grow their own heart bypasses by
giving them genes that make new blood vessels grow.  One group is getting a gene
called vascular endothelial growth factor-1 (VEGF-1) and a second group has been
getting VEGF-2.

   Isner's team has reported some success with the treatments, with patients
saying they have less chest pain and other evidence of improved blood flow,
which Isner believes suggests they have grown tiny new blood vessels.

   A third group of patients got VEGF in clogged arteries in the legs, and they
also reported improvements.

   The successes were among the first chalked up for gene therapy, an
experimental new field that shows promise in theory but which scientists have
found harder to make work in real patients.

   In September 1999, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died during a gene therapy
experiment aimed at correcting an inherited liver disorder.  His was the first
death directly attributed to gene therapy.

   The National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug Administration
responded by investigating all gene therapy trials.  In May the FDA suspended
Isner's program and issued a strongly worded letter accusing him of failing to
report the death of one patient and saying he showed a "serious lack of
knowledge" about his duties.

   Isner has since said 16 of the FDA's 21 findings were in error, and yesterday
he said he has resolved the rest.

   He thinks his approach may be a way to help the most severely ill
heart-disease patients who cannot be helped with bypass surgery.

   Isner's trials are sponsored by Vascular Genetics Inc. of Durham, N.C., a
company he helped found in 1997.


LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2000


                              90 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    NOVEMBER 13, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D6; BIOTECHNOLOGY IN BRIEF

LENGTH: 1007 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY IN BRIEF

SOURCE: Bloomberg News: Boston Globe:

BODY:
BIOMEDICINES OF ALAMEDA FILES FOR IPO

    BioMedicines Inc., which buys drugs from other companies and then identifies
new uses for the drugs, filed to raise as much as $57.5 million in an initial
public offering.

    The Alameda company uses a proprietary database sorter to identify drug
candidates in which other companies have already made substantial investments,
the company said in its Securities and Exchange Commission filing.

    "We seek to commercialize products of high clinical value to patients while
minimizing our product acquisition and development costs," the company said.

    BioMedicines has bought rights to five drug candidates and started work on
redirecting or expanding product development on three of them, the filing said.
One would treat breast cancer; another is being developed to treat a form of
chronic hepatitis; and the third would combat skin or kidney cancer.

   CUBIST HIRES EMISPHERE: Cubist Pharmaceuticals Inc. has tapped Emisphere
Technologies Inc. of Tarrytown, N.Y., to develop an oral form of its proposed
antibiotic Cidecin under a potential $30 million agreement.

    Cubist, of Cambridge, Mass., said an oral version of the injectable drug
would make it more competitive with a rival drug from Pharmacia Corp. In April,
Pharmacia gained Food and Drug Administration approval for Zyvox, its drug to
treat bacterial diseases that penetrate deep into body tissue.

    Pharmacia, which has FDA approval for both the injectable and tablet forms,
said Zyvox sales were $11 million in the third quarter and that the drug is
approved for sale on the formulary list of more than 1,000 medical institutions.

    Cidecin, the brand name for daptomycin, is Cubist's lead drug and is being
tested in Phase III clinical trials. It is an injectable medication for patients
with complicated skin and soft tissue infections and certain forms of pneumonia.

    Under the agreement, Emisphere would receive up to $30 million in fees,
research funding, and milestone payments from Cubist if an oral form of Cidecin
is brought to market. Both companies made the announcement last week, following
successful evaluation of the drug in rats.


   NOT ENOUGH PATIENTS: More than 700,000 patients completed clinical trials
sponsored by the pharmaceutical industry last year, according to research
compiled by CenterWatch, a Boston publisher.

    Noting the difficulty in recruiting and retaining patients for critical
evaluations of new drugs, CenterWatch said that for every 20 patients who
respond to a recruitment promotion or are referred by their physician, only one
will complete the trial.

    "Most investigative sites believe that patient recruitment is much more
difficult today than it was several years ago," CenterWatch noted, adding that
costs to find patients are also rising.

    Overall, more than $4 billion will be spent on clinical trials this year. .

   MEDAREX SELLS ANTIBODIES: Medarex Inc., a New Jersey biotech company, said it
agreed to produce human antibodies for pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly and Co.
using a genetically altered mouse.

    The mouse, known as HuMAb-Mouse, is genetically engineered to produce fully
human antibodies. Its natural antibody-producing genes are replaced with human
equivalents.

    The technology allows the company to produce antibodies, which bind to
specific types of cells that could be developed to create drugs for various
diseases.

   NERVE DRUG SHOWS PROMISE: Curis Inc., a Cambridge, Mass., biotechnology
company, said its drug based on a human protein from the "hedgehog family"
restored nerve function in an animal model of diabetes-related nerve damage.

    Although the research is in early stages, the company said these findings
are a critical step toward getting the product into human clinical trials.

    After five weeks of treatment with the hedgehog-based drug, researchers
found that sensory and motor function damaged by diabetes returned to normal
levels in the animal model.

    Of the roughly 15 million people with diabetes nationwide, about 6 million
suffer from diabetic neuropathy. The company estimates the market for the
product would be about $1.5 million annually.

    Hedgehog proteins are responsible for the development of the central and
peripheral nervous systems. Curis is researching the proteins as potential
treatments for such conditions as nerve damage, multiple sclerosis, and
Alzheimer's disease.

   $70 MILLION GENE THERAPY DEAL: Targeted Genetics Corp., whose shares have
soared sevenfold in the past year, said it could receive as much as $70 million
from American Home Products Corp. to develop gene-therapy treatments for
hemophilia.

    Targeted Genetics, a Seattle gene-therapy and cell-therapy company, will get
$5 million up front and another $15 million over the next three years to develop
a gene therapy for hemophilia A, the most common form of the blood disease.

    Hemophilia, which is hereditary, occurs when blood won't clot and bleeding
won't stop. A gene-therapy treatment would involve giving patients normal copies
of the genes that control clotting so their bodies could make the proteins they
lack.

   FDA SUSPENDS CANCER TRIALS: Shares of NeoRx, a Seattle biotechnology company,
lost nearly half their value Wednesday after the Food and Drug Administration
suspended clinical trials of a cancer drug because four patients experienced
potentially fatal side effects.

    NeoRx is counting on the radioactive drug, which it calls skeletal targeted
radiotherapy, to be its first product. It recently began late-stage trials to
treat multiple myeloma, a blood cancer.

    NeoRx said the four patients developed a syndrome that involves abnormal
blood clotting.

    Dr. Paul Abrams, NeoRx's chief executive, said he thought the company would
be able to address the FDA concerns. The syndrome appeared only in some patients
who got the highest dose and did not have irrigation to flush excess radiation
out of their bladders, he said, adding that the irrigation is now being used on
all patients.



LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                              91 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            November 13, 2000 Monday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 741 words

HEADLINE: Heart patients' own cells may give aid;
Treatments avoid problem of rejection

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   To make their patients' frail hearts stronger, doctors may be able to use
cells from the patients themselves, heart specialists said Sunday at the
American Heart Association's annual Scientific Sessions in New Orleans.

   "This is incredibly exciting new science," said Dr. Rose Marie Robertson, the
organization's president.

   In reports on experiments that are years away from becoming part of standard
medical practice, a French doctor spoke of repairing a damaged heart with a
piece of thigh muscle, and a Canadian surgeon reported on work with stem cells,
which are made in bone marrow and change into an array of cells. Three American
investigators discussed the creation of blood vessels, and another researcher
spoke of using gene therapy to repair the pumping function.

   The big advantage, they all said, is that these materials come from the
patients, thereby eliminating the risk of rejection by the immune systems of
desperately ill individuals.

   The reports, mixed in with advisories about diet and possible warning signs
of heart trouble, came on the opening day of the organization's scientific
meeting, a conclave that will last through Wednesday and is expected to draw
about 35,000 delegates. Meetings and the organization's trade show will fill the
Ernest N. Morial Convention Center.

   In the French procedure, Dr. Philippe Menasche of Hopital Bichat in Paris
used local anesthesia to remove a patch of muscle cells from the thigh of a
72-year-old man suffering from heart failure. Menasche cultured them in a
laboratory dish for two weeks and injected millions of these cells into the man
when he underwent bypass surgery in June.

   "Five months later, there is function in an area that was previously dead,"
Menasche said. "It's not normal, but it's better."

   Although he was pleased, Menasche said, "We have to be very, very, very
cautious. We need more patients and more observation."

   For instance, Menasche said, a difference of opinion exists over how much
credit is due to the transplanted cells and how much is due to the bypass
operation. But, he said, tests indicated the area with the graft was
contracting.

   Because the test has been performed on only one person, there are no criteria
yet on the best potential patients, although Menasche suggested that it might be
recommended for someone who would be too frail to undergo a heart transplant.

   "We do not see this as a replacement for standard cardiac transplantation,
but as an option for coronary-artery disease," he said.

   The Canadian stem-cell procedure so far has been tested only in rats, said
Dr. Ray C.J. Chiu of McGill University in Montreal. In those animals, the cells
are removed from bone marrow, and injected directly into the heart. There, they
become heart-muscle cells that, he said, become so integrated into the natural
muscle fiber that it's almost impossible to tell which is which.

   "This is, potentially, a renewable resource," he said. "It's good not just
for the heart but for regenerative medicine in general."

   Like alternate paths around a highway pileup, new blood vessels in rats can
direct blood around the site of a heart attack and help restore normal heart
function, said Dr. Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University School of Medicine in
Boston.

   While this sounds like good news, some scientists have worried that a
proliferation of blood vessels may lead to an abundance of cells in other parts
of the body and, therefore, an elevated risk of cancer and other problems.

   Not necessarily, said Dr. Timothy D. Henry, a cardiologist at Hennepin County
Medical Center in Minneapolis. A yearlong study of 102 patients showed no
significant differences in deaths, heart attacks or cancer, his study showed.

   The topic of keeping the heart healthy also was discussed Sunday. People who
have had heart attacks should adopt a diet with plenty of olive oil, fresh fruit
and vegetables, and fish and cut down on butter, red meat and foods rich in
animal fat, an Italian doctor said.

   Although it's high in fat, this so-called "Mediterranean diet" abounds in
nutrients that protect the heart, including vitamin E and the good fatty acids
in olive oil and fish, said Dr. Roberto Marchioli, who based his statements on a
study he coordinated of 11,324 Italians who had suffered heart attacks.

   People who ate the most butter had a risk of dying in 3 1/2 years that was
nearly three times as high as those who ate prudently, the study showed.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2000


                              92 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    November 13, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Cell transplant saves dying heart 'Astonishing' progress seen in
alternative to gene therapy

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

   NEW ORLEANS -- For the first time, doctors have replaced dead
tissue in a man's failing heart by using a living "cell patch"
made of cells taken from his thigh muscle, says a report out Sunday.

   A 72-year-old man received the cell transplant during a coronary
bypass June 15. "We now have five months of follow-up, and there's
evidence of (function) in an area that was previously dead,"
says lead researcher Philippe Menasche, a heart surgeon at the
Hospital Bichat in Paris.


   The study reflects renewed interest in a concept that has languished
for a decade as researchers focused more intensively on genetic
approaches to heart treatment, Menasche says. But concerns over
the safety of gene therapy, and the difficulty of using genes
to fix failing hearts, have kindled greater interest in other
approaches, including using cells taken from bone marrow to patch
damaged hearts.

   Other experts praised the study, released here at the scientific
sessions of the American Heart Association, but cautioned that
the research is in its infancy.

   "It's promising," says David Faxon, chief of cardiology at the
University of Chicago School of Medicine. "But it's very early,
way before we can know whether this will have clinical application."

   Rose Marie Robertson of Vanderbilt University Medical Center in
Nashville called cell transplantation an important avenue of research
into the treatment of heart failure and described the advances
thus far as "astonishing."

   The goal is nothing less than replacing a pool of dead cells with
a pool of living ones.

   Heart muscle cells, unlike cells elsewhere in the body, are not
replaced when they die. The heart grows after birth not by growing
new cells but by enlarging the cells it has. Heart attacks, infections
and inherited defects can kill heart tissue, triggering a series
of events that may lead to widespread cell death and heart failure.

   To repair their patient's heart, Menasche and his colleagues took
muscle tissue from his thigh and placed it in a culture dish,
where the cells could grow and multiply. Two weeks later, during
the bypass operation, they injected 800 million cells into a large
swath of dead tissue in the main pumping chamber of the man's
heart.

   Studies of the heart using echocardiography and positron emission
tomography scans show that the thigh muscle cells have taken root
and are contracting much as normal heart muscle cells would.

   "This is an encouraging result," Menasche says. "It shows that
the concept of cell therapy, which has been around for years,
can be moved into the clinical area."

   Researchers at McGill University in Montreal have begun experimenting
with a different type of cell therapy, using adult stromal stem
cells. Stromal stem cells, found in bone marrow, can change into
many kinds of cells, including bone, muscle and liver cells, when
they migrate to other parts of the body.

   In that study, Ray Chiu of McGill and his colleagues implanted
stem cells into the damaged hearts of rats. The cells were transformed
into viable heart muscle cells in 20 of the 22 animals studied.



LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2000


                              93 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 12, 2000, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1945 words

HEADLINE: Mice score knockout with gene researchers;
Custom rodents revolutionize biology

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ALLAN TURNER

BODY:

   For a young mouse, ku80 was in rotten shape.

   He was alarmingly frail. His bones were weak, his skin and hair thin. He
exhibited all the signs of extreme old age and was prone to diseases that
afflict mice - and humans - of advanced years.

   But to the scientists who created him, ku80 was a mighty mouse - one of the
revolutionary, genetically modified "living test tubes" whose use in research
promises seemingly miraculous medical breakthroughs in coming decades.

   Known as "knockout" mice for genes removed from their cells or as
"transgenics" for those that are added, the rodents are important tools in
determining the functions and malfunctions of the approximately 100,000 genes
contained in human chromosomes.

   The mice - whose genetic makeup closely resembles that of humans - can be
custom-designed to develop diabetes, asthma, glaucoma and a host of other
diseases common to both species.

   Ku80, named for the gene deleted from its cells, aged at 2 1/2 times the
normal rate, and researchers who created him at The Woodlands-based Lexicon
Genetics believe he may prove invaluable in exploring the cellular changes that
cause cancer.

   Although the technology to genetically modify laboratory animals has existed
for about 10 years, its importance grew drastically with last summer's
announcement that scientists had virtually completed the basic map of human
genes. The Human Genome Project, the most expensive biology project ever
undertaken, has been likened to the development of the atomic bomb for its
ambitiousness.

   Even scientists marvel at the rapid advance of genetic knowledge. Not until
1944 was DNA identified as the crucial conveyor of human traits, be they the
color of hair and eyes or a propensity for developing disease. It took
scientists an additional decade to start understanding DNA's fundamental "double
helix" structure.

   Knockout technology and related developments have "revolutionized" in vivo
biology, said Rick A. Wetsel, director of the developmental biology laboratory
at the Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Diseases,
part of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

   "We identify a particular gene, physically inactivate it and get a readout on
which functions are affected," he said. "This is helping us with different genes
we thought could play a role in disease but were uncertain about. It's hard to
determine this in a test tube."

   Researchers now envision a not-far-off day when data gleaned from mouse
studies will allow doctors to address human ailments at their root.

   That prospect gives Baylor College of Medicine's Susan Berget anticipatory
goose bumps.

   "We're going to be able to design molecular weapons against known molecular
targets," said Berget, associate dean of basic science, "and the transgenic
mouse is one piece of finding the target. With antibiotics, we went to the rain
forest, ground up plants and hoped we'd find some mysterious substance.

   "Maybe it worked, maybe it didn't. Now we can understand the molecular basis
of disease and choose our targets with precision."

   "This is going to change everything," added Thomas F. Burks, executive vice
president of the UT Health Science Center's office of research and academic
affairs. "This is going to have the biggest impact on the development of
medicine of anything that's ever occurred."

   Already, Burks estimated, about $ 10 million is spent annually at his school
on research involving genetically manipulated mice. As much as $ 500 million in
mouse-dependent research projects are under way in the Houston area.

   Lexicon, founded five years ago by researchers at Baylor College of Medicine,
has grown to become one of the nation's leading biotechnology companies.

   At its headquarters deep in the pine woods of Montgomery County, Lexicon
maintains the world's largest "library" of genetically altered mouse cells used
in generating lab animals, which are then sold for as much as $ 100,000 per
breeding set.

   In a quiet back room, Lexicon stores approximately 100,000 vials of the mouse
cells in liquid nitrogen. Among its holdings are knockout mice to be used in the
search for a genetic basis of schizophrenia and the celebrated ku80.

   "Ku80 is a fascinating gene," said Lexicon Chief Executive Officer Arthur
Sands. "The mouse dies of old age after six or nine months, and a normal mouse
would live about two years. Not only was this gene responsible for premature
aging, it seems to be linked to p53, a gene which is very important to tumor
suppression."

   Such discoveries are of profound interest to pharmaceutical companies, which
hope to develop either traditional medicines or high-tech gene therapies to
address the problems. Lexicon now is in partnership with drug companies and
research institutions around the world.

   "It's been estimated that something like 70 percent of the drugs on the
market at present address only one family of gene products, one family of
proteins out of hundreds," UT's Burks said. "We haven't even scratched the
surface."

   Burks' optimism comes despite recent troubling developments in the
gene-research arena.

   In late September, the U.S. Department of Agriculture settled a lawsuit
brought by Alternatives Research and Development Foundation, an animal-rights
group seeking to end exemptions for mice, rats and birds from coverage under the
Animal Welfare Act.

   While congressional action delayed implementation of the settlement for at
least a year, researchers fear the increased oversight would greatly increase
paperwork while doing little to improve conditions for lab animals they contend
are already well cared for.

   ARDF director John McArdle, who holds a doctorate in anatomical science and
formerly experimented on cats and monkeys at the University of Chicago, argued
that 95 percent of lab animals have no legal protection. His organization
advocates designing studies that minimize trauma to animals or, when possible,
developing alternatives to animal testing.

   Potentially more significant is the backlash against early, unsuccessful
attempts to treat disease through gene therapy.

   In June 1999, an 18-year-old Tuscon, Ariz., man died at the University of
Pennsylvania Institute for Gene Therapy after undergoing treatment for a liver
ailment.

   The death led to increased scrutiny of gene-therapy programs nationwide, and
two months ago the Arizona man's family filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against
the Pennsylvania center.

   "I think gene therapy is going to develop despite these setbacks," Burks
said. "There was a very sad death in Pennsylvania, but there have been many sad
deaths because we did not have gene therapy."

   The process of making knockout mice - Burks calls it "an art" - involves
combining DNA containing an inactivated gene with embryonic stem cells from,
say, a brown mouse.

   Resultant cells that lack the gene then are injected into a blastocyst, an
early, spherical embryo, of a white mouse. The blastocyst then is surgically
implanted in the uterus of a receptive female host.

   If all goes well, the mouse will give birth to as many as 10 brown and white
spotted "chimeric" offspring in three weeks. Those offspring then are bred again
to produce knockout mice. Those with the most uniformly brown coloring -
indicating a preponderance of the modified DNA - are chosen for research.

   The foregoing procedures take place in biologically secure laboratories,
claustral and redolent of rodent life, where scrub-suited humans pursue their
arcane interests with the single-mindedness of 16th-century monks.

   The process, noted Randy Johnson, an assistant professor at M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center's biochemistry and molecular biology department, takes about six
months to complete. Producing knockout mice for cancer-center researchers
generally costs less than $ 20,000 per breeding set, Johnson said.

   Though findings from studies involving genetically manipulated mice have been
intriguing, scientists have identified the functions of only a fraction of the
genes in human cells.

   In recent years, Houston researchers have scrutinized genes for their
possible roles in physical diseases and mental and behavioral conditions. At the
Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Diseases, scientists
have studied, among others, hypertension, narcolepsy and Alzheimer's disease.

   Another study, focusing on the C3a gene, underscores the complexity of the
task facing researchers. That gene, said the institute's Wetsel, seems under
differing circumstances both to play havoc with the human body, constricting
airways in asthma attacks, and to protect it.

   "The gene also seems to protect people in septic shock," he said. "In septic
shock and sepsis, we saw that these mice died much quicker when they were
missing the gene.  . . .  Having it present might help or it might hurt."

   Baylor researchers encountered a similar situation with their studies of a
gene that prompted mice to eat to obesity but also seemed to protect them from
bone loss.

   Among the more revealing Baylor studies, Berget said, was one in which p53,
an important tumor-suppressing gene, was knocked out of mice.

   "Mice created lacking p53 were viable," she said. "They lived a reasonable
lifespan, but they had a higher incidence of tumors in later life, a wide
variety of tumors.  . . .  It was just like normal mice except that it was
missing just this one gene. It gives you an ideal research animal to test gene
therapies for cancer."

   Occasionally, noted Benoit de Crombrugghe, molecular genetics chairman at
M.D. Anderson, researchers benefit from unexpected results. "A researcher has to
follow his intuition in a sense," he said.

   De Crombrugghe cited a case in which scientists unexpectedly developed
knockout mice with exencephaly, a condition in which the skull fails to close
around the brain.

   "We really had been looking for something else," he said. "When the mice
developed exencephaly, it allowed us to look at early embryonic development. It
really helped us pinpoint when the disease really started.

   "It's been known for a number of years that when pregnant women take folic
acid, it decreased the incidents of spina bifida, which is the same kind of
disease. When we treated the knockout mice with folic acid, we found their pups
were free of the condition."

   Researchers looking for a genetic basis for mental illness often find their
search complicated by the fact that more than one gene can be involved. Lexicon
Genetics' collaboration with Rockefeller University and the Scripps Research
Institute to locate genes tied to schizophrenia will start with 11 varieties of
knockout mice.

   "Behavioral disorders, autism, schizophrenia - all these things are so
difficult to understand in terms of cellular mechanisms," Burks said, adding
that UT researchers have had signal successes.

   In searching for the cellular root of hyperactivity, scientists knocked out
one gene, then another and another to see how the mice behaved. Finally, Burks
said, "the knockout was totally hyperactive."

   "It was zoom, zoom, zoom in terms of normal mice," he said. "This identified
a target for possible gene therapy. Something had been knocked out that was
linked to hyperactive behavior. It couldn't be captured on still film - mice
running around at 60 miles an hour.

   "Someone has said that with a target and an animal model we can develop any
therapy. The knockout gives us both, and the potential is tremendous.  . . .
Without equivocation, November 2000 is the most exciting time in the history of
the world to be a biological scientist.

   "The genome project is going to make Charles Darwin look like a beginner."

GRAPHIC: Mug: 1. Thomas F. Burks (p. 23); Photos: 2. Zheng-Zheng Shi, a
scientist at Lexicon Genetics, prepares to examine a genetically manipulated
mouse in a Micro-CAT scanner. Lexicon, founded five years ago by Baylor College
of Medicine researchers, has grown into one of the nation's leading
biotechnology companies (p. 23); 3. Lexicon Genetics Chief Executive Officer
Arthur Sands is engulfed in a frigid cloud as he opens a liquid nitrogen freezer
that contains thousands of frozen mouse stem cells used to breed genetically
manipulated laboratory animals. Lexicon's "library" of knockout mice, the
animals of choice for cutting-edge medical experiments, is the world's largest
(p. 23); 4. Ku80, right, a genetically manipulated mouse who ages at 2 1/2 times
the normal rate, stands face to face with an older, normal control animal of the
same species. Scientists believe the mouse will prove valuable in cancer
research (p. 23); 2,3. Steve Campbell / Chronicle, 4. Photo courtesy Lexicon
Genetics

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2002


                              94 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 12, 2000, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 270 words

HEADLINE: High-tech therapies promising;
Heart researchers' meeting starts today

SOURCE: Reuters News Service

DATELINE: NEW ORLEANS

BODY:

   NEW ORLEANS - New, hi-tech solutions for heart disease such as gene and stem
cell therapy are showing early promise, researchers plan to tell experts at a
meeting that begins today.

   However, the advice to the average man and woman remains the same - exercise,
eat right and keep stress to a minimum.

   Doctors and researchers meeting at the American Heart Association's annual
scientific sessions in New Orleans will hear the latest updates on using gene
therapy to help people "grow their own" heart bypasses - an experimental
approach only a few years old.

   It is based on a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor, used to
build new blood vessels, and on the gene that controls production of the
protein.

   Researchers are using the gene and protein in advanced stages of heart
disease. Those patients who cannot have any more bypasses and who are too ill to
live normal lives.

   Preliminary results suggest the approach is safe and reduces patients' chest
pain, allowing them to return to normal activities.

   Even more experimental is the use of stem cells - the so-called master cells
that give rise to all cells in the body.

   Canadian researchers are to report on work done in animals using stem cells
taken from the bone marrow. The cells are used to start the growth of new
tissue, which replaces dead heart muscle.

   If the method is successful in people, it may help those whose hearts are
damaged during heart attacks.

   Researchers will also report on using lasers to punch holes in the heart in
an effort to improve circulation.

   Heart disease is the leading cause of death among Americans.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2000


                              95 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    November 12, 2000, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1946 words

HEADLINE: Mice score knockout with gene researchers;
Custom rodents revolutionize biology

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: ALLAN TURNER

BODY:

   For a young mouse, ku80 was in rotten shape.

   He was alarmingly frail. His bones were weak, his skin and hair thin. He
exhibited all the signs of extreme old age and was prone to diseases that
afflict mice - and humans - of advanced years.

   But to the scientists who created him, ku80 was a mighty mouse - one of the
revolutionary, genetically modified "living test tubes" whose use in research
promises seemingly miraculous medical breakthroughs in coming decades.

   Known as "knockout" mice for genes removed from their cells or as
"transgenics" for those that are added, the rodents are important tools in
determining the functions and malfunctions of the approximately 100,000 genes
contained in human chromosomes.

   The mice - whose genetic makeup closely resembles that of humans - can be
custom-designed to develop diabetes, asthma, glaucoma and a host of other
diseases common to both species.

   Ku80, named for the gene deleted from its cells, aged at 2 1/2 times the
normal rate, and researchers who created him at The Woodlands-based Lexicon
Genetics believe he may prove invaluable in exploring the cellular changes that
cause cancer.

   Although the technology to genetically modify laboratory animals has existed
for about 10 years, its importance grew drastically with last summer's
announcement that scientists had virtually completed the basic map of human
genes. The Human Genome Project, the most expensive biology project ever
undertaken, has been likened to the development of the atomic bomb for its
ambitiousness.

   Even scientists marvel at the rapid advance of genetic knowledge. Not until
1944 was DNA identified as the crucial conveyor of human traits, be they the
color of hair and eyes or a propensity for developing disease. It took
scientists an additional decade to start understanding DNA's fundamental "double
helix" structure.

   Knockout technology and related developments have "revolutionized" in vivo
biology, said Rick A. Wetsel, director of the developmental biology laboratory
at the Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Diseases,
part of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston.

   "We identify a particular gene, physically inactivate it and get a readout on
which functions are affected," he said. "This is helping us with different genes
we thought could play a role in disease but were uncertain about. It's hard to
determine this in a test tube."

   Researchers now envision a not-far-off day when data gleaned from mouse
studies will allow doctors to address human ailments at their root.

   That prospect gives Baylor College of Medicine's Susan Berget anticipatory
goose bumps.

   "We're going to be able to design molecular weapons against known molecular
targets," said Berget, associate dean of basic science, "and the transgenic
mouse is one piece of finding the target. With antibiotics, we went to the rain
forest, ground up plants and hoped we'd find some mysterious substance.

   "Maybe it worked, maybe it didn't. Now we can understand the molecular basis
of disease and choose our targets with precision."

   "This is going to change everything," added Thomas F. Burks, executive vice
president of the UT Health Science Center's office of research and academic
affairs. "This is going to have the biggest impact on the development of
medicine of anything that's ever occurred."

   Already, Burks estimated, about $ 10 million is spent annually at his school
on research involving genetically manipulated mice. As much as $ 500 million in
mouse-dependent research projects are under way in the Houston area.

   Lexicon, founded five years ago by researchers at Baylor College of Medicine,
has grown to become one of the nation's leading biotechnology companies.

   At its headquarters deep in the pine woods of Montgomery County, Lexicon
maintains the world's largest "library" of genetically altered mouse cells used
in generating lab animals, which are then sold for as much as $ 100,000 per
breeding set.

   In a quiet back room, Lexicon stores approximately 100,000 vials of the mouse
cells in liquid nitrogen. Among its holdings are knockout mice to be used in the
search for a genetic basis of schizophrenia and the celebrated ku80.

   "Ku80 is a fascinating gene," said Lexicon Chief Executive Officer Arthur
Sands. "The mouse dies of old age after six or nine months, and a normal mouse
would live about two years. Not only was this gene responsible for premature
aging, it seems to be linked to p53, a gene which is very important to tumor
suppression."

   Such discoveries are of profound interest to pharmaceutical companies, which
hope to develop either traditional medicines or high-tech gene therapies to
address the problems. Lexicon now is in partnership with drug companies and
research institutions around the world.

   "It's been estimated that something like 70 percent of the drugs on the
market at present address only one family of gene products, one family of
proteins out of hundreds," UT's Burks said. "We haven't even scratched the
surface."

   Burks' optimism comes despite recent troubling developments in the
gene-research arena.

   In late September, the U.S. Department of Agriculture settled a lawsuit
brought by Alternatives Research and Development Foundation, an animal-rights
group seeking to end exemptions for mice, rats and birds from coverage under the
Animal Welfare Act.

   While congressional action delayed implementation of the settlement for at
least a year, researchers fear the increased oversight would greatly increase
paperwork while doing little to improve conditions for lab animals they contend
are already well cared for.

   ARDF director John McArdle, who holds a doctorate in anatomical science and
formerly experimented on cats and monkeys at the University of Chicago, argued
that 95 percent of lab animals have no legal protection. His organization
advocates designing studies that minimize trauma to animals or, when possible,
developing alternatives to animal testing.

   Potentially more significant is the backlash against early, unsuccessful
attempts to treat disease through gene therapy.

   In June 1999, an 18-year-old Tuscon, Ariz., man died at the University of
Pennsylvania Institute for Gene Therapy after undergoing treatment for a liver
ailment.

   The death led to increased scrutiny of gene-therapy programs nationwide, and
two months ago the Arizona man's family filed a wrongful-death lawsuit against
the Pennsylvania center.

   "I think gene therapy is going to develop despite these setbacks," Burks
said. "There was a very sad death in Pennsylvania, but there have been many sad
deaths because we did not have gene therapy."

   The process of making knockout mice - Burks calls it "an art" - involves
combining DNA containing an inactivated gene with embryonic stem cells from,
say, a brown mouse.

   Resultant cells that lack the gene then are injected into a blastocyst, an
early, spherical embryo, of a white mouse. The blastocyst then is surgically
implanted in the uterus of a receptive female host.

   If all goes well, the mouse will give birth to as many as 10 brown and white
spotted "chimeric" offspring in three weeks. Those offspring then are bred again
to produce knockout mice. Those with the most uniformly brown coloring -
indicating a preponderance of the modified DNA - are chosen for research.

   The foregoing procedures take place in biologically secure laboratories,
claustral and redolent of rodent life, where scrub-suited humans pursue their
arcane interests with the single-mindedness of 16th-century monks.

   The process, noted Randy Johnson, an assistant professor at M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center's biochemistry and molecular biology department, takes about six
months to complete. Producing knockout mice for cancer-center researchers
generally costs less than $ 20,000 per breeding set, Johnson said.

   Though findings from studies involving genetically manipulated mice have been
intriguing, scientists have identified the functions of only a fraction of the
genes in human cells.

   In recent years, Houston researchers have scrutinized genes for their
possible roles in physical diseases and mental and behavioral conditions. At the
Institute of Molecular Medicine for the Prevention of Human Diseases, scientists
have studied, among others, hypertension, narcolepsy and Alzheimer's disease.

   Another study, focusing on the C3a gene, underscores the complexity of the
task facing researchers. That gene, said the institute's Wetsel, seems under
differing circumstances both to play havoc with the human body, constricting
airways in asthma attacks, and to protect it.

   "The gene also seems to protect people in septic shock," he said. "In septic
shock and sepsis, we saw that these mice died much quicker when they were
missing the gene.  . . .  Having it present might help or it might hurt."

   Baylor researchers encountered a similar situation with their studies of a
gene that prompted mice to eat to obesity but also seemed to protect them from
bone loss.

   Among the more revealing Baylor studies, Berget said, was one in which p53,
an important tumor-suppressing gene, was knocked out of mice.

   "Mice created lacking p53 were viable," she said. "They lived a reasonable
lifespan, but they had a higher incidence of tumors in later life, a wide
variety of tumors.  . . .  It was just like normal mice except that it was
missing just this one gene. It gives you an ideal research animal to test gene
therapies for cancer."

   Occasionally, noted Benoit de Crombrugghe, molecular genetics chairman at
M.D. Anderson, researchers benefit from unexpected results. "A researcher has to
follow his intuition in a sense," he said.

   De Crombrugghe cited a case in which scientists unexpectedly developed
knockout mice with exencephaly, a condition in which the skull fails to close
around the brain.

   "We really had been looking for something else," he said. "When the mice
developed exencephaly, it allowed us to look at early embryonic development. It
really helped us pinpoint when the disease really started.

   "It's been known for a number of years that when pregnant women take folic
acid, it decreased the incidents of spina bifida, which is the same kind of
disease. When we treated the knockout mice with folic acid, we found their pups
were free of the condition."

   Researchers looking for a genetic basis for mental illness often find their
search complicated by the fact that more than one gene can be involved. Lexicon
Genetics' collaboration with Rockefeller University and the Scripps Research
Institute to locate genes tied to schizophrenia will start with 11 varieties of
knockout mice.

   "Behavioral disorders, autism, schizophrenia - all these things are so
difficult to understand in terms of cellular mechanisms," Burks said, adding
that UT researchers have had signal successes.

   In searching for the cellular root of hyperactivity, scientists knocked out
one gene, then another and another to see how the mice behaved. Finally, Burks
said, "the knockout was totally hyperactive."

   "It was zoom, zoom, zoom in terms of normal mice," he said. "This identified
a target for possible gene therapy. Something had been knocked out that was
linked to hyperactive behavior. It couldn't be captured on still film - mice
running around at 60 miles an hour.

   "Someone has said that with a target and an animal model we can develop any
therapy. The knockout gives us both, and the potential is tremendous.  . . .
Without equivocation, November 2000 is the most exciting time in the history of
the world to be a biological scientist.

   "The genome project is going to make Charles Darwin look like a beginner."


GRAPHIC: Mug: 1. Thomas F. Burks (p. 23); Photos: 2. Zheng-Zheng Shi, a
scientist at Lexicon Genetics, prepares to examine a genetically manipulated
mouse in a Micro-CAT scanner.  Lexicon, founded five years ago by Baylor College
of Medicine researchers, has grown into one of the nation's leading
biotechnology companies (p. 23); 3. Lexicon Genetics Chief Executive Officer
Arthur Sands is engulfed in a frigid cloud as he opens a liquid nitrogen freezer
that contains thousands of frozen mouse stem cells used to breed genetically
manipulated laboratory animals. Lexicon's "library" of knockout mice, the
animals of choice for cutting-edge medical experiments, is the world's largest
(p. 23); 4. Ku80, right, a genetically manipulated mouse who ages at 2 1/2 times
the normal rate, stands face to face with an older, normal control animal of the
same species.  Scientists believe the mouse will prove valuable in cancer
research (p. 23); 2,3. Steve Campbell / Chronicle, 4. Photo courtesy Lexicon
Genetics

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2000


                              96 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 12, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-22

LENGTH: 543 words

HEADLINE: Despite new heart treatments, exercise, good diet advised; Stem cells
benefit, however doctors swear by standbys

BYLINE: Maggie Fox; REUTERS

BODY:
 NEW ORLEANS -- New, ultra-high-tech solutions for heart disease such as gene
and stem cell therapy are showing some early promise, researchers were to tell a
meeting that started yesterday.

   But the advice to the average man and woman remains the same: Exercise, eat
right and keep stress to a minimum.

   Doctors and researchers meeting at the American Heart Association's annual
scientific sessions in New Orleans will hear the latest updates on using gene
therapy to help people "grow their own" heart bypasses -- an experimental
approach only a few years old.

   It is based on a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
used to build new blood vessels, and on the gene that controls production of the
protein.

   Researchers are using both the gene and the protein itself in very ill heart
disease patients who cannot have any more bypasses and who are too ill to live
normal lives.  Preliminary results suggest the approach is safe and reduces the
patients' chest pain, allowing them to return to many normal activities.

   Even more experimental is the use of stem cells -- the so-called master cells
that give rise to all the cells in the body.

   Canadian researchers will report on work done in animals using stem cells
taken from the bone marrow to start the growth of new tissue to replace dead
heart muscle.  If the method ever works in humans, it might help people whose
hearts are damaged during heart attacks.

   Researchers also will report on using lasers to punch holes in the heart and
thus, apparently, improve blood flow -- a controversial procedure.  And they
will report on new ways to peer into the blood vessels and the clogs in them
that are most at risk of rupturing and causing a heart attack or stroke.

   But the main news is that the best way to deal with heart disease is to avoid
it in the first place.  Heart disease kills more Americans than anything else --
causing 41 percent of all deaths -- and is the biggest killer in most
industrialized countries.

   Despite studies that suggest infections may play a role, the biggest culprits
are smoking, a rich high-fat diet, and a lack of exercise.

   More research will be presented to suggest that the people living around the
Mediterranean had it right, with their traditional diet rich in olive oil
instead of animal fats, plenty of fruits and vegetables and a little wine.

   Such a diet may not only help prevent heart disease but may help people who
have had heart attacks, a study presented yesterday showed.

   Other research will look into the role of trans-fatty acids -- those hardened
fats created in making some kinds of margarine and shortening.

   Doctors are also looking at just how much one needs to exercise, and will
report on the safety of starting an exercise program in old age, and starting
one after a heart attack.

   Previous research has shown it is safe for seniors to take up moderate
exercise even if they have been sedentary for years, and has shown that men who
keep up vigorous exercise after having a heart attack survive longer, and
without having another heart attack, than men who do not.

   And keeping a sense of humor helps.  A study to be presented next week will
show that laughter may indeed be the best medicine for heart disease.


LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2000


                              97 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



               November 11, 2000, Saturday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 29; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

HEADLINE: SETBACK IN RESEARCH FIGHT AGAINST MD;
 MEDICINE: PROMISING GENE THERAPY INJECTION EXPERIMENT HALTED AFTER DEATH OF A
TEEN PATIENT GIVEN DIFFERENT GENE. SUFFERERS AND FAMILIES AGONIZE AT DELAY.

BYLINE: CHARLEY GILLESPIE, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio

BODY:


   Last year, Donovan Decker became the first recipient of a gene therapy
injection to test the safety of a possible treatment for muscular dystrophy. Now
he's worried his cure won't come soon enough.

   The experiment ended abruptly after the death of a teenager who received a
different gene therapy treatment.

   Decker, of Huron, S.D., suffers from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, a
disease that mostly damages muscles that stabilize the hips and shoulders. The
36-year-old air traffic controller cannot walk long distances, and his condition
is worsening.

   Researchers at Ohio State University Medical Center, in conjunction with the
University of Pennsylvania, injected the therapeutic gene into a muscle on the
top of Decker's foot on Sept. 3, 1999. The injection contained a cold virus
modified to carry genes for a muscle protein Decker was missing because of a
genetic flaw.

   The injection was sufficient only to test the procedure, not to improve
Decker's health. Doctors warned that the procedure could worsen his condition
and put him in a wheelchair earlier than expected, Decker said, but he recalls
feeling happy and hopeful at taking some action.

   "If nothing is done I am pretty much going to be in a wheelchair in three
years anyway," Decker said.

   Adding to Decker's urgency, four of his seven siblings have the disease. His
only sister without it has two daughters with MD.

   "A couple of my sisters are in wheelchairs all the time," he said.

   Decker's mother, Ruth Weber, found out 21 years ago that five of her children
have MD.

   "It was very traumatic. You have your hopes and dreams for your kids and I
thought they wouldn't be able to do anything," Weber said. "Which was wrong
because they all have excelled in their lives."

   Weber is thankful just two of her 20 grandchildren have the disease, but is
worried because her youngest grandchild, at 19, is having problems more quickly
than expected.

   "It's hard to watch them when I have been able to walk all of my life. I know
what they miss," she said. "It's a day-by-day, minute-by-minute struggle for
them."

   She is frustrated over the halted experiment.

   "I hope we can get started again on the trials," she said. "When things are
moving your hopes stay higher . . . your spirits stay higher."

   Decker was the first of an expected six participants in the Muscular
Dystrophy Assn.-funded experiment. An unidentified 14-year-old boy also received
an injection.

   The testing was stopped after Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died
Sept. 17, 1999, four days after a University of Pennsylvania team injected a
gene into his liver to combat an inherited disease.

   "As soon as I heard about the Pennsylvania patient's death over the radio I
called the hospital," Decker said. "They told me it was a different type of
virus and process."

   In March, the Food and Drug Administration suspended the trials at the
University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene Therapy. Gelsinger's family
filed a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors and the university in
September.

   "The entire gene research industry got shook up. Any studies connected to the
University of Pennsylvania were stopped," said Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of
Ohio State's neurology department.

   Mendell, who performed the procedure on Decker and the boy, said even those
two cases will provide a lot of information.

   "We are not back to square one because we made good strides toward finding
out how much the body accepted the gene therapy," Mendell said. "We will have a
complete analysis of the whole program in the next few months to present to the
FDA."

   The Muscular Dystrophy Assn. spent $ 29 million this year toward finding a
cure for the 250,000 Americans with the disease and still considers gene therapy
the most promising treatment, research director Ronald Schenkenberger said.

   While gene injections are restricted, the MDA is concentrating on other
avenues such as stem-cell research, Schenkenberger said.

   "Bone marrow transplants--like the method used to treat leukemia--are a means
to introduce stem cells to the body," he said. "Because it is not a new
procedure the restrictions are less."

   Cheryl Wall, an Ohio State Medical Center nurse, said she has talked with
hundreds of people who have family members with MD who hope the federal agency
reviewing the research will allow the trials to resume.

   "They understand a need for safety but they also want to see the FDA move a
little faster," she said. "They are watching their loved ones disintegrate."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2000


                              98 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 10, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Page 16; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend
Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

HEADLINE: FILM REVIEW;
Heroes of Science Through a Rose-Colored Lens

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

BODY:

   A warm and cuddly sage or a wild-eyed egomaniac demonically tinkering with
the balance of nature? The image of the scientist in the popular imagination
usually tilts toward one of these extremes. And in "Me and Isaac Newton," a
glossy group portrait of seven noted scientists, the documentary filmmaker
Michael Apted places his chips on the warm, cuddly side of the table.

   Without going recklessly overboard, this handsomely photographed,
meticulously edited film implies that the sort of world-class mind possessed by
a scientist of Nobel Prize-winning caliber is likely to be accompanied by an
equally refined moral sense. Well, maybe. But is the opportunity to play God
automatically such a humbling experience? The film's gorgeous cinematography and
mystically flavored world-music soundtrack underscore its sanctification of
scientific pursuit as a potentially world-saving secular religion whose leading
lights exude a priestly wisdom.

    The movie's seven subjects, who represent a cross section of scientific
endeavor, are interviewed sequentially in cinematic chapters that begin with
chatty thumbnail biographies and broaden to include topics like "the work" and
"the future." They offer a largely comforting vision of collective genius
balanced by compassion, humor and judicious self-assessment.

   The pharmaceutical chemist Gertrude Elion (who died last year at 81 shortly
after participating in the film) is a stern but caring grandmotherly type you
can imagine preparing and serving up the most delicious chicken soup. When the
twinkling-eyed theoretical physicist Michio Kaku, shown gliding on an ice rink,
remarks that here "it's just me and Isaac Newton," you practically want to hug
him.

   As anyone familiar with the world of science knows, of course, most
scientists aren't this cuddlesome. Science, like every other elite field, is
fraught with cutthroat politics, clashing egos and a certain amount of
skulduggery. But none of that messy stuff makes it into this high-minded film.
As the subjects reminisce about their lives and their work in polished
paragraphs studded with homey anecdotes, you marvel at how carefully prepared
and edited their remarks appear to be. When they contemplate the future and the
role of science, they are not unaware of its perils (the development of nuclear
power and the hydrogen bomb remains the ultimate cautionary event) but still
express a guarded optimism.

   A number of these biographies are personal stories of triumphing over
difficult odds. Mr. Kaku, a Japanese-American whose parents were interned during
World War II, recalls always feeling like an outsider. One of the founders of
string theory -- "the idea that vibrating strings are at the core of electrons,
protons and neutrons" -- he is now ardently pursuing Albert Einstein's goal of
discovering a single theory to explain "everything."

   Elion, the oldest of the seven, never finished her Ph.D. but still became one
of the first women to break through the glass ceiling in her field. Among her
many accomplishments was the discovery of an immune system suppressant that
helps prevent the body's rejection of transplanted organs.

   The environmental physicist Ashok Gadgil, who was born in Bombay, grew up
surrounded by poverty and disease and has devoted his life to researching energy
efficiency. He has developed a simple, inexpensive system of disinfecting
polluted water with ultraviolet light. As the film follows him on his travels
among the poor, it invests him with a saintly aura.

   Among the other subjects are Maja Mataric, a Yugoslav emigrant who grew up in
Kansas and works in robotics; Steven Pinker, a Canadian pioneer in the field of
cognitive neuroscience; and Karol Sikora, a cancer researcher exploring how gene
therapy can influence the molecular behavior of cancer cells.

   Finally, we have Patricia Wright, a late-blooming primatologist and
conservationist who was a social worker and housewife until her fascination with
a pet owl monkey drew her into a new career. Ms. Wright subsequently spent many
years in Madagascar studying the 32 varieties of lemurs indigenous to the
island. She became an ardent conservationist when she realized that the
slash-and-burn agriculture in Madagascar was endangering wildlife that existed
nowhere else on earth. And she helped raise the money to establish a national
preserve that is now operating.

   Because she spends months at a time in the rain forest observing wildlife,
Ms. Wright has the most obviously colorful career, and her work is the easiest
to understand. But when the film goes to the laboratory to observe more complex
and theoretical projects, the information it imparts is so sketchy we are
reminded of how difficult it is to translate science into lay language.

   Despite its ultimate lack of intellectual substance, "Me and Isaac Newton" is
still inspiring. All seven of its subjects are fascinating, and most are
extremely likable. Mr. Apted has done them all a huge favor.

ME AND ISAAC NEWTON

Directed by Michael Apted; director of photography, Maryse Alberti; edited by
Susanne Rostock; music by Patrick Seymour; produced by Jody Patton and Eileen
Gregory; released by First Look Pictures. At the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th
Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Gertrude Elion, Ashok Gadgil, Michio Kaku, Maja Mataric, Steven Pinker,
Karol Sikora and Patricia Wright.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michio Kaku, a founder of "string theory," is among seven
scientists profiled in "Me and Isaac Newton," a documentary by Michael Apted.
(First Look Pictures)

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2000


                              99 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      NOVEMBER 10, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1350 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   In the Region

   Sunoco agrees to buy Pittsburgh chemical company

   Sunoco Inc., the Philadelphia oil refiner and chemical producer, said
yesterday that it had agreed to buy Aristech Chemical Corp., a U.S. unit of
Japan's Mitsubishi Corp., for $695 million. Aristech, Pittsburgh, makes
polypropylene, a chemical used in plastics and films, and phenol, used to make
compact discs and car parts. Aristech has 1,100 employees. Sunoco, which had
$8.3 billion in 1999 sales, will pay $167 million more for Aristech if the
company's profit margins exceed a certain level, Sunoco said in a statement. The
purchase is expected to be completed next quarter, Sunoco spokesman Jerry Davis
said. Shares of Sunoco fell 31 cents to $29.38.

   Vote on PGW rate increase set for Nov. 21, PUC says

   The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission postponed voting on the
Philadelphia Gas Works' rate-increase requests until Nov. 21. The special
meeting, which is open to the public, will he held at a PUC hearing room in
Harrisburg. PGW's rate requests would add about 35 percent to customers' bills
this winter.

   CFP to take a charge for inventory adjustment

   CFP Holdings Inc., a Philadelphia producer of meat and poultry products, said
it would take a $7.5 million charge for inventory adjustment in its second
quarter, ended Sept. 30. Managers at the Northeast Philadelphia plant had
underreported meat usage, the company said. CFP, which had $102.1 million in
revenue in the first half of this fiscal year, has two operating units, Quality
Foods and Custom Foods. Its customers include Subway, Arby's and Domino's Pizza.

   Lincoln National expands stock buyback by $500 million

   Lincoln National Corp.'s board approved the repurchase of up to $500 million
of its common stock, boosting its total authorization to $599.7 million. The
Philadelphia company said it may buy back shares in the open market or through
privately negotiated transactions. The financial-services holding company has
about 191.6 million shares outstanding.

   Bethlehem firm gets grant to develop syphilis test

   A Bethlehem, Pa., company has received a $1 million grant from the National
Institutes of Health to develop an oral test for syphilis. OraSure Technologies
Inc. said it expects to create a test that can detect syphilis in as little as
20 minutes. After the test is developed at OraSure facilities in Beaverton,
Ore., it should be manufactured in Bethlehem, company officials said.

   Chester Valley Bancorp names a chief executive

   Donna M. Coughey has become president and chief executive officer of Chester
Valley Bancorp Inc. She had been chairwoman, president and chief executive of
Mellon Bank Delaware. Chester Valley, Downingtown, owns First Financial Bank and
the Philadelphia Corp. for Investment Services, a securities broker/dealer.

   Elsewhere

   FTC to delay action on America Online-Time Warner deal

   The Federal Trade Commission voted unanimously to delay any action on America
Online Inc.'s proposed $127 billion acquisition of Time Warner Inc. for up to
three weeks while the companies come up with proposals to solve problems with
the deal. "The parties have committed in the last 24 hours to offer new
proposals to address competitive issues in connection with the proposed merger,"
the FTC said. The FTC wants assurances that AOL would grant competing Internet
service providers access to the extensive cable network operated by Time Warner.

   Heating-oil reserve is created for Northeast

   President Clinton yesterday approved a bill creating a home-heating-oil
reserve for the Northeast, which was hit by sharp price increases last winter.
The law also restores the president's authority to tap the Strategic Petroleum
Reserve. The legislation creates a permanent two-million-barrel heating-oil
reserve in the Northeast that the energy secretary can use when there is a
significant regional supply shortage or price rise. The bill also reauthorizes
the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, the 600-million-barrel stockpile in Texas and
Louisiana set aside by law for energy emergencies, through the end of fiscal
2003.

   Walt Disney issues first-quarter earnings warning

   Walt Disney Co. said that first-quarter earnings will be stagnant and that
advertising rates at its ABC Television unit are slipping. Profit in the quarter
ending next month will be about the same as the year-earlier 25 cents a share,
excluding losses from Walt Disney Internet Group, chief financial officer Thomas
Staggs said during a conference call with analysts. The average estimate from
analysts polled by First Call/Thomson Financial was 32 cents. The forecast came
after Disney reported profit for the fiscal fourth quarter ended Sept 30. Net
income was $167 million, or 11 cents a share, including losses from the Internet
group, company spokeswoman Chris Castro said. That exceeded the average estimate
of 7 cents a share from First Call/Thomson Financial. Disney reported a loss of
$126 million, or 2 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue rose to $6.12 billion
from $5.78 billion a year ago. The figures are adjusted as if certain purchases
and sales took place at the start of the previous fiscal year.

   NYSE says all prices will be in decimals on Jan. 29

   The New York Stock Exchange plans to list all prices of stocks in dollars and
cents, rather than the traditional fractions, starting Jan. 29, more than two
months ahead of the government-mandated deadline, NYSE chairman Richard Grasso
said. The Nasdaq Stock Market, the NYSE's chief competitor, has said it will be
decimal-ready by the SEC's April 9 deadline.

   Interest rates on mortgages climb in latest week

   The average interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages climbed to 7.79
percent for the week ending Nov. 10, up from 7.73 percent the previous week,
according to Freddie Mac, the mortgage company. On one-year adjustable-rate
mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 7.23 percent, up from
7.12 percent the week before.

   Maytag chairman quits in disagreement with board

   Maytag Corp., long rumored to be a takeover target, said its chairman and
chief executive officer, Lloyd Ward, had resigned due to a difference of opinion
with the board over the company's strategic outlook and direction. "Mr. Ward
said that, under the circumstances, it was in both his and the company's
interests that he tender his resignation," the maker of refrigerators, washing
machines and Hoover vacuum cleaners said. The company did not say what the
strategic differences involved. Ward had been chairman and chief executive for
about a year. Leonard Hadley has been appointed interim president and chief
executive. Before his retirement in August 1999, Hadley was for seven years
chairman and chief executive of Maytag.

   Is a new "Warren Buffett green" tint in the works?

   Warren Buffett is getting into the paint business. The multibillionaire's
investment company, Berkshire Hathaway Inc., is offering $1 billion in cash to
buy Benjamin Moore & Co., Montvale, N.J. Under a merger agreement approved by
Benjamin Moore's board of directors and about 18 percent of its common stock
shareholders, a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway will offer $37.82 cash per
share to all holders of Benjamin Moore common stock. When that tender offer is
completed, the remaining shareholders will receive cash in the same amount. The
deal hinges on Berkshire's getting at least two-thirds of the common stock and
obtaining government approval.

   American Home unit to develop hemophilia treatments

   American Home Products' Genetics Institute will develop gene-therapy products
to treat hemophilia in partnership with Targeted Genetics Corp. The Genetics
Institute, a subsidiary of American Homes Products Corp., will pay Targeted
Genetics a series of undisclosed fees over the course of research and
development trials. Genetics Institute will retain the rights to any products
resulting from the joint effort.

   Compiled from staff reports, the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Reuters
and other wire services.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             100 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               November 10, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A7

LENGTH: 819 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY OFFER AN EFFECTIVE WAY TO COMBAT THE DEBILITATING
PARKINSON'S;
DISEASE

BYLINE: George JohnsonMEDICAL RESEARCH; DISEASE HISTORY; DRUG THERAPY;
EXPERIMENTATION

BODY:


   Parkinson's disease is a debilitating brain disorder in which, over a period
of years, you lose the ability to control muscular movement. Arms begin to
shake, facial muscles to twitch.

   Parkinson's disease is named after Dr. James Parkinson, who first described
the disorder as a shaking palsy in 1817. About 1 million Americans are afflicted
with the disease.

   What causes Parkinson's? Researcher Arvid Carlsson discovered a critical clue
in the 1950s - that a brain chemical called dopamine is unusually common in the
midbrain where muscular movement is controlled.

   The dopamine allows the cells there to communicate with one another and so
control movement. Carlsson was awarded the Nobel Prize for this discovery last
month.

   In people with Parkinson's, the midbrain cells that produce dopamine begin to
die. We don't know why. Without adequate dopamine, the muscle-controlling cells
of the midbrain cannot do their job properly, and body movements become more
difficult to control.

   To treat Parkinson's, we administer a chemical called L-dopa, which is
converted by the brain into dopamine. This increases the dopamine available to
the brain, and so alleviates many of the symptoms of Parkinson's.

   Unfortunately, administering L-dopa only treats the symptoms of the disease.
It does not address the basic problem, which is that dopamine-producing nerve
cells are dying in the midbrain. Slowly, progressively, more cells die. L-dopa
can only slow the process of what Parkinson called "the saddest of diseases."

   To stop the disease in its tracks, we would like to halt the progressive
dying of midbrain dopamine-producing cells that is the true cause of the
disease. But we don't know how.

   There is, however, another possible approach. If we could induce the healthy
nerve cells that remain to sprout additional nerve fibers, the added cell mass
would allow the healthy cells to make more dopamine. In this way, we might be
able to replace the production capacity that has been lost.

   There is a brain chemical that might do the job. It has a jaw-breaker of a
name: glial cell-derived neurotropic factor. Let's call it GDNF. In tissue
culture, GDNF is a potent stimulator of growth in midbrain dopamine-producing
cells, causing treated cells to sprout many new projections. While GDNF might
not stop the slow process of cell death characteristic of Parkinson's, maybe
accelerated growth of healthy cells would compensate.

   Last week, a team of U.S. and Swiss researchers reported that they had
succeeded in using gene therapy to introduce the GDNF gene into the midbrain of
rhesus monkeys. These monkeys were chosen because their midbrain muscular
coordination regions are organized much like human ones.

   The success of gene therapy depends critically on using an effective delivery
vehicle. Some cold viruses have proved too dangerous as delivery vehicles. The
immune system sometimes reacts to them violently. Tiny parvoviruses are nearly
invisible to the human immune system and have been used recently to cure
hemophilia in four individuals by transferring an anti-clotting factor. We
cannot use such treatment for Parkinson's, however, because parvoviruses do not
enter nerve cells.

   To carry the GDNF gene into midbrain cells, these researchers used instead a
slow-growing virus related to the AIDS virus. This virus is harmless, readily
infects nerve cells and does not produce a strong immune response. The
researchers injected the GDNF-carrying virus directly into the midbrains of
rhesus monkeys with chemically-induced Parkinson's (speci fic chemicals were
used to damage the monkey's midbrain dopamine-producing cells). A virus carrying
another unrelated gene was introduced into other control monkeys.

   In the control monkeys, there was no effect. But in GDNF-treated monkeys,
dopamine levels in the midbrain soon began to rise. In one to two months, the
Parkinson's symptoms began to decrease. In short, the treatment worked.

   There is still a critical hurdle that must be overcome before GDNF gene
therapy can be attempted in humans. Some of the GDNF-treated monkeys produced
excessive dopamine. Too much dopamine drives the brain into psychosis.

   Indeed, anti-psychotic drugs work precisely because they counteract the
effects of dopamine. For GDNF gene therapy to be safe, it will be necessary to
devise a delivery system that will allow the gene to be switched on and off.
This would allow patients to adjust their dopamine levels to avoid the side
effects of too much or too little dopamine.

   Just such a control system already has been used successfully to control the
level of red-blood-cell production in gene therapy treatment of anemic rhesus
monkeys. Taking a pill once a month flicks on the gene for a burst of
red-blood-cell production.

   No one knows if this will work for GDNF in humans. But the possibility is
exciting, and work continues furiously.

NOTES:
George Johnson is a biology professor at Washington University.
onscience@txtwriter.com http:/txtwriter.com

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2000


                             101 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            November 10, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 66

LENGTH: 526 words

HEADLINE: GARDEN STATE COMPANIES

BODY:

   New AT&T job  AT&T Corp., among the phone carriers hoping to break into the
New Jersey local calling market now dominated by Verizon Communications,
yesterday created a new post of state president.

    J. Michael Schweder, a longtime government affairs representative for the
long-distance giant, was named to the job. His duties will include oversight of
all corporate activities in the state and the company's efforts to break into
the local-calling market. He will report to Frank Ianna, whose primary job is
president of network services, but who also serves as chief executive officer
for the company's New Jersey operations.

   Schweder joined AT&T in its Pennsylvania state government affairs department
in 1983 after three terms in Pennsylvania's House of Representatives. Three
years ago, he moved to the company's operational headquarters in Basking Ridge,
where he will continue to be based. - John Ward

   Weather helps Selective

   Good weather boosted Selective Insurance Group Inc.'s profit for the third
quarter.

   The Branchville-based insurer said third-quarter earnings rose 170 percent to
$5.4 million, or 21 cents a share, from $2 million, or 7 cents a share, for the
quarter in which Hurricane Floyd ravaged a swath of the East Coast from the
Carolinas to New Jersey. Premium revenue rose 3.5 percent.

    Besides the lack of late summer and early fall hurricanes, price rises for
its commercial insurance business also boosted Selective's results.

    But the 15 percent auto insurance rate cut that took effect last year
continued to squeeze the company, which said claims and overhead expenses for
its New Jersey car insurance business amounted to nearly $1.12 for every dollar
in premium it collected. - David Ress

   Verizon's licenses

   Verizon Wireless, the nation's largest cellular phone company, yesterday said
it has agreed to buy 20 personal communications system licenses in six
southeastern states from ALLTEL.

    Terms of the deal, which continues an industry trend of license swaps and
sales, were not disclosed.

    A spokesman for Bedminster-based Verizon Wireless said the licenses would
give the company additional capacity in areas with potential wireless customer
bases of 9 million, and would expand existing Verizon coverage areas by a
potential 2 million customers. Verizon has 26.3 million subscribers nationwide.

    The affected licenses are in Alabama, Georgia, Kansas, Missouri, Tennessee
and Oklahoma. - John Ward

   AHP's partnership

   American Home Products' Genetics Institute has entered into a partnership
with Targeted Genetics Corp. to develop gene therapy products for the treatment
of hemophilia.

    The Genetics Institute, a subsidiary of American Home Products, will pay
Targeted Genetics a series of undisclosed fees over the course of research and
development trials.

    Under the terms of the contract, Genetics Institute will retain the rights
to any products resulting from the joint effort.

    The Genetics Institute primarily works for the discovery of drugs through
the understanding and manipulation of DNA. Its laboratories are in Cambridge,
Mass.

    Targeted Genetics is based in Seattle.

    American Home Products is based in Madison.- Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             102 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           November 8, 2000 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HOME&GARDEN; Pg. 86

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Mental conditioning is 'MindAlert' goal

BYLINE: SHIRLEY M. FRIEDMAN, FOR THE STAR-LEDGER

BODY:

   Based on the premise that the brain, like the rest of the body, can benefit
from exercise and a healthy lifestyle, the American Society on Aging is trying
to expand resources related to aging and mental fitness.

    The society, the largest organization in the field of aging, has launched
"MindAlert," which will disseminate information on research and programs that
help older adults maintain and improve their mental function.

    "Research has shown that the brain is able to grow new cells that can keep
the mind alert and capable of storing and retrieving memory as it ages," said
Gloria Cavanaugh, president and CEO of the society. "Mental function can be
significantly improved by appropriate training and practice, even among older
adults showing signs of memory loss."

   As the population ages, "the ability to maintain mental skills becomes a
great concern," says Sibyl Jacobson, president and CEO of Metropolitan Life
Foundation, which, along with the Archstone Foundation, is providing seed money
for MindAlert.

   "Programs that provide individuals with information on ways to increase
mental fitness and strengthen memory become increasingly important."

    A grant from the Metropolitan Life Foundation, established in 1976 by the
Metropolitan Life Insurance Co., will identify community-based programs that
provide valuable information and activities for enhancing cognitive function
with aging.

    The foundation's MindAlert lecture series will incorporate the latest
research information.

    The Archstone Foundation is funding an online clearinghouse and resource
center for MindAlert.

    In another area, authors Allen D. Bragdon and David Gamon dispel the
commonly held notion that cognitive abilities must decrease with age in their
well-researched book, "Use It or Lose it" - How to Keep Your Brain Fit as It
Ages" (Brainwaves Books, Oct. 2000, $9.95).

    Bragdon, an author and editor of professional, academic and how-to books, is
co-director with Gamon of the Brainwaves Center, Cape Cod, Mass.

    Brainwaves Books is the publishing arm of the center (www.brainwaves.com).
Gamon is a researcher and writes on cognitive science.

    The center's mission is to distill applicable facts from neuroscience
research and make the information clear and appealing to the public.

    "We should make a constant effort to keep our brains active and challenged,
in order to keep them as healthy as a runner keeps his or her heart," Gamon
says.

    Bragdon adds, "Within this generation's lifetime, medical intervention and
gene therapy may be able to improve memory loss or even reverse (Alzheimer's
disease). But until then, there are ways to help maintain mental powers so that
people can live a full, engaging life as the years roll by."

    Among the book's topics are mental acuity tests, advice on mental lapses,
techniques for memorizing facts and retaining mental flexibility, and exercises
for specific brain functions threatened by aging.

    For more information on MindAlert, contact the American Society of Aging at
(415) 974-9600 or visit its Web site (www.asaging.org).

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             103 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           November 8, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 564 words

HEADLINE: Vitamin A, motherly love boost memories

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   Vitamin A and plenty of attention from mom early in life help people learn
and develop good memories, two researchers said Tuesday in New Orleans.

   Even though both conclusions were based on studies with laboratory rodents,
the results should be applicable to other species, including humans, the
scientists said at the Society for Neuroscience's annual meeting.

   While these investigators were talking about enhancing memory, another
focused on salvaging it from the ravages of such illnesses as Alzheimer's
disease with injections of a compound that stimulates the growth of nerve cells.

   Neural-growth factor is being tested for safety on eight people for about two
years, said Dr. Mark Tuszynski of the University of California, San Diego. If
results are promising, the experiment will be expanded, he said.

   As is the case with the treatment of most diseases, early detection is best,
Tuszynski said.

   Correcting vitamin A deficiency promptly is also advisable because the lack
of this nutrient can impair the development of mechanisms associated with memory
development, said Sharoni Jacobs, a graduate student at the Salk Institute in La
Jolla, Calif.

   Vitamin A, which is in liver, carrots and leafy green vegetables, is
converted into compounds called retinoids that are required for processes
associated with long-term memory and learning.

   This finding by Jacobs and her colleagues suggests that vitamin A
deficiencies in poor children can lead to difficulties in learning that had
previously gone unrecognized, she said.

   Despite the problems that such a shortage might cause, complete restoration
is possible once vitamin A gets back into the diet, Jacobs said.

   While getting too much vitamin A can also be a problem, Jacobs said the Salk
team has not determined yet what the optimum daily intake of this nutrient
should be for brain health.

   The Salk team worked with mice. The Canadian scientists who studied the
importance of maternal attention observed mother rats and the amount of
attention they lavished on their newborn pups by licking them.

   This process, which the researchers described as "tactile stimulation,"
played a major role in the development of the hippocampus, the part of the brain
that is important in memory and learning, said Ian Weaver of McGill University
in Montreal.

   The more affection, the better the young rats' brains became, said Weaver,
who reached that conclusion by measuring such effects as overall brain function
and the development of the nervous system. The pattern for such long-lasting
effects was set by the fifth day, he said.

   At the other end of the spectrum, in the fight against conditions that
destroy memory, Tuszynski and his co-workers first worked with rats to determine
the effect that neural-growth factor might have on their nervous systems.

   Their memories improved dramatically, he said, letting them zip through mazes
much faster than rodents who didn't get the growth factor.

   This success led Tuszynski and his team to test the growth factor in humans,
injecting the growth factor next to the degenerating cells in a form of gene
therapy. The goal, he said, is to prevent the loss of more nerve cells or, at
least, to reduce the rate of loss.

   "This is a potent molecule," Tuszynski said.

   While it should, indeed, induce cell growth, it may also have side effects,
including pain and weight loss.

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY ELLIS LUCIA Dr. Barbara Schneider, left, a pathologist
at LSU, gets technical tips from Bob Fasulka with Leica Microsystems on the use
of a laser microdissection system at the 30th annual meeting of the Society of
Neuroscience Tuesday at the Morial Convention Center.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2000


                             104 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    November 7, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. 2D

LENGTH: 2943 words

HEADLINE: DAILY BRIEFING

BYLINE: Staff reports and news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
> Denotes item of particular local interest.

DEALS: Information Holdings purchases Transcender
Stamford, Conn. --- Information Holdings Inc., which provides patent and
copyright information online, said it bought Transcender Corp. for $ 60 million
to gain a business that trains software programmers for certification exams.
Information Holdings provides intellectual property news, software and licensing
services to pharmaceutical, technology and scientific companies such as Johnson
& Johnson and Microsoft Corp. It also publishes books on subjects ranging from
organic chemistry to abstract mathematics to Web-data management.

Also ...
K2: The biggest U.S. maker of skis and sports-equipment maker Brunswick said
they terminated talks for K2 to buy Brunswick's outdoor-products businesses for
$ 200 million.

Johnson Controls: The largest maker of automotive batteries in North America
said it completed its purchase of Gylling Optima Batteries AB of Sweden for
about $ 58 million in cash to expand its U.S. product line.

ECONOMY: Discount rates rise in Treasury auction
Washington --- The Treasury Department sold $ 11 billion in three-month bills at
a discount rate of 6.22 percent, up from 6.18 percent last week. An additional $
10 billion was sold in six-month bills at a rate of 6.105 percent, up from 6.075
percent. The new discount rates understate the actual return to investors ---
6.406 percent for three-month bills, with a $ 10,000 bill selling for $
9,842.80, and 6.386 percent for a six-month bill selling for $ 9,691.40. In a
separate report, the Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year
Treasury bills rose to 6.11 percent last week from 6.01 percent the previous
week.

FINANCE: Magnet secures $ 25 million in financing
> Magnet Communications Inc., said Monday that it had secured $ 25 million in
private equity financing, including investments from SunTrust Banks and Bank of
America. Atlanta-based Magnet Communications provides Web-based cash management,
business banking and other services for financial institutions. The 5-year-old
company said it will use the funding for research and development, to expand its
sales force and for other corporate purposes. The company reported $ 300,000 in
revenue for 1998 and $ 2 million for 1999. It is projecting $ 10 million in
revenue for this year and as high as $ 25 million for 2001.

More profits seen in Chase-Morgan deal
New York --- Chase Manhattan said its planned $ 32 billion purchase of J.P.
Morgan & Co. will bolster the combined companies' profits by more than the $ 1.2
billion originally expected. In a memorandum to employees filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission, Chase Chairman and Chief Executive William
Harrison and J.P. Morgan Chairman and President Douglas Warner said the
companies' initial estimates of how much combining the two banks would increase
profit were ''conservative." Separately, Chase said the Justice Department and
the Federal Trade Commission approved the proposed merger. The bank still
requires approval from the Federal Reserve.

Three charged with fraud ordered to cease business
> Washington --- Three brokers who raised at least $ 159 million from more than
1,800 investors, including many elderly, squandered all but $ 2.5 million, a
court-ordered receiver reported. A preliminary injunction issued by U.S.
District Court Judge David Carter ordered Ernest F. Cossey and Gary W.  Williams
of Southern California and Thomas G. Cloud of Atlanta to cease their allegedly
fraudulent business and continued a freeze on their assets, the Securities and
Exchange Commission said. Carter called for a detailed accounting of the
defendants' finances, the SEC said. Attorneys for Cossey, Williams and Cloud
were unavailable for comment.

SEC to meet Nov. 15 on consulting proposal
Washington --- The Securities and Exchange Commission said it will meet Nov.  15
to consider a measure designed to protect auditor independence by setting new
rules on consulting work that accounting firms do for companies they audit. The
agency's move to set a timetable for consideration of the much- debated rule
comes as the SEC has been in private negotiations to resolve opposition from
some of the world's biggest accounting firms. The meeting also was set after
some top congressional leaders last week endorsed proposed legislation that
would force the SEC to delay action until next year.

FOOD/BEVERAGE: Hershey to buy Nabisco gum-and-mint businesses
Hershey, Pa.  --- Hershey Foods said it is buying Nabisco Inc.'s gum-and- mint
businesses for $ 135 million. The businesses, which had 1999 sales of about $
270 million, include Ice Breakers and Breath Savers Cool Blasts intense mints
and Breath Savers mints, as well as Carefree, Stickfree, Bubble Yum and Fruit
Stripe gums. The agreement between Hershey and Nabisco is contingent upon Philip
Morris Co.'s acquisition of Nabisco Holdings Corp., Nabisco Inc.'s parent, as
well as Federal Trade Commission approval.

HEALTH CARE: CytRx, Merck sign licensing agreement
> Shares of Atlanta-based CytRx Corp., a biopharmaceutical company, were up
sharply Monday after the company said it had signed a licensing agreement with
Merck & Co. Inc. for its DNA delivery technology. The technology is used in DNA
vaccines and gene therapy. CytRx will receive an upfront payment, with the
possibility of future royalty payments. It did not disclose any dollar amounts.
Its stock closed at $ 1.31, up 28 cents.

Also ...
American Home Products: The vaccine maker said its Prevenar vaccine to prevent
certain infections in infants and young children has moved closer to European
Union approval.

HOSPITALITY: Wyndham International sells five U.K. hotels
Dallas --- Wyndham International Inc. sold five Malmaison hotels in the United
Kingdom for $ 111 million, as part of its move to raise money to pay off debt by
selling off properties that don't fit into the Wyndham chain. Dallas-based
Wyndham, which now operates 244 hotels, said in a press release distributed by
Business Wire that it completed the sale of the hotels and the brand name to
Marylebone Warwick Balfour Group PLC, a London-based real estate firm.

MANUFACTURING: NFL supplier seeks bankruptcy protection
Wilmington, Del. --- LogoAthletic Inc., a sportswear maker that supplies
uniforms to 13 National Football League teams, filed for bankruptcy protection
from creditors after slumping sales of licensed gear left it struggling to
survive. Indianapolis-based LogoAthletic listed more than $ 100 million each in
assets and liabilities in its Chapter 11 petition filed in U. S. Bankruptcy
Court in Wilmington. The privately held company is owned by a group that
includes German sporting goods maker Puma AG. Skyrocketing NFL licensing fees
and tumbling sales of team-related apparel across the spectrum of professional
sports prompted LogoAthletic to seek protection from creditors, industry experts
say.

MEDIA: Notes, bonds offered by Cox Communications
> Cox Communications Inc. today plans to close a $ 1 billion offering of senior
debt. The Atlanta-based cable company said it will use the proceeds to repay
commercial paper borrowings. Cox offered $ 800 million in 10-year notes and $
200 million in 12-year, floating-rate bonds. Chase Securities Inc. and Merrill
Lynch & Co. arranged the sale. Cox is majority held by the owner of The Atlanta
Journal-Constitution.

PEOPLE: Polo Ralph Lauren names new CFO
New York --- Polo Ralph Lauren Corp., the maker of Ralph Lauren, Chaps and Polo
Sport clothing, named Gerald Chaney chief financial officer, effective Nov. 27.
Chaney succeeds Nancy A. Platoni Poli. Without elaborating, the clothing
designer said Poli is leaving to pursue other interests. Chaney was chief
financial officer of Kellwood Co., a St. Louis-based clothing maker.

RETAIL: Publix to start online service in Fla.
> Publix Super Markets has picked Pompano Beach, Fla., as the first market for
its online grocery shopping service to start in April 2001. PublixDirect will
pick and pack groceries from a new warehouse and serve South Florida customers
within a 25-mile radius to include Fort Lauderdale. Spokeswoman Jennifer Bush
said Publix selected the Pompano Beach area because of a high concentration of
Internet users and the demand for an online grocery delivery service.
PublixDirect is opening its online grocery headquarters in Alpharetta this
December. The company plans to offer the service in other major markets in
Florida and Georgia. Bush declined to say if one of the markets in Georgia will
be metro Atlanta.

Fleece sweatshirts for women recalled
Washington --- A Miami company is recalling about 42,000 women's fleece
sweatshirts sold at Kmart stores because they fail to meet the federal mandatory
standards for fabric flammability and could ignite easily, the Consumer Product
Safety Commission said Monday. The sweatshirts are made of a fleece fabric that
resembles the inside-out of a sweatshirt. They are long- sleeved,
pullover-style, gray and 90 percent cotton and 10 percent polyester. A label
sewn into the neck of the sweatshirts that read in part, ''Route 66 Original
Clothing'', ''Made in El Salvador'' and ''R.N. 94401.'' Kmart stores sold the
women's sweatshirts from June 1999 through March 2000 for about $ 9. Consumers
should immediately stop wearing the sweatshirts and contact Five-Y Clothing at
1-888-343-4838 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. Monday through Friday to receive a
refund.

TECHNOLOGY: Dutch hacker infiltrates Microsoft server briefly
Redmond, Wash. --- Microsoft Corp. confirmed Monday that a Dutch hacker briefly
infiltrated one of the company's backup Internet servers and posted the message,
''Hack the planet.'' The latest security breach, which occurred at a server that
pointed users to another Web site, was characterized as minor in comparison to
an intrusion disclosed late last month. In that case, company officials believe
a hacker had access for about 12 days in October to the source code for software
still in the early stages of development.

Transmeta to sell shares at $ 21 apiece in IPO
Santa Clara, Calif. --- Transmeta Corp., a computer-chip developer backed by
Paul Allen and George Soros, agreed to sell shares at $ 21 apiece in its initial
public offering, above its forecast price range. Transmeta's IPO will raise $
273 million before expenses and values the company at $ 2.68 billion. Transmeta
sold 13 million shares, or a 10 percent stake, through Morgan Stanely Dean
Witter & Co. and Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown. The company, which makes chips for
computers and mobile Internet appliances, on Friday boosted its asking price for
the shares from $ 16 to $ 18 from an initial $ 11 to $ 13 range. Demand was
strong enough to sell above the range.

TELECOMS: Teligent may scale back expansion plans
Vienna, Va. --- Teligent Inc., which sells phone and Internet service to
businesses using wireless equipment, may announce this week that it will scale
back expansion plans after its shares plunged 92 percent this year. ''You're
going to see a change in the business plan,'' said UBS Warburg analyst John
Hodulik, who lowered his rating on the shares to ''neutral'' from ''attractive''
Friday. The company might also announce a reduction in its work force, he said.
Two other analysts lowered their ratings Monday. The company said it will
announce third-quarter results Wednesday after the markets close, then hold a
conference call Thursday.

Also ...
Transcrypt International: The maker of security devices to prevent interception
of voice and data communications, said it will cut 69 jobs, or about 26 percent.


TRANSPORTATION: Spirit Airlines' attendants to unionize
> Flight attendants for Spirit Airlines, a small, private low-fare carrier based
in Miramar, Fla., have voted to unionize under the Association of Flight
Attendants. Votes counted Friday showed 71 percent of the 350 eligible Spirit
flight attendants voted to unionize, the AFA said. Spirit flies between Florida
and the Northeast and Midwest. The AFA also is seeking to organize about 20,000
attendants at Atlanta-based Delta Air Lines.

Jaguar engine ouput could be shifted
Cleveland --- Ford said it's negotiating with the United Auto Workers to move
Jaguar engine production from a suburban Cleveland plant. The move would affect
about 200 workers, plus another 200 jobs that would be added in June 2001 when
Ford begins building a new engine for the Jaguar X-type auto, said spokesman
Nick Sharkey. He declined to say where the jobs may go, or whether cost cutting
was an objective. A final decision may not be reached for three to four months,
pending agreement with the union, he said.


   Ford recalling Mustangs to fix brakes
Dearborn, Mich. --- Ford said it will recall about 430,000 Mustangs with manual
transmissions from the 1994 through 2001 model years to fix a problem with the
emergency brake. A misalignment of some parts in the handle mechanism of the
emergency-brake system could cause the handle to partially slip, which could
reduce the pressure being applied by the brake, the automaker said. The National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration has gathered 300 reports of unintended
vehicle movement of Mustangs. The automaker hasn't received any reports of
accidents or injuries.

Southwest Airlines, union close to agreement
Dallas --- Southwest Airlines Co. said it reached a tentative contract agreement
with the union for ramp workers and employees who stock planes and oversee
boarding, which has been without a contract for almost a year. The largest
low-fare airline and the union for the 5,300 workers declined to discuss
details. Charles Cerf, vice president of Transport Workers Union Local 555, said
he was satisfied that the major sticking points, wages and incentives for good
attendance, were resolved. If the union's executive board approves the agreement
Wednesday, members will vote on it by mail.

Global Airlines offers to buy Trans World
St. Louis --- Global Airlines Corp., a company with no operations led by a Los
Angeles investor named Emil Bernard, offered for the second time to buy Trans
World Airlines Inc., in a bid Global valued at $ 298 million. The $ 3.
75-a-share offer includes $ 2.25 in Global Class B non-voting stock and $ 1. 50
in cash for each TWA share. The offer is a premium over TWA's closing price
Monday of $ 2 a share, up 20 cents. Global in June offered $ 5 a share, or $ 381
million, in stock, debt securities and cash for the St. Louis-based airline. TWA
had requested more information on that bid, Global said in July. TWA will
consider any legitimate offer, company spokeswoman Chris Kelly said.

Flight attendants announce job actions
Chicago --- United Airlines flight attendants said they would begin job actions
short of disrupting flights at the world's largest carrier after failing to
reach a wage agreement by a union-imposed Saturday deadline. United's
25,000-member Association of Flight Attendants announced a series of job actions
to protest the pace of negotiations. The actions include having sympathetic
passengers distribute leaflets during flights and having members adhere strictly
to contract, the union said.

Daewoo asking union to take job, wage cuts
Seoul, South Korea --- Daewoo Motor Co. officials met with labor unions today
and reported progress toward a company proposal to accept job and wage cuts. The
meetings come as company faces bankruptcy unless it gains fresh loans from its
bankers. Creditors for Korea's second-largest automaker have tied new loans to
Daewoo Motor winning support from unions for reforms aimed at stemming losses.
The cost cuts may also make Daewoo Motor more attractive for potential buyers,
with General Motors Corp. and Fiat SpA the two most likely to make a joint bid.
The corporate brinkmanship steps up pressure on workers to accept job losses
totaling 3,500 staff and pay cuts for those who remain.

Also ...
Continental Airlines: Launched its Elite Upgrade Automation System, which
automatically upgrades members of the OnePass Elite frequent-flier program to
first class, eliminating the need for members to call reservations to request
complimentary upgrades.

UTILITIES/ENERGY: Non-profit to buy unit of Southern Co. venture
> A Welsh non-profit firm has agreed to buy a water and sewage company from a
Southern Co. partnership in return for assuming $ 2.6 billion in debt. Glas
Cymru agreed to take over the debt of Hyder's water utility from Western Power
Distribution, which is a joint venture of Southern Co.'s Southern Energy Inc.
subsidiary and Pennsylvania-based PPL Corp. The deal is subject to regulatory
OK. Western Power, which recently bought Hyder for $ 3.8 billion, is adding its
electricity distribution network in Wales to its own in southwestern England.


   Report released on power plants
Princeton, N.J. --- New power plants will improve reliability of the U.S.
electric grid through 2009, the North American Electric Reliability Council said
in a report. Plant developers have plans to build generators that can produce as
much as 190,000 megawatts of electricity by 2004, or enough to light about 190
million single-family homes. That will increase capacity margins as supply grows
faster than demand, said agency spokesman Gene Gorzelnik. Few new transmission
lines will be built during that time, and delivery problems may cause isolated
outages.

--- Staff, Dow Jones News Service, Bloomberg News, Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2000


                             105 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           November 7, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 835 words

HEADLINE: Amylin posts higher loss; Symlin costs cited

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. yesterday reported a higher net loss for the third
quarter as it prepares to file with the Food and Drug Administration for
approval of a drug for treating diabetes.

   The San Diego company, which develops treatments for diabetes and related
disorders, posted a loss of $10 million, or 16 cents per share, compared with a
net loss of $7 million, or 17 cents per share, for the third quarter of 1999.

   The company attributed the loss to increased contracted costs connected with
the approval process for Symlin, a drug for controlling glucose levels in
patients with adult-onset diabetes.

   Amylin also cited costs connected with the development of other diabetes
treatments and a treatment for metabolic disorders related to cardiovascular
illness.

   For the nine months ended Sept. 30, Amylin reported a loss of $30.2 million,
or 49 cents per share, compared with a loss of $20.5 million, or 53 cents per
share, for the year-ago period.

   Shares of the company's stock, traded on Nasdaq under ticker symbol AMLN,
closed down 75 cents yesterday at $11.31.

   In other local earnings news:

   Vical Inc. yesterday reported a $1.9 million loss in the third quarter ended
Sept. 30, compared with a $2.8 million loss for the same period a year ago.
Revenues rose 16 percent, to $1.4 million.

   The developer of gene therapy and vaccine products, which are still in
experimental testing, had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of
$150.4 million, compared with $37.7 million on Dec. 31, 1999.

   The company's stock, which trades under the symbol VICL, rose almost 5
percent to close at $24.62.

   In other earnings news:

   Cisco Systems Inc. yesterday beat Wall Street profit forecasts for the 13th
straight quarter in an anxiously awaited report that showed a 66 percent jump in
sales by the No. 1 producer of equipment used to direct traffic on the Internet.

   But investors, rattled by a volatile six-month downturn in the stock market,
reacted negatively to the report, worried that even a reliable performer like
Cisco will soon be hit by a sluggish turn in the economy.

   Cisco, widely seen as a barometer for the technology industry and the
Internet economy, reported an operating profit of $1.36 billion, or 18 cents per
share, for the three months ended Oct. 28, which is the company's first fiscal
quarter.

   Those figures exclude acquisition costs, investment gains and other one-time
factors that left Cisco with net income of $798 million, or 11 cents per share,
for the quarter.

   Analysts had been projecting an operating profit of 17 cents per share,
making it the 13th quarter in a row that Cisco topped forecasts by exactly a
penny.

   In the same quarter last year, Cisco reported net income of $415 million, or
6 cents per share.  Year-ago operating profits, if adjusted to include the
results of the companies Cisco has acquired over the past 12 months, totaled
$814 million, or 11 cents per share.

   Waste Management Inc., the nation's largest trash company, lost $190.8
million in the third quarter, an improvement over a $947.8 million loss for the
same period last year.  The results met expectations.

   The Houston-based company said that excluding $416.7 million in one-time
expenses for asset sales and termination of a pension plan, operating profit
fell to $207.6 million, or 33 cents per share, from $279.2 million, or 44 cents,
for the three months ended Sept. 30.

   May Department Stores Co.'s third-quarter earnings dropped 38 percent.

   The company earned $85 million, or 27 cents per share, in the quarter ended
Oct. 28, compared with $138 million, or 38 cents per share, a year ago.

   In September, May issued an earnings warning, saying back-to-school sales
were poor, and it had to slash prices to reduce spring and summer inventory.

   Revenue totaled $3.33 billion, an increase of 5 percent from $3.17 billion in
1999. Same-store sales fell marginally.

   The results include figures from David's Bridal, which May acquired in
August.

   Earnings for the first nine months of the year totaled $340 million, or $1.03
per share, compared with $414 million, or $1.15 per share, in 1999.

   During those three quarters, May opened 21 department stores.  The company
plans to open seven more stores by year-end.

   ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Costa Mesa, a drugmaker planning to split into
three companies, said third-quarter profit rose 15 percent on higher royalty
revenue from the hepatitis C drug it developed.

   Net income rose to $36.6 million, or 45 cents a share, from $31.8 million, or
39 cents, a year earlier.

   Revenue rose 14 percent to $207.3 million from $181.7 million.  ICN had $49
million in royalties, up from $33 million a year earlier, on sales of ribavirin,
a hepatitis C drug sold in combination with Intron A by Schering-Plough Corp.
under the name Rebetron in the United States and Rebetol in Europe.


LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2000


                             106 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            November 7, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-3

LENGTH: 804 words

HEADLINE: Amylin posts higher loss; Symlin costs cited

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc. yesterday reported a higher net loss for the
third quarter as it prepares to file with the Food and Drug Administration for
approval of a drug for treating diabetes. The San Diego company, which develops
treatments for diabetes and related disorders, posted a loss of $10 million, or
16 cents per share, compared with a net loss of $7 million, or 17 cents per
share, for the third quarter of 1999. The company attributed the loss to
increased contracted costs connected with the approval process for Symlin, a
drug for controlling glucose levels in patients with adult-onset diabetes.
Amylin also cited costs connected with the development of other diabetes
treatments and a treatment for metabolic disorders related to cardiovascular
illness. For the nine months ended Sept. 30, Amylin reported a loss of $30.2
million, or 49 cents per share, compared with a loss of $20.5 million, or 53
cents per share, for the year-ago period. Shares of the company's stock, traded
on Nasdaq under ticker symbol AMLN, closed down 75 cents yesterday at $11.31. In
other local earnings news: Vical Inc. yesterday reported a $1.9 million loss in
the third quarter ended Sept. 30, compared with a $2.8 million loss for the same
period a year ago.

   Revenues rose 16 percent, to $1.4 million. The developer of gene therapy and
vaccine products, which are still in experimental testing, had cash, cash
equivalents and marketable securities of $150.4 million, compared with $37.7
million on Dec. 31, 1999. The company's stock, which trades under the symbol
VICL, rose almost 5 percent to close at $24.62. In other earnings news: Cisco
Systems Inc. yesterday beat Wall Street profit forecasts for the 13th straight
quarter in an anxiously awaited report that showed a 66 percent jump in sales by
the No. 1 producer of equipment used to direct traffic on the Internet. But
investors, rattled by a volatile six-month downturn in the stock market, reacted
negatively to the report, worried that even a reliable performer like Cisco will
soon be hit by a sluggish turn in the economy. Cisco, widely seen as a barometer
for the technology industry and the Internet economy, reported an operating
profit of $1.36 billion, or 18 cents per share, for the three months ended Oct.
28, which is the company's first fiscal quarter. Those figures exclude
acquisition costs, investment gains and other one-time factors that left Cisco
with net income of $798 million, or 11 cents per share, for the quarter.
Analysts had been projecting an operating profit of 17 cents per share, making
it the 13th quarter in a row that Cisco topped forecasts by exactly a penny. In
the same quarter last year, Cisco reported net income of $415 million, or 6
cents per share.

   Year-ago operating profits, if adjusted to include the results of the
companies Cisco has acquired over the past 12 months, totaled $814 million, or
11 cents per share. Waste Management Inc., the nation's largest trash company,
lost $190.8 million in the third quarter, an improvement over a $947.8 million
loss for the same period last year.

   The results met expectations. The Houston-based company said that excluding
$416.7 million in one-time expenses for asset sales and termination of a pension
plan, operating profit fell to $207.6 million, or 33 cents per share, from
$279.2 million, or 44 cents, for the three months ended Sept. 30. May Department
Stores Co.'s third-quarter earnings dropped 38 percent. The company earned $85
million, or 27 cents per share, in the quarter ended Oct. 28, compared with $138
million, or 38 cents per share, a year ago. In September, May issued an earnings
warning, saying back-to-school sales were poor, and it had to slash prices to
reduce spring and summer inventory. Revenue totaled $3.33 billion, an increase
of 5 percent from $3.17 billion in 1999. Same-store sales fell marginally. The
results include figures from David's Bridal, which May acquired in August.
Earnings for the first nine months of the year totaled $340 million, or $1.03
per share, compared with $414 million, or $1.15 per share, in 1999. During those
three quarters, May opened 21 department stores.

   The company plans to open seven more stores by year-end. ICN Pharmaceuticals
Inc. of Costa Mesa, a drugmaker planning to split into three companies, said
third-quarter profit rose 15 percent on higher royalty revenue from the
hepatitis C drug it developed. Net income rose to $36.6 million, or 45 cents a
share, from $31.8 million, or 39 cents, a year earlier. Revenue rose 14 percent
to $207.3 million from $181.7 million.

   ICN had $49 million in royalties, up from $33 million a year earlier, on
sales of ribavirin, a hepatitis C drug sold in combination with Intron A by
Schering-Plough Corp. under the name Rebetron in the United States and Rebetol
in Europe.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             107 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                    November 6, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS & FINANCE, Pg. 3

LENGTH: 309 words

HEADLINE: Favorite Web sites;

BYLINE: Compiled by Mike Kersmarki;

BODY:
  Games people play

   www.flipside.com - Flipside has created three online games to celebrate the
release of Dr. Seuss'  How the Grinch Stole Christmas, starring Jim Carrey as
the Grinch. They are a slot machine game, a  memory game and a checker game.

   battlebots.com- Learn more about the sport of robotic combat at BattleBots.
Contestants design  and build radio-controlled robots up to 488 pounds and
include weapons: hammers, saws and spikes.  Deeper thinking

   www.closertotruth.com - Scientists, scholars and artists lock horns on the
big issues of modern  times at Closer to Truth. A recent debate focused on the
question, "Will gene therapy change the  human race?"

   ideaexchange.com - Got a great idea? Visit this marketplace to buy and sell
ideas. You can also  promote and hone ideas that may have commercial value.
Mind-numbing politics

   ammi.org/livingroomcandidate/ - Check out an online compendium of
presidential campaign  commercials dating back to 1952.  Help your central
processor

   tech24.com - Go here for free help with your computer, including live tech
chat, four-hour  response e-mails and remote support.

   auctions.excite.com - Need to scrounge around for copies of Office97 or other
old software. Don't  pay full price. Other sites include: www.emsps.com and
www.dellauction.com and www.ebay.com  That's Entertainment!

   www.creators.com/lifestyle/hirsch/hirsch.asp - Syndicated columnist Lynda
Hirsch has been writing  about soap operas all the days of our lives.

   www.tarzan.org - Visit the official site of Tarzan, who has been swinging
through the jungle  since 1912. Explore nearly a century of Tarzan history,
including movies, radios, books, magazines,  comics and Disney's animated
classic.  Compiled by Mike Kersmarki, assistant business editor. Reach him at
mkersmarki@tampatrib.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (C),
 (C) The BattleBots Web site serves as a primer on the emerging sport of robotic
combat, where almost 500 pound machines clash.

NOTES: FAVORITE WEB SITES

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2000


                             108 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      November 5, 2000 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 047

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: Searching for solutions - Parkinson's treatments emerging

BYLINE: By Karyn Miller-Medzon

BODY:

   On the subject of Parkinson's disease, physicians are wary of words like
"cure." But the latest research leaves them optimistic about future treatments
for the potentially debilitating neurological illness.

   "It's very encouraging to see the rate of introduction of new therapies,"
said Dr. Samuel Ellias, a neurologist and Parkinson's specialist at Boston
Medical Center. "The thing that's most exciting is that every year I see at
least two or three new treatment modalities being tried."

   What is Parkinson's disease? According to Dr. Daniel Tarsy, director of the
Movement Disorders Center at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, it's a
disease of the motor system in which nerve cells degenerate in an area of the
brain called the substantia nigra. By the time the patient begins to experience
symptoms, 70 percent of these nerve cells are gone.

   The result, Tarsy said, is that patients develop an array of symptoms,
including slowness of movement, tremors, muscle stiffness and difficulties with
balance. In severe cases, (which occurs in 20 percent of patients) Parkinson's
causes slurred speech, difficulty walking and loss of mental function.

   Most patients, however, don't get to this stage, especially with the drug
treatments now offered, Tarsy said. Prominent sufferers include actor Michael J.
Fox and Attorney General Janet Reno.

   Treatments for Parkinson's fall into three general categories: oral
medications that alleviate Parkinson's symptoms; surgical treatments to
alleviate symptoms; and experimental treatments designed to slow (and even
reverse) symptoms.

   The third category is sparking the most interest both in the research and
patient communities.

   One experimental treatment involves surgical transplantation of healthy
cells, both fetal and pig, into the brains of Parkinson's patients.

   "The results are promising. Some patients have received definite benefits and
some have had complications," Ellias said. The complications arose during human
fetal cell transplantation trials. "With transplantation, at least in principle,
you're replacing cells that don't work well and make dopamine with those that
do. If the transplantation of new cells is successful, it could slow down the
progression of disease and symptoms."

   Ellias and his colleagues are among those conducting patient trials using pig
cells. Of the 12 patients in one trial, at least three showed very good
improvement that lasted for many years.

   The logistics of obtaining enough dopamine-producing cells from human
fetuses, however, is complicated. The pig cells offer a solution because they
are readily accessible and can be screened for disease, Ellias said.

   Theoretically, patients receiving pig cells are at risk for porcine (or pig)
viruses. So far, patients screened for these viruses have shown no signs of
infection.

   While Tarsy estimated that cell transplantation treatment might be as far as
10 years down the road (depending on the results of current trials), he noted
that in cases where the brains of transplant patients were examined
posthumously, "the implant tissue of both fetal and pig tissue actually
established a good connection. The brain seemed able to integrate this new
tissue."

   This is good news for Parkinson's patients. Current treatments - which often
alleviate the most debilitating symptoms - frequently stop working over time.

   "Most patients have reasonably good control of their symptoms using
medication for between five and eight years," Ellias said. "For some it may be
less, for others it can be much longer."

   Over time, however, many patients suffer periods of slow movement, as well as
side effects. "It's at this time that one considers neuro-surgical procedures,"
Ellias said.

   Current procedures include thalamotomy (in which a lesion is made in the
thalamus to reduce tremors); pallidotomy (where a lesion is created in the
globus pallidus to reduce muscle stiffness and slow movements); and thalamic
deep brain stimulation (for tremors), where electrodes are placed in the brain
and attached to a device similar to a pace maker.

   Ellias said all these procedures are fairly effective, though thalamotomy
isn't commonly used since the introduction of thalamic deep brain stimulation.

   Also in the early stages of research are stem cell transplantation (which
would place undifferentiated cells into the brain, where researchers hope they
would replace the cells destroyed by Parkinson's) and restorative drugs that
might reverse degeneration and revive function.

   Recent experiments involving gene therapy have also proven promising.
According to reports published in the Oct. 27 issue of Science, researchers at
Rush Presbyterian Medical Center in Chicago have successfully used this therapy
to reverse the anatomical cellular changes that occur in the brains of monkeys
with Parkinson's.

   The experiments have also shown success in preventing the disease from
progressing, and in reversing functional deficits in monkeys with early stage
Parkinson's.

   "This research produced the most optimistic results I've seen yet," Ellias
said.

   The rate at which new treatments are being studied and introduced  produces a
great amount of hope among patients, Tarsy said. "Look at how hopeful Michael J.
Fox is. He sets the tone. The first thing patients ask when they come into my
office is, 'What's new?' "

   Photo Caption: NEW FRONTIERS: Dr. Samuel Ellias, a Parkinson's specialist at
Boston Medical Center, is excited about the disease's new treatments. Staff
photo by Michael Seamans


LOAD-DATE: November 05, 2000


                             109 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   November 04, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Supreme Court to hear case on work arbitration


   WASHINGTON - A California man's lawsuit alleging on-the-job harassment could
set ground rules for when employers can force workers to settle labor disputes
through arbitration rather than in court.

   The Supreme Court hears arguments Monday in the case of Saint Clair Adams,
who was made to sign a document agreeing to settle any potential labor grievance
through binding arbitration before Circuit City Stores Inc. would hire him. The
court is reviewing what types of job classifications may fall under such an
agreement.





   Troops in Korea in '68-69 can get defoliant testing


   WASHINGTON - The government is offering to examine Cold War American troops
who served in Korea three decades ago for possible exposure to the defoliant
Agent Orange.

   In a little-publicized initiative, the Veterans Affairs Department expanded a
program previously offered to Vietnam War veterans to include people who served
in Korea in 1968-69.

   The rule change follows by a year the Pentagon's disclosure that South Korean
troops sprayed Agent Orange, during that time along the demilitarized zone
between North and South Korea.





   Man, 47, apparently shot family, self in Virginia


   HERNDON, Va. - An engineer apparently shot his wife and two young daughters
before committing suicide, police said.

   Autopsies performed Friday show that Richard Hamilton, 47, killed himself,
after apparently killing his wife Bene Svitavsky, 46, and daughters Kathryn, 8,
and Sara, 6.

   Firefighters found the bodies Thursday after being called to a small fire at
the home.





   Minority-hiring law struck down in Chicago


   CHICAGO - A federal judge has ruled unconstitutional a Cook County law
requiring that at least 40 percent of county construction contracts go to
minority- and women-owned businesses.

   Judge John Grady ruled Thursday that preferences for minorities and women
violated the equal protection clause of the 14th Amendment.

   The challenge to the preferences was brought in 1996 by the Builders
Association of Greater Chicago, a trade group comprising some of the city's
largest commercial builders.

   "We're not against minority enterprises," said Albert Leitschuh, association
executive vice president. "We just don't believe it's right to legislate who you
should hire."

   Cook County Board President John Stroger said he will consult with county
lawyers about appealing.





   California OKs giving gays with kids tax status


   SACRAMENTO, Calif. - California has approved a plan to give gay and lesbian
parents the same tax benefits accorded to unmarried heterosexuals with children,
a move hailed as a significant victory by gay rights activists.

   The 3-2 decision by the state's Board of Equalization made public this week
makes California the first state to explicitly recognize that, for tax purposes,
homosexuals can be considered parents of children not biologically theirs.





   Family of teen who died in gene study settles suit


   PHILADELPHIA - The family of a teen-ager who died during a gene therapy
experiment last year has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors
and the University of Pennsylvania.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy.

   Terms of the settlement were not released.

   Gelsinger suffered from an inherited disorder that inhibits nitrogen
processing in the body. It usually kills boys at a young age, but Gelsinger
controlled his condition with drugs and diet.





   Shuttle Discovery back in Florida after trip


   CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla. - Space shuttle Discovery returned home Friday after
landing in California on Oct. 24.

   After 13 days in space, Discovery was diverted to Edwards Air Force Base
because of bad weather in Florida.

   High winds over Edwards and a balky bolt on an engine cover delayed mounting
Discovery on its 747 carrier aircraft until Thursday. The craft stopped in
Oklahoma and Missouri before landing in Florida.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2000


                             110 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    November 4, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 26; National Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF / PENNSYLVANIA;
 DEAL IS REACHED IN GENE THERAPY DEATH

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:


   The University of Pennsylvania announced it had reached an out-of-court
settlement with the family of Jesse Gelsinger, a Tucson man whose death in a
gene therapy experiment 14 months ago prompted a national reassessment of
protections for research volunteers. Details of the settlement, which grew out
of a civil suit the family filed in a Pennsylvania state court in September,
were not disclosed. Gelsinger, who was 18 and who had an inherited liver
disorder, died Sept. 17, 1999, just four days after getting an experimental
infusion of genetically engineered viruses.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             111 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    November 4, 2000 Saturday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05A

LENGTH: 232 words

HEADLINE: FBI agent seeks right to tell of misconduct

BYLINE:  From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   Washington -- A 20-year veteran FBI agent went to court Friday seeking the
right to report to President Clinton and key members of Congress what he
considers serious and criminal misconduct by federal workers during a top-
secret undercover national security operation.

   FBI Director Louis Freeh and Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder have denied
agent Joseph G. Rogoskey permission to relay his allegations to Clinton,
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and House and Senate committees that
oversee the FBI.

   In a lawsuit against the FBI and Justice Department, Rogoskey said that as an
undercover agent he "witnessed acts of serious misconduct and violation of
federal law by employees of the federal government during the course of their
employment."

   Now on paid administrative leave, Rogoskey spent 12 years, 1987 through 1998,
on top-secret undercover operations involving some of the government's deepest
secrets that are accessible only to specified people.

   Gene therapy death: The family of a teenager who died during a gene therapy
experiment last year has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors
and the University of Pennsylvania. Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died
Sept. 17, 1999, four days after starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death is
the first known to have been caused by gene therapy. Terms of the settlement
were not released.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             112 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    November 4, 2000 Saturday STATE EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 05A

LENGTH: 94 words

HEADLINE: Family settles in gene therapy death

BYLINE:  From Journal Sentinel wire reports

BODY:

   Philadelphia -- The family of a teenager who died during a gene therapy
experiment last year has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors
and the University of Pennsylvania.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy.

   Terms of the settlement were not released. The university released a
statement Friday saying it hopes the deal "will enable the Gelsingers to bring a
small measure of closure to their loss."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             113 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                November 4, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

HEADLINE: Penn Settles Suit On Genetic Test

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, Nov. 3

BODY:

   The family of a teen-ager who died in a gene therapy experiment has settled a
wrongful-death lawsuit against his doctors and the University of Pennsylvania.

   The teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died on Sept. 17, 1999, four
days after the experiment began. His death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy.

    Terms of the settlement were not released.

   Mr. Gelsinger suffered from an inherited disorder that inhibited nitrogen
processing in the body. Researchers injected him with a cold virus that had been
modified to carry a gene that would control the condition. But two days after
the therapy began, he slipped into a coma.

   Mr. Gelsinger was eventually taken off life support and died.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             114 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      NOVEMBER 4, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: PENN, FAMILY SETTLE SUIT IN GENE-THERAPY DEATH THE PACT'S TERMS
INCLUDED A SUBSTANTIAL SUM. WHAT WAS IMPORTANT, RELATIVES SAID, IS IMPROVING
SAFETY.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania has settled a lawsuit filed by the family of
an Arizona teenager who died last fall during a gene-therapy experiment at
Penn's teaching hospital.

   The death is believed to be the first directly stemming from gene therapy, a
highly experimental field of medicine that aims to replace defective genes with
correct ones.

   Both Penn and the family of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., declined
to disclose terms of the out-of-court settlement other than to acknowledge it
involved a substantial sum of money.

   The agreement was framed Tuesday and completed yesterday, lawyers said. The
legal team for the Gelsinger family said the settlement did not require Penn to
make any specific changes in its medical research program.

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, said in a phone interview from Tucson that
the case was important not because of the money involved but because it
highlighted the "lack of integrity" in the gene-therapy field.

   "While the Gelsingers fervently hope gene therapy will one day be the means
to cure many of the horrible diseases afflicting so many, they urge that the
road toward this or any medical breakthrough is free of conflicts of interest,
bioethical missteps and inadequate government oversight," lawyers for the family
said in a statement.

   The suit was filed seven weeks ago in Philadelphia Common Pleas Court. It
alleged that Penn and its doctors - and other parties - had been negligent in
the testing of an experimental gene drug to correct an inherited liver disorder
known as ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency.

   Jesse Gelsinger got the gene therapy on Sept. 17, 1999, soon went into a
coma, and died four days later in what doctors believe was a massive revolt by
his immune system against the disarmed cold viruses used to deliver the
corrective genes to his liver.

   He was the 17th patient to get the experimental medicine. All had a mild form
of OTC, which they controlled through strict adherence to a special diet and
drugs. The trial volunteers who preceded Gelsinger did not suffer any apparent
harm.

   In the suit, the Gelsinger family alleged that patient consent forms signed
by Gelsinger and the other volunteers deliberately underplayed the risks of the
trial.

   The suit also alleged that the trial was fraught with conflicts of interest,
including the extent of the financial relationship between James M. Wilson, the
lead Penn researcher, and Genovo Inc., the Sharon Hill biotech company that he
founded and that helped fund the experiment.

   Penn officials described the allegations, made in September, as "only one
version of a very complicated and painful story."

   In a statement released yesterday, Penn lawyers said the university hoped
that the settlement would "bring a small measure of closure" to the Gelsinger
family's loss.

   "It will also enable Penn to concentrate on moving forward with its
aggressive efforts to improve its oversight and monitoring of human-subject
research, an effort to which the university has already devoted substantial
resources of time, energy and money," the statement said.

   An on-site investigation of Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy after
Gelsinger's death prompted federal regulators to forbid the highly regarded
program from continuing with its human experiments until Penn corrected
procedural deficiencies.

   The temporary hold has not been lifted by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. In the meantime, the institute is conducting animal research and
recently got financial backing from SmithKline Beecham P.L.C., the drug company.

   Besides Penn and Wilson, other defendants involved in the settlement were
Children's National Medical Center of Washington; Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia; Mark Batshaw, a physician at the Washington hospital; and Steve
Raper, a physician at Penn.

   Two other defendants - Arthur L. Caplan, head of Penn's medical ethics
program, and William N. Kelley, former dean of the Penn medical school - were
dismissed from the suit prior to the settlement for reasons that lawyers
declined to specify.

   Wilson and other doctors could not be reached for comment yesterday.

   Stephanie Syler, a spokeswoman for Targeted Genetics Corp., of Seattle, which
acquired Genovo in August, said the company took "appropriate action" to protect
its stockholders at the time of the acquisition and that Targeted Genetics would
not be "materially impacted" by the cost of the settlement.

   Gelsinger's death - and the ongoing investigation by the FDA and various
congressional committees - prompted Penn to tighten its monitoring of all
human-subject research. The federal government has also stepped up its oversight
of federally funded experiments that test novel gene therapies on people.

   So far, no gene drug has been approved for use in humans. But scientists at
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, working with Stanford University, have
shown promising results in preliminary trials of gene therapy to correct a type
of hemophilia, a blood disorder.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., in a family photo near the Rocky Balboa
statue at the Spectrum. (Arizona Daily Star)

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             115 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   November 4, 2000, Saturday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: WORLD, Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 307 words

HEADLINE: PENN SETTLES GENE DEATH LAWSUIT

BYLINE: RICK WEISS AND DEBORAH NELSON, THE WASHINGTON POST

BODY:


   The University of Pennsylvania yesterday announced it had reached an
out-of-court settlement with the family of Jesse Gelsinger, the Tucson teen
whose death in a gene therapy experiment 14 months ago prompted a national
reassessment of protections for research volunteers.

   Details of the settlement, which grew out of a civil suit the family had
filed in Pennsylvania state court in September, were not disclosed.

   Gelsinger, who was 18 and had an inherited liver disorder, died Sept. 17,
1999, just four days after getting an experimental infusion of trillions of
genetically engineered viruses. Researchers had hoped the treatment might lead
to a cure for his disease, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, and other
ailments.

   A subsequent investigation by the Food and Drug Administration found numerous
breaches of federal research rules. The study was also widely criticized because
of apparent financial conflicts of interest through which one of the principal
investigators, Penn researcher James Wilson, stood to profit from the experiment
through a biotechnology company he had founded, Genovo of Sharon Hill, Pa.

   Gelsinger was the first person known to have died directly as a result of
gene therapy, an experimental approach that seeks to cure diseases by giving
people new genes. The field has yet to enjoy a proven long-term success after
more than a decade of efforts in thousands of patients.

   In January, as a result of its investigation, the FDA suspended all human
experiments at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, once considered one of
the world's premier gene therapy centers.

   Among its findings was that Gelsinger was given the experimental treatment
even though his blood ammonia levels, a measure of liver failure, were higher
than the highest allowable level deemed safe for the experiment.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             116 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     November 4, 2000 Saturday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: NATION

BODY:

   WHITLEY CITY, KY.

   Wildfires plague Appalachian states

   Across the parched southern Appalachians, firefighters battled wildfires
yesterday that have burned nearly 47,000 acres and have cast such a heavy blue
haze that drivers are turning on their headlights in daylight. No significant
rain has fallen in the area for more than a month, and nearly all the fires have
been blamed on careless campers or arsonists. At least four homes have been
destroyed by fires in Kentucky that sent thick smoke drifting as far north as
Cincinnati, 150 miles away. Kentucky, with nearly 18,000 acres burned this week,
and Tennessee, with about 15,000 acres, were the hardest hit.

   PHILADELPHIA

   Teen's family settles gene therapy suit

   The family of a teenager who died during a gene therapy experiment last year
has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors and the University of
Pennsylvania. Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four
days after starting the experiment. His death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy. Terms of the settlement were not released. Gelsinger
suffered from an inherited, usually fatal disorder that inhibits nitrogen
processing in the body. Gelsinger controlled his condition with drugs and a
low-protein diet. Researchers hoped to correct the problem by injecting into his
liver a cold virus that had been modified to carry a gene that would control the
condition. But 48 hours after the therapy began he slipped into a coma. He was
taken off life support.

   WASHINGTON

   Great Lakes governors given water authority

   Legislation approved yesterday would give governors of the eight Great Lakes
states power over whether their water can be exported. The bill covering
restoration of the Everglades and other water projects across the country was
approved by the House, 312-2. The bill now goes to President Clinton for his
expected signature. The Water Resources Development Act also urged the Great
Lakes states to devise a common standard to use when making decisions about
with- drawing water from the Great Lakes basin. Sen. George V. Voinovich,
Republican of Ohio, was the primary author of the bill.

   NEW YORK

   2 tobacco firms in settlement talks

    - Negotiators for two major tobacco companies are close to reaching
nationwide settlements that would cover all individual smokers' claims against
them, people familiar with the negotiations said last night. Together, the
settlements could be worth $8 billion. Lorillard Tobacco and Liggett Group have
been negotiating with plaintiffs' lawyers for more than a month under U.S.
District Judge Jack Weinstein in Brooklyn. Talks are expected to continue
through the weekend. If the two companies do reach an agreement it could become
a model for other cigarette makers.

   WASHINGTON

   Student loan policy requires death proof

   In a crackdown on borrowers who falsely claim death or disability to get out
of repaying college loans, the Education Department will require stronger proof
of these misfortunes from families, schools or lenders. Federal law allows for
loan discharges if a borrower dies or becomes permanently disabled. Last year
nearly $80 million in loans were discharged because of false claims of death or
disabilities. Effective July 1, families will have to provide an original death
certificate before a loan could be forgiven. The department says it will monitor
disabled borrowers' finances for three years before clearing them of their
loans.

   DENVER

   Cowboy' prison guards charged with brutality

   Seven federal prison guards allegedly belonging to a renegade group called
"the Cowboys" have been charged with kicking inmates, smashing their heads into
walls and mixing human waste into their food. Thursday's federal indictment
listed 52 acts of abuse against at least 20 inmates from 1995 to 1997 at the
maximum-security prison at Florence. William Vance Turner, an inmate who helped
persuade authorities to investigate, asked to be placed in a witness protection
program.

COLUMN: NATION

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2000


                             117 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   NOVEMBER 4, 2000, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: School Settles Gene Therapy Death Case;

Univ. of Pennsylvania had violated many federal research rules

SOURCE: Washington Post

DATELINE: Washington

BODY:
The University of Pennsylvania announced yesterday that it has reached an
out-of-court settlement with the family of Jesse Gelsinger, an Arizona teenager
whose death in a gene therapy experiment 14 months ago prompted a national
reassessment of protections for research volunteers.

    Details of the settlement, which grew out of a civil suit the family had
filed in Pennsylvania state court in September, were not disclosed.

    Gelsinger, who was 18 and had an inherited liver disorder, died Sept. 17,
1999, just four days after getting an experimental infusion of trillions of
genetically engineered viruses. Researchers had hoped the treatment might lead
to a cure for his disease, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, and other
ailments.

    A subsequent investigation by the Food and Drug Administration found
numerous breaches of federal research rules. The study also was widely
criticized because of apparent financial conflicts of interest through which one
of the principal investigators, university researcher James Wilson, stood to
profit from the experiment through a biotechnology company he had founded,
Genovo, of Sharon Hill, Pa.

    Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, said yesterday that he had undergone a
painful change of heart in the year following his son's death -- at first fully
trusting the researchers and holding them blameless, then gradually, as
disclosures of apparent wrongdoing emerged, concluding he had been duped by
scientists who cared more about profits than safety.

    "Dealing with the money end of this (settlement) was probably one of the
most difficult aspects of this, because this experiment was all about money, and
it was never about money for Jesse," Gelsinger said.

    Jesse Gelsinger was the first person known to have died directly as a result
of gene therapy, an experimental approach that seeks to cure diseases by giving
people new genes. The field, which has yet to enjoy a proven long-term success
after more than a decade of efforts in thousands of patients, has been
criticized over the years for moving too quickly from animal studies to humans
-- a trend that has coincided with increasing investment from biotechnology and
pharmaceutical companies.

    Gelsinger's death drew widespread attention to shortcomings in the federal
system for protecting research volunteers. In January, as a result of its
investigation, the FDA suspended all human experiments at Penn's Institute for
Human Gene Therapy. Among its findings:

    -- Four patients who had enrolled ahead of Gelsinger suffered reactions to
the treatment so serious as to require, according to rules Penn had agreed to in
advance, that the study be halted and the FDA notified immediately. But the
agency was not notified at the time nor was the study halted.

    -- Informed consent forms that were supposed to tell volunteers about the
potential risks of participation were changed without the knowledge of the FDA
to eliminate all mention of monkeys that had died after getting a similar
treatment.

    -- Gelsinger himself was given the experimental treatment even though his
blood ammonia levels -- a measure of liver failure -- were higher than the
highest allowable level deemed safe for the experiment. Moreover, that highest
allowable level had previously been raised by the researchers without the
knowledge or permission of the FDA.

    In May the university announced that, rather than comply with all the FDA's
demands for changes, human experiments would no longer be conducted at the
institute and Wilson would limit his studies to animals.



LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2001


                             118 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               November 4, 2000, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1383 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News ServicesWRONGFUL DEATH LAWSUIT; TEEN-AGER; TEENAGER; TEEN;
GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT; RESEARCH; SETTLEMENT; USDA; CROP SUBSIDY FARMERS;
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA; MURDER; CRIME; DEATH PENALTY; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;
EXECUTION; CHINLE, ARIZONA; SCHOOL BUS ACCIDENT; MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA; AIDS
LETTERS; FRAUD PRANK; TYPHOON BEBINCA; PHILIPPINES; DEATH; FATALITY NATURAL
DISASTER; DESTRUCTION; ASSAULT; BEAUTY QUEEN TAJIKISTAN; EARTHQUAKE; MOZAMBIQUE;
FLOODING; CHESS CHAMPION TOURNAMENT; WINNER; ENGLAND; GREAT BRITAIN; IRAN
COMMEMORATIONS; IRAN HOSTAGE CRISIS; ANNIVERSARY

BODY:


NATION

PHILADELPHIA

Family settles lawsuit over gene-therapy death

   The family of a teen-ager who died during a gene therapy experiment last year
has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors and the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death was the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy. Terms of the settlement were not released.

   The lawsuit accused doctors of being "careless, negligent and reckless" in
Gelsinger's treatment.

WASHINGTON

Agriculture Dept. will maintain crop subsidies

   Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman says he has no plans to cut federal crop
subsidies next year, which would decrease if he followed a formula established
in a 1996 farm law.

   The government guarantees farmers a minimum price, known as a "loan rate,"
for crops such as corn, wheat, soybeans, rice and cotton. When market prices are
below the loan rate, as they are now, farmers are paid the difference between
the loan rate and the market price.

   "Unless market conditions improve dramatically in the coming weeks and
commodity prices go up, I intend to use my full statutory authority to keep loan
rates at their maximum levels," Glickman said in a letter to Senate Minority
Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., that the Agriculture Department released Friday.

   Farmers are expected to receive $ 7.6 billion in such subsidies this year, up
from $ 5.9 billion last year and $ 1.8 billion in 1998.

COLUMBIA, S.C.

Man who killed principal in holdup is executed

   A man twice sentenced to die for robbing and killing a principal on the steps
of an elementary school was executed by lethal injection Friday after the
governor and the U.S. Supreme Court turned down last-ditch appeals.

   Kevin Dean Young, 32, and two other men were convicted of taking $ 67 from
Dennis Hepler, 35, as he walked out of school in August 1988. Young's lawyers
conceded he shot Helper but said another man may have fired the fa tal shot.

   Gov. Jim Hodges refused Friday to commute the death sentence. Later in the
day, the Supreme Court, unanimously and without comment, denied a stay of
execution. The execution was South Carolina's first this year.

CHINLE, Ariz.

School bus overturns, killing one person

   A bus carrying high school students to a band competition drove off a road
Friday and flipped over, killing one person and critically injuring two others,
Navajo police said.

   The Chinle Unified School District Bus, which was going to Las Vegas, had 37
people on board when it drove off Highway 191 on the Navajo Reservation. No
other vehicles were involved, police said.

   He said there was a heavy morning fog at the time of the crash. A chape rone,
Vestina Tso, 20, was killed.

   One person was flown to a hospital in Flagstaff and another to a hospital in
Albuquerque, police said. The others were taken to hospitals in Chinle and
Ganado for minor injuries. Chinle is about 229 miles northeast of Phoenix.

MINNEAPOLIS

Phony letters tell people they have AIDS virus

   Dozens of people in Minneapolis have been sent phony, official-looking
letters telling them they are infected with the AIDS virus.

   Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton's name and City Hall address appear as the sender
on the envelopes, but it is unclear who sent them or why. About two dozen people
sent their letters to her or called for an explanation. Belton turned the
letters over to federal investigators.

   The envelopes had Florida postmarks and also showed return addresses on the
back for a Target store in Coral Springs, Fla., and Target Corp. headquarters in
Minneapolis. A Target spokeswoman said the company was not involved and is
investigating.

=====

WORLD

RUSSIA

Weather shuts down efforts at sunken sub

   Divers tried to cut their way into living quarters of the sunken Kursk
nuclear submarine Friday, but rising winds and snow forced a temporary halt to
their efforts to recover bodies, a navy official said.

   Wind gusting to 45 mph on the Barents Sea above the Arctic Circle made
continued operations dangerous, said Igor Babenko, head of the Northern Fleet's
press center. He said divers risk being jerked about on tethers leading to their
mother ship, Regalia.

   Earlier Friday, Russian and Norwegian divers moved their search for bodies
toward less damaged areas of the vessel after they were unable to enter a
shattered forward compartment.

RUSSIA

Attack on beauty queen draws 11-year sentence

   A businessman convicted of ordering a disfiguring acid attack on a beauty
queen who rebuffed his advances was sentenced to 11 years in prison Friday,
reports said.

   Ruben Grigoryan hired two men to throw acid at Eleonora Kondratyuk in
September 1999 in the southern town of Sochi on the Black Sea, Russia's ORT
government television said.

   Kondratyuk, a model and beauty pageant winner, was blinded and scarred by the
attack. She has undergone several operations, ORT said.

The men who carried out the attack have not been found.

PHILIPPINES

At least 26 are dead in wake of Typhoon Bebinca

   Typhoon Bebinca barreled through the northern Philippines on Friday, killing
at least 26 people, triggering landslides and flooding many areas, officials and
radio reports said.

   Schools, government offices and many shops and banks were closed. Packing
winds of up to 95 mph, the storm moved on toward southern China, the weather
bureau said.

IRAN

6,000 commemorate seizure of U.S. embassy

   With the traditional chants of "Death to America!" Iranians commemorated the
anniversary of the U.S. Embassy seizure Friday, but in much smaller numbers than
in previous years.

   The small size of the crowd in front of the embassy - about 6,000 instead of
the tens of the thousands seen at the annual rally in the mid-1990s - was seen
as evidence of a growing desire among Iranians for better ties with the outside
world. Some of the crowd were students b rought to the scene on buses.

   The United States broke diplomatic relations with Iran after militant
students stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran on Nov. 4, 1979, and held 52
Americans hostage for 444 days.

BRITAIN

Kramnik beats Kasparov for chess championship

   Chess has a new world champion after 15 years of domination by Garry
Kasparov, who had fought off five previous challengers with his bold, brilliant
moves and intimidating stares.

   Vladimir Kramnik, 25, lifted the crown Thursday from his former mentor and
fellow Russian with a title-clinching draw in game 15 of their match.

   Kasparov, 37, who had puzzled spectators with his untypically tentative play,
blamed his defeat on poor preparation.

   Thursday's play, which lasted 38 moves, was the 13th draw in 15 games. The
difference in the match was that Kramnik won twice, and Kasparov didn't win any.


MOZAMBIQUE

Many victims of floods still are without shelter

   Tens of thousands of Mozambicans driven from their homes months ago by
massive flooding are still homeless, Mozambique's former first lady said Friday.

   Graca Machel, the widow of former Mozambican President Samora Machel and now
the wife of former South African president Nelson Mandela, said many displaced
families are living under nothing but sheets of plastic.

   International donors pledged more than $ 450 million to rebuild southern
Mozambique after the floods, but Machel said at a dinner for foreign
correspondents in neighboring South Africa that less than a third of that money
has made it into the country.

TAJIKISTAN

17,000 are homeless following earthquake

   An earthquake in mountainous southern Tajikistan has left 17,000 people
homeless, officials said Friday. No casualties were reported from the quake
Tuesday in the Farhor region. But more than 800 buildings were damaged, leaving
more than 17,000 people without shelter, Prime Minister Akil Akilov's press
service said.

   The magnitude 4.5 quake was centered in the village of Khasanov, 65 miles
southeast of Tajikstan's capital of Dushanbe, geologists said. The damage was
extensive partly because it hit an area undermined by illegal oil extraction,
geologists told government officials Friday.

NOTES:
NATION/WORLD

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Mason Taylor (left), a
supporter of Al Gore, puts in his view as Ron Lansdell (center), who backs Ralph
Nader, talks with another man after a Green Party rally Thursday in Seattle.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             119 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 November 4, 2000, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1389 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News ServicesWRONGFUL DEATH LAWSUIT; TEEN-AGER; TEENAGER; TEEN;
GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENT; RESEARCH; SETTLEMENT; USDA; CROP SUBSIDY FARMERS;
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA; MURDER; CRIME; DEATH PENALTY; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;
EXECUTION; CHINLE, ARIZONA; SCHOOL BUS ACCIDENT; MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA; AIDS
LETTERS; FRAUD PRANK; TYPHOON BEBINCA; PHILIPPINES; DEATH; FATALITY NATURAL
DISASTER; DESTRUCTION; ASSAULT; BEAUTY QUEEN TAJIKISTAN; EARTHQUAKE; MOZAMBIQUE;
FLOODING; CHESS CHAMPION TOURNAMENT; WINNER; ENGLAND; GREAT BRITAIN; IRAN
COMMEMORATIONS; IRAN HOSTAGE CRISIS; ANNIVERSARY

BODY:


NATION

PHILADELPHIA

Family settles lawsuit over gene-therapy death

   The family of a teen-ager who died during a gene therapy experiment last year
has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors and the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death was the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy. Terms of the settlement were not released.

   The lawsuit accused doctors of being "careless, negligent and reckless" in
Gelsinger's treatment.

WASHINGTON

Agriculture Dept. will maintain crop subsidies

   Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman says he has no plans to cut federal crop
subsidies next year, which would decrease if he followed a formula established
in a 1996 farm law.

   The government guarantees farmers a minimum price, known as a "loan rate,"
for crops such as corn, wheat, soybeans, rice and cotton. When market prices are
below the loan rate, as they are now, farmers are paid the difference between
the loan rate and the market price.

   "Unless market conditions improve dramatically in the coming weeks and
commodity prices go up, I intend to use my full statutory authority to keep loan
rates at their maximum levels," Glickman said in a letter to Senate Minority
Leader Tom Daschle, D-S.D., that the Agriculture Department released Friday.

   Farmers are expected to receive $ 7.6 billion in such subsidies this year, up
from $ 5.9 billion last year and $ 1.8 billion in 1998.

COLUMBIA, S.C.

Man who killed principal in holdup is executed

   A man twice sentenced to die for robbing and killing a principal on the steps
of an elementary school was executed by lethal injection Friday after the
governor and the U.S. Supreme Court turned down last-ditch appeals.

   Kevin Dean Young, 32, and two other men were convicted of taking $ 67 from
Dennis Hepler, 35, as he walked out of school in August 1988. Young's lawyers
conceded he shot Helper, but said another man may have fired the f atal shot.

   Gov. Jim Hodges refused Friday to commute the death sentence. Later in the
day, the Supreme Court, unanimously and without comment, denied a stay of
execution. The execution was South Carolina's first this year.

CHINLE, Ariz.

School bus overturns, killing one person

   A bus carrying high school students to a band competition drove off a road
Friday and flipped over, killing one person and critically injuring two others,
Navajo police said.

   The Chinle Unified School District Bus, which was going to Las Vegas, had 37
people on board when it drove off Highway 191 on the Navajo Reservation. No
other vehicles were involved, police said.

   He said there was a heavy morning fog at the time of the crash. A chape rone,
Vestina Tso, 20, was killed.

   One person was flown to a hospital in Flagstaff and another to a hospital in
Albuquerque, police said. The others were taken to hospitals in Chinle and
Ganado for minor injuries. Chinle is about 229 miles northeast of Phoenix.

MINNEAPOLIS

Phony letters tell people they have AIDS virus

   Dozens of people in Minneapolis have been sent phony, official-looking
letters telling them they are infected with the AIDS virus.

   Mayor Sharon Sayles Belton's name and City Hall address appear as the sender
on the envelopes, but it is unclear who sent them or why. About two dozen people
sent their letters to her or called for an explanation. Belton turned the
letters over to federal investigators.

   The envelopes had Florida postmarks and also showed return addresses on the
back for a Target store in Coral Springs, Fla., and Target Corp. headquarters in
Minneapolis. A Target spokeswoman said the company was not involved and is
investigating.

==========

WORLD

RUSSIA

Weather shuts down efforts at sunken sub

   Divers tried to cut their way into living quarters of the sunken Kursk
nuclear submarine Friday, but rising winds and snow forced a temporary halt to
their efforts to recover bodies, a navy official said.

   Wind gusting to 45 mph on the Barents Sea above the Arctic Circle made
continued operations dangerous, said Igor Babenko, head of the Northern Fleet's
press center. He said divers risk being jerked about on tethers leading to their
mother ship, Regalia.

   Earlier Friday, Russian and Norwegian divers moved their search for bodies
toward less damaged areas of the vessel after they were unable to enter a
shattered forward compartment.

RUSSIA

Attack on beauty queen draws 11-year sentence

   A businessman convicted of ordering a disfiguring acid attack on a beauty
queen who rebuffed his advances was sentenced to 11 years in prison Friday,
reports said.

   Ruben Grigoryan hired two men to throw acid at Eleonora Kondratyuk in
September 1999 in the southern town of Sochi on the Black Sea, Russia's ORT
government television said.

   Kondratyuk, a model and beauty pageant winner, was blinded and scarred by the
attack. She has undergone several operations, ORT said.

The men who carried out the attack have not been found.

PHILIPPINES

At least 26 are dead in wake of Typhoon Bebinca

   Typhoon Bebinca barreled through the northern Philippines on Friday, killing
at least 26 people, triggering landslides and flooding many areas, officials and
radio reports said.

   Schools, government offices and many shops and banks were closed. Packing
winds of up to 95 mph, the storm moved on toward southern China, the weather
bureau said.

IRAN

6,000 commemorate seizure of U.S. embassy

   With the traditional chants of "Death to America!" Iranians commemorated the
anniversary of the U.S. Embassy seizure Friday, but in much smaller numbers than
in previous years.

   The small size of the crowd in front of the embassy - about 6,000 instead of
the tens of the thousands seen at the annual rally in the mid-1990s - was seen
as evidence of a growing desire among Iranians for better ties with the outside
world. Some of the crowd were students b rought to the scene on buses.

   The United States broke diplomatic relations with Iran after militant
students stormed the U.S. Embassy in Tehran on Nov. 4, 1979, and held 52
Americans hostage for 444 days.

TURKEY

Bloody prison riot ends as inmates free hostages

   Gang members released 26 prison officials and guards Friday, ending a two-day
prison riot that left five inmates dead, officials said.

   Gang leader Nuri Ergin surrendered a gun after talks with regional Gov. Ayhan
Cevik early Friday, and three hostages were released by the prisoners. The
prison is near the Aegean port city of Izmir.

   Twenty-three other hostages were freed later after Ergin was transferred to
Bilecik prison, about 150 miles north, Cevik was quoted by the Anatolia news
agency as saying.

   Prisons in Turkey are usually overcrowded, guards are poorly paid, and
rioting and hostage taking are not uncommon.

MOZAMBIQUE

Many victims of floods still are without shelter

   Tens of thousands of Mozambicans driven from their homes months ago by
massive flooding are still homeless, Mozambique's former first lady said Friday.

   Graca Machel, the widow of former Mozambican president Samora Machel and now
the wife of former South African president Nelson Mandela, said many displaced
families are living under nothing but sheets of plastic.

   International donors pledged more than $ 450 million to rebuild southern
Mozambique after the floods, but Machel said at a dinner for foreign
correspondents in neighboring South Africa that less than a third of that money
has made it into the country.

TAJIKISTAN

17,000 are homeless following earthquake

   An earthquake in mountainous southern Tajikistan has left 17,000 people
homeless, officials said Friday.

   No casualties were reported from the quake Tuesday in the Farhor region.  But
more than 800 buildings were damaged, leaving more than 17,000 people without
shelter, Prime Minister Akil Akilov's press service said.

   The magnitude 4.5 quake was centered in the village of Khasanov, 65 miles
southeast of Tajikstan's capital of Dushanbe, geologists said. The damage was
extensive partly because it hit an area undermined by illegal oil extraction,
geologists told government officials Friday.

NOTES:
NATION/WORLD

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Mason Taylor (left), a
supporter of Al Gore, puts in his view as Ron Lansdell (center), who backs Ralph
Nader, talks with another man after a Green Party rally Thursday in Seattle.

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000


                             120 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           November 4, 2000 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: News Briefs

BODY:

   Hostage anniversary   fizzles in Tehran   TEHRAN, Iran - With the traditional
chants of "Death to America!" Iranians commemorated the 21st anniversary of the
U.S. Embassy seizure yesterday, but in much smaller numbers than in previous
years.

    The small size of the crowd in front of the embassy - about 6,000 instead of
the tens of the thousands seen at the annual rally in the mid-1990s - was seen
as proof of a growing desire among Iranians for better ties with the outside
world. Some of the crowd were bused-in students.

    The United States broke diplomatic relations with Iran after militant
students stormed the U.S. Embassy on Nov. 4, 1979, and held 52 Americans hostage
for 444 days.

    Prison guards charged

     with torturing inmates

    DENVER - Seven federal prison guards allegedly belonging to a renegade group
called "The Cowboys" have been charged with kicking inmates, smashing their
heads into walls and mixing human waste into their food.

    The federal indictment said one handcuffed inmate was choked until his eyes
bulged, and another man's head was slammed repeatedly into a wall.

    Altogether, the indictment listed 52 acts of abuse against at least 20
inmates in 1995 to 1997 at the maximum- security prison at Florence, 95 miles
south of Denver.

    The action is part of a two-year investigation into the Cowboys, who
authorities say patrolled the prison in a reign of terror. In all, 10 guards
have been indicted and the investigation is continuing.

    Peruvian spymaster's

    riches investigated

    LIMA, Peru - The secret world of Peru's former spy chief began to unravel
yesterday after the government launched a probe into allegations that he
laundered some $50 million through Swiss banks, and he lost a key ally when the
attorney general resigned.

    As the public clamor for ex-spy chief Vladimiro Montesinos's capture grew,
President Alberto Fujimori announced yesterday that an arrest order had gone out
for the man who was once his closest aide.

    Fujimori said he has issued orders to prevent Montesinos' escape from the
country by land, sea or air. He pledged that an investigation would clear up the
"criminal deposit" into the Swiss bank accounts.

    Montesinos was long considered as powerful as the president here. He has
been in hiding since his return from a failed asylum bid in Panama, and he is
rumored to be protected by his military allies.

    Fujimori said he had spoken once with Montesinos by phone since the ex-spy
chief's return to Peru on Oct. 23 but that Montesinos refused to reveal his
location. He said the ex-spy chief is believed to be accompanied by two personal
security guards, a lawyer and a telecommunications expert.

    Penn settles lawsuit

     on fatal gene experiment

    PHILADELPHIA - The family of a teenager who died during a gene therapy
experiment last year has settled a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors
and the University of Pennsylvania.

    Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy.

    Terms of the settlement were not released. Penn released a statement
yesterday saying it hopes the deal "will enable the Gelsingers to bring a small
measure of closure to their loss." A call placed to the Gelsinger home in
Arizona was not immediately returned yesterday.

    Gelsinger suffered from an inherited disorder that inhibits nitrogen
processing in the body. The disorder usually kills boys at a young age, but
Gelsinger controlled his condition with drugs and a low-protein diet.

    Researchers hoped to correct the problem by injecting into his liver a cold
virus that had been modified to carry a gene that would control the condition.
But 24 hours after the therapy began, his condition deteriorated. After two
days, he slipped into a coma. He eventually was taken off life support.

    The lawsuit accused doctors of being "careless, negligent and reckless" in
Gelsinger's treatment. It did not specify an amount of damages being sought. The
university had said Gelsinger's medical care was appropriate and that he was
fully aware of the risks involved with the therapy.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             121 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   November 4, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 953 words

HEADLINE: Penn Settles Gene Therapy Suit; University Pays Undisclosed Sum to
Family of Teen Who Died

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:



   The University of Pennsylvania announced yesterday that it had reached an
out-of-court settlement with the family of Jesse Gelsinger, the Tucson teenager
whose death in a gene therapy experiment 14 months ago prompted a national
reassessment of protections for research volunteers.

   Details of the settlement, which grew out of a civil suit the family filed in
a Pennsylvania state court in September, were not disclosed.

   Gelsinger, who was 18 and had an inherited liver disorder, died Sept. 17,
1999, just four days after getting an experimental infusion of trillions of
genetically engineered viruses. Researchers had hoped the treatment might lead
to a cure for his disease, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, and other
ailments.

   A subsequent investigation by the Food and Drug Administration found numerous
breaches of federal research rules. The study was also widely criticized because
of apparent financial conflicts of interest through which one of the principal
investigators, Penn researcher James Wilson, stood to profit from the experiment
through a biotechnology company he had founded, Genovo of Sharon Hill, Pa.

   Paul Gelsinger, Jesse's father, said yesterday he had undergone a painful
change of heart in the year after his son's death, at first fully trusting the
researchers and holding them blameless and then gradually, as disclosures of
apparent wrongdoing emerged, concluding that he had been duped by scientists who
cared more about profits than safety.

   "Dealing with the money end of this [settlement] was probably one of the most
difficult aspects of this because this experiment was all about money, and it
was never about money for Jesse," Gelsinger said.

   Gelsinger was the first person known to have died directly as a result of
gene therapy, an experimental approach that seeks to cure diseases by giving
people new genes. The field, which has yet to enjoy a proven long-term success
after more than a decade of efforts in thousands of patients, has been
criticized over the years for moving too quickly from animal studies to
humans--a trend that has coincided with increasing investment from biotechnology
and pharmaceutical companies.

   Gelsinger's death drew widespread attention to shortcomings in the federal
system for protecting research volunteers. It prompted several congressional
hearings and various ongoing efforts by the FDA, the National Institutes of
Health and the Department of Health and Human Services to improve human subject
protections.

   In January, as a result of its investigation, the FDA suspended all human
experiments at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, once considered one of
the world's premier gene therapy centers. Among its findings:


   * Four patients who had enrolled ahead of Gelsinger suffered reactions to the
treatment so serious as to require, according to rules Penn had agreed to in
advance, that the study be halted and the FDA notified immediately. But the
agency was not notified at the time nor was the study halted.


   * Informed consent forms that were supposed to tell volunteers about the
potential risks of participation were changed without the knowledge of the FDA
to eliminate all mention of monkeys that had died after getting a similar
treatment.


   * Gelsinger was given the experimental treatment even though his blood
ammonia levels--a measure of liver failure--were higher than the highest
allowable level deemed safe for the experiment. Moreover, that highest allowable
level had previously been raised by the researchers without the knowledge or
permission of the FDA.

   In May, the university announced that, rather than comply with all of the
FDA's demands for changes, human experiments would no longer be conducted at the
institute and Wilson would limit his studies to animals. But even that level of
work came into question in July, when FDA investigators announced they had
uncovered serious lapses in the institute's animal research as well.

   Parties to yesterday's settlement include Penn, Genovo, Wilson and his
co-workers Mark L. Batshaw and Steven E. Raper, and those two colleagues'
institutions, Children's National Medical Center of Washington and Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, respectively.

   The Gelsinger family released two other defendants from the suit: Penn
bioethicist Arthur Caplan, who had provided controversial advice that led to the
experiment's focus on relatively healthy adults such as Gelsinger instead of
critically ill newborns as originally planned, and former Penn medical dean
William Kelley, who held key patents on the gene therapy technique.

   Paul Gelsinger said he planned to use some of the settlement money to fund
research on Jesse's disease and to foster public awareness of the need to
protect human subjects. He said he hoped to do that through groups such as the
National Organization for Rare Disorders in New Fairfield, Conn., and Citizens
for Responsible Care & Research, an advocacy group in New York City.

   In a brief statement, Penn said the settlement will "enable Penn to
concentrate on moving forward with its aggressive efforts to improve its
oversight and monitoring of human subject research, an effort to which the
university has already devoted substantial resources of time, energy, and
money."

   The university also said it hoped the agreement would "enable the Gelsingers
to bring a small measure of closure to their loss."

   Gelsinger said closure was unlikely. "There's never really any satisfaction
to be had," he said. But he said he was gratified that in the aftermath of
Jesse's death, some wheels of change had begun to turn.

   "I am just amazed at the impact that my boy has had," he said.


LOAD-DATE: November 04, 2000


                             122 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    November 3, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C5

LENGTH: 174 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
IMPROVED DRUG SALES LIFT GENZYME

BYLINE: BY RONALD ROSENBERG

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. shares rose $6.75 to $80 after Salomon Smith Barney raised its
stock rating to a "buy," from an "outperform," citing rising sales of Renagel, a
dialysis drug. The Cambridge biotech company, whose stock has climbed 80 percent
this year, said it expects Renagel to reach $500 million in revenues in five
years. The drug was developed by GelTex Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Waltham, which
Genzyme is in the process of acquiring. Separately, Genzyme said it was told by
the Food and Drug Administration that it can skip a December medical advisory
committee meeting to review its proposed enzyme replacement treatment for
Fabry's disease, called Fabrazyme. The company hailed the decision as a vote of
confidence and said the drug is on track to gain FDA approval in January.
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which is racing to get a similar drug, called
Replagal, approved by the FDA said yesterday that it does not expect to go
through an advisory panel meeting, either. It also hopes for final FDA approval
in January.


LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2000


                             123 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   November 02, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFESTYLES, Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: ON THE CALENDAR

BODY:


   Temple Sinai Singers and soloist Susan Wehle will perform at the
Builders/Godparents Brunch to be given by Buffalo Chapter, Hadassah, Sunday at
11:30 a.m. in Transit Valley Country Club. Suzie Solender will be hostess at the
brunch which honors her mother, the late Jeannette Rivo, and her daughter, Lisa
Solender Flick. Guests will be major donors to the Hadassah Medical Organization
Campaign, proceeds of which will support development of gene therapy in Hadassah
hospitals in Jerusalem.

   The Sabra and Shalom groups will sponsor a trip to Toronto, Ont., Nov. 9 to
view the Matisse collection at the Art Gallery of Ontario. Mickey Savit and
Elaine Schweitzer are taking reservations. Blue Spruce TWIG, a support group for
Children's Hospital, will sponsor a series of fashion shows Sunday in the
Buffalo/Niagara Marriott. The American Girls Collection will be shown at 10
a.m., 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. Kathleen Leighton of WKBW-TV, and Karen Vanee and Joe
Chille of WJYE-FM, will be commentators. Fashions worn by American Girls
characters, representing styles from the Colonial period to the present, will be
featured. A Chinese auction and boutique will be included. Proceeds will benefit
the hospital. Maureen S. DeRose will receive the St. Louise de Marillac Award at
the annual fall luncheon of Marillac Guild of Sisters Hospital Tuesday in
Fanny's restaurant. Carol Roth is chairwoman of the event, which will include an
auction and will benefit the hospital's special care nursery. DeRose, a member
of the Sisters Hospital Foundation board of directors, was chairwoman of the
foundation's annual Gala in 1995 and 1996 and organized Gala 2000, which raised
$ 55,000 for the special care nursery expansion. She also has worked on
fund-raising for the Buffalo Zoo, Elmwood Franklin School and Buffalo Seminary.
James Spedding, a volunteer since 1995, will receive the guild's Spirit Award.
Romulus Women's Auxiliary will have a Chinese auction after dinner at 6:30 p.m.
today in Romulus clubrooms. Sandy Preciuso and Bernie Aja will be hostesses.
Members will collect children's books for Sedita School 38.

   Elizabeth Wilson and Mary Therese Kinder were chairwomen of a card party
given by Women's Activities Association of Park Country Club of Buffalo
preceding a luncheon today in the clubhouse. Canned goods to be given to the
needy at Thanksgiving were collected. Four retired crossing guards will be
honored by Buffalo Crossing Guard Association at a party today at 6 p.m. in
Nortel Restaurant. Mario Galente will be master of ceremonies. William Koch, a
preservationist, will speak on "Stained Glass Windows in City Churches" at a
meeting of Mothers Club at Central Park United Methodist Church Friday after a
luncheon in the church hall. Bonita Martin is chairwomen. The Rev. Charles G.
Biegner Jr., pastor of Resurrection Lutheran Church, Buffalo, and Habitat for
Humanity will receive the Samaritan Awards of Samaritan Pastoral Counseling
Center of the Niagara Frontier at the organization's Crystal Ball 2000 Friday at
6 p.m. in Salvatore's Italian Gardens. Board members Ronald and Margaret Talboys
will accept the Habitat award from Bishop Lee Miller of Upstate New York Synod,
Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, and the Rev. Dr. John Brunner, president
of the Lutheran Church Missouri Synod Eastern District. Proceeds will be used to
finance counseling for needy clients. Sandy Beach Yacht Club Women's
Organization will have a harvest dinner and awards program Saturday, starting
with cocktails at 6 p.m. in the clubhouse. Kate Rozicki and Mary Moreland are
taking reservations.

   Alumnae Chapter of Alpha Sigma Alpha Sorority will celebrate Founders Day at
a luncheon Saturday in Country Club of Buffalo. Jackie Lo Russo is chairwoman.
St. Simon Episcopal Church will sponsor a bazaar and roast beef dinner Saturday
in the church, 200 Cazenovia St. The bazaar will be held from 10 a.m. to 7 p.m.
and the family style dinner will be served from 4 to 7 p.m. Katharine Pratt
Horton Buffalo Chapter, National Society, Daughters of the American Revolution,
will be host in its Chapter House Monday at noon to Williams Mills Chapter for a
joint Good Citizens Award program. Gretchen Zollendeck is chairwoman and
hostesses will be Linda Priebe and Andrea Abels. Jo Ellen Burns will present a
program on seasonal and transitional decorating when Clarence Women's Club meets
Monday at 7:30 p.m. in Clarence Town Park Clubhouse. Alice Putnam Chapter,
Colonial Dames of the Seventeenth Century, will have a luncheon Tuesday at 11:45
a.m. in Best Western Inn, Batavia. Helen Taylor, state president, will speak.
Adrienne Tworek-Gryta will be hostess at a luncheon for Wednesday Morning
Musiciale Wednesday in North Presbyterian Church, Williamsville. A program will
be presented by organist Marlene Harrington, oboist Zenia Ohsiek; flutist
Carolyn Whaley; pianists Leah Peer and Dorothy Linzey. A Christmas ornament
workshop will be conducted after a meeting of Buffalo Chapter, Embroiderers'
Guild of America, Wednesday at 9:30 a.m. in North Presbyterian Church,
Williamsville. Mary D. Touli, senior youth services coordinator for the Town of
Amherst, will speak on "Town of Amherst Youth: Student Attitudes and Behavior"
at a meeting of United Methodist Women of Christ United Methodist Church,
Snyder, Nov. 9 at 7 p.m. in the church hall. The World Thank Offering will be
collected. Jewish Women International of Greater Buffalo will have its annual
Chai Luncheon Sunday at 12:30 p.m. at 120 Meyer Road, Amherst. Evelyn Berman,
luncheon chairwoman, will be assisted by Hilda Wolchok and Sally Gordon.
Proceeds will benefit the organization's residential treatment center for
children in Jerusalem.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2000


                             124 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   November 2, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 10D

LENGTH: 477 words

HEADLINE: Health reform is in the genes You'll soon see results, genome
researcher says

BYLINE: Marilyn Elias

DATELINE:  CHICAGO

BODY:

   CHICAGO -- Americans will reap untold benefits from a radical
shift in health care that sounds like science fiction but is only
several years away, says Francis Collins, director of the Human
Genome Research Institute.

   Cracking the human genetic code last summer catapulted us into
an era of routinely predicting and preventing diseases, and treating
patients with ultra-potent "designer" drugs tailored to their
own genes, he told the American Academy of Pediatrics meeting
this week.

   "It's going to have a profound impact on the practice of medicine
and probably nowhere more so than in pediatrics," Collins said.
"Virtually all diseases have a genetic component." Having the
genome "will accelerate finding genes for varied diseases."


   People's risks for certain disorders may be identified in childhood.
"It's clear we're going to uncover the hereditary factors involved
in obesity in the next five or six years," he said. Type I (juvenile)
diabetes is another good bet for early detection of high genetic
risk and possibly heading off the disease, Collins said.

   A new study on response to Albuterol, a common asthma drug, shows
how knowing a person's genetic "fingerprint" could improve treatment.

   Variability in response to the drug was traced to inherited differences
in a key receptor for Albuterol. If the gene is present, the drug
can't bind to the receptor, so it's not as effective in opening
airways. "Maybe before prescribing a drug like Albuterol, you'd
want to know (if someone has) the gene," Collins said.

   More than a dozen new drugs are in clinical trials for cystic
fibrosis as a result of the gene's discovery, he says.

   By 2010, there will be predictive genetic tests available for
at least 10 disorders and treatments to lower risks for several
conditions, Collins said.

   By 2020, he sees "gene-based designer drugs for diabetes and
hypertension," along with cancer therapies "targeted to the
molecular fingerprint of the tumor." Twenty years from now, doctors
will order genotype tests on patients before writing prescriptions,
he predicts.

   By 2030, "individualized preventive medicine," keyed to a person's
genetic profile, will be routine. "Children probably will be
tested at birth. Gene therapy and gene-based drug therapy will
be available."

   The scary part of all this: "You don't get to choose the DNA
you inherit" and, Collins says, no national law bars gene-based
discrimination in health insurance or the workplace.

   At least two dozen states have passed "in some instances pretty
good legislation," and President Clinton recently issued an executive
order to forbid using genetic information in federal jobs.

   There's bipartisan support for a national protective law, Collins
says, but the issue has been shunted aside in favor of higher
priorities.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, B/W, Forrest MacCormack for USA TODAY; Collins: Tests will be
developed soon to predict at least 10 disorders.

LOAD-DATE: November 02, 2000


                             125 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    October 31, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A11; SCHOOLS & LEARNING

LENGTH: 1085 words

HEADLINE: Philosophy's Resurgence; Not Just for Theorists Anymore, Courses Now
Contemplate Real-Life Issues Raised by Technology and Genetics

BYLINE: Valerie Strauss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Here's what many folks think when they hear the word "philosophy": Professors
perched high in their towers, pondering such things as realism and whether we
can infer naturalism from skepticism (maybe yes, maybe no).

   But consider these images: Philosophers counseling clients about moral
dilemmas. Latte sippers chatting in philosophy cafes. A Microsoft engineer
crediting his philosophy education for his success. A wrongful death lawsuit
filed against an ethicist.

   Philosophy, that abstruse academic discipline, is enjoying a popular
renaissance as revolutions in technology and genetics raise fundamental
questions about the nature of our life in the new millennium.

   There used to be "a widespread sense that philosophy had become very detached
from real-world problems," said Bill Galston, director of the Institute for
Philosophy and Public Policy at the University of Maryland at College Park.

   Not anymore. In a movement that would have pleased Socrates, who viewed
philosophy as essential to public life, scholars are trying to apply the wisdom
of the great thinkers to today's issues. And courses marrying technology and
philosophy are a current favorite of many students.

   Daniel Rothbart, a philosophy professor at George Mason University, teaches a
junior-level philosophy of science course in which 80 percent of the students
are computer science majors. John Arz, a professor of management science at
George Washington University, teaches a number of philosophy/technology courses.
"What people don't realize is that Socrates, Aristotle and Plato had a lot to
say that is of value to information systems," Arz said.

   Though traditionalists view "applied philosophy" as a distant cousin of the
real thing, it is where the action is. When the University of Maryland institute
was founded in 1976, it was one of the first such centers in the country. Now
there are dozens of them, dealing with debates over medical and scientific
experimentation, gene therapy, abortion and assisted suicide. Their scholars
write papers, give speeches, lobby politicians and confer with business
executives.

   "The whole business about philosophy and public policy is booming," said R.
Paul Churchill, head of the GWU philosophy department. Churchill recently
participated in a symposium on NATO peacekeeping in Bosnia, arguing that peace
should be seen in terms of justice and reconciliation, and not as simply the
absence of war.

   Galston teaches a University of Maryland graduate course called the Moral
Dimensions of Public Policy. The class studies questions that revolve around
honesty and lying.

   The Center of Bioethics at the University of Pennsylvania opened in 1994 with
one staff member; now it has 14. It started out without a master's program and
now has 100 students working toward master's degrees.

   "Bioethics has become the way Americans can talk to one another about ethical
and value issues," said Arthur Caplan, the center's director. "Cloning. What do
we think of Dr. Kevorkian? Who should own your genes? Is it all right to dig up
Abraham Lincoln and see if he had a genetic disease? . . . I actually believe
that bioethics has become America's moral tale."

   Caplan is involved in a morality play of his own, having been named in a
lawsuit filed against the University of Pennsylvania by the family of an
18-year-old man who died as part of a genetic experiment. Caplan had discussed
the case with the patient's doctors.

   Though traditional philosophy courses have been cut back at some colleges,
the number of students studying the subject through other departments--religion,
political science, literature--has risen dramatically. The number of philosophy
majors also has increased in recent years after declining in the 1980s and early
1990s, and they are winding up in many professions.

   Paul Stieglipz is a 26-year-old GMU senior majoring in philosophy and Russian
and planning to become a Marine Corps officer. The reasoning skills he has
learned from studying the great thinkers is good preparation for a military
career, he said. "You need a firm basis for your beliefs. Philosophy really
helped me with that."

   John Mueller, 31, a software test engineer for Microsoft Corp., was a
philosophy major at GWU. Because of the logic he learned in philosophy classes,
he said, "I can go through a computer program and think about, at each step,
what are the assumptions and expectations for this function or for this
procedure."

   The subject also is being studied at more high schools. In Philadelphia, for
example, about a dozen high schools have recently started offering courses in
bioethics. At Walter Johnson High School in Bethesda, teacher Carrie D'Amour
last year started the equivalent of Philosophy 101.

   "It's perfect for 11th- and 12th-graders who are trying to map out who they
are and what they believe in," she said.

   The resurgence of philosophy also can be seen in the bestseller list, which
includes philosophy books such as "Sophie's World," by Jostein Gaarder, and
"Plato, Not Prozac!," by Lou Marinoff.

   The emergence of the philosophy counseling movement has horrified many
traditional philosophers as well as psychotherapists, who say that people in
need of mental therapy should seek out professional help.

   But the trend is growing, led by Marinoff, a philosophy professor and
counselor at City College of New York, which this fall became the first college
in the country to offer philosophy counseling at its student Wellness Center.
There are about 100 such licensed counselors in the country, helping
clients--many of whom feel that traditional therapy failed them--sort out their
feelings about a job, a marriage, the loss of a loved one and other life issues.

   "The secularization of America has left many people in a moral vacuum," said
Marinoff, who counsels clients by trying to find a philosopher or philosophic
tradition that offers wisdom for their particular problem. "If you don't belong
to an organized religion, how do you develop morals? People need wisdom that can
be distilled for use but not watered down to where it is useless. That is what
we are able to provide."

   Those who prefer to chat in groups can visit one of the "philo cafes"
sprouting up in cities around the world, including New York, Los Angeles and San
Francisco. At the Hong Kong Philosophy Cafe, monthly discussion topics have
included "Can sports be an alternative to religion?" and "What makes work
meaningful?" and even "Marriage--what for?"

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2000


                             126 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                  OCTOBER 30, 2000 Monday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS MONEYTALK; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 689 words

HEADLINE: TECHNOLOGY HEALTH CHECK HAYES TESTS OUT CUTTING-EDGE MEDICAL
TREATMENTS FOR INSURERS, HOSPITALS, HEALTH-CARE FACILITIES

BYLINE: April Adamson, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   TREATING COLON cancer used to mean chemotherapy and surgery.

   But today, doctors can prolong a patient's life and treat the disease with
alternative, genetic therapies.

   That's medicine for the new millennium: As advanced technologies are
discovered, altered and advanced, hospitals, insurance companies and patients
are trying to keep abreast of the breakthroughs. On average, 50 percent of the
rise in health care cost is due to emerging medical technologies, experts say.

   But who monitors and researches these new technologies, to make sure they are
cost effective, smart and safe?

   The Food and Drug Administration's focus is limited, concentrating more on
pharmaceutical drugs and less on surgical procedures or medical devices.

   So hospitals and health-care companies often rely on research done by private
companies like Hayes Inc., a medical technology assessment company in Lansdale,
Montgomery County, that wades through a morass of new technologies and offers
reports and data about cutting-edge procedures and drugs.

   If Hayes finds that a new technology is useful, cost-effective or more
beneficial than a traditional treatment, the information can spur an insurance
company to offer a new benefit or a hospital to offer patients new therapies or
procedures.

   "The growth in technology has created the need for our business. We don't
want to see technologies introduced that aren't beneficial," said Hayes Inc.
President and CEO Winifred Hayes.

   "There is more and more concern over how health care companies make decisions
and there's more insistence that that process be a scientific one, subject to
scrutiny," said Hayes, a registered nurse with a masters' degree in nursing and
a degree from Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health.

   Hayes Inc. is a privately held company founded in 1989 with physicians,
epidemiologists and bioscientists on staff. In the past few years - since the
birth of the Patients Bill of Rights in 1998 and the continued demand for HMOs
to cover alternative medicine - its business load has grown steadily, about 15
percent per year, according to Hayes.

   Hayes markets its services to companies that pay for a single report or for
dozens per year. The service costs anywhere from $10,000 to several hundred
thousand dollars.

   Hayes presently serves about 250 health companies, including insurance
companies representing roughly 150 million people. Hayes says the company also
serves 300 acute-care hospitals and 150 other health-care facilities, such as
ambulatory care centers and outpatient surgical and rehabilitation centers.

   "The new technology has made the health-care community realize we should look
at how we're providing health care to people," said Hayes. "Because a technology
has been around for years doesn't mean it's the best. The company has opened the
door to evidence-based medical practice."

   Hayes' data comes from peer-reviewed literature, including studies scientists
submit to medical journals, and answers questions companies want to know, like:
Does the technology work? For whom? How does it compare with alternative
treatments?

   For example - though Hepatitis B used to be a chronic and eventually fatal
disease - today, with Interferon drug treatment, Hep B is manageable and in some
cases preventable.

   But what if a cancer patient's doctor suggests she participate in alternative
medical treatments for the disease, which may include hyperbaric oxygen therapy
- the use of oxygen at greater-than-atmospheric pressures? The procedure is
fairly new and some insurance companies aren't familiar with it.

   Insurance companies are more likely to cover a procedure when there are no
alternative treatments. In contrast, procedures that prolong life but don't cure
are less likely to be covered.

   And hospitals use the information to formulate their "best clinical
practices," or the best way to treat specific diseases.

   "Is it safe, is it effective, that's what we concentrate on. Hospitals have
to make choices. It's not cost effective to offer three different treatments,"
said Hayes.

   Send e-mail to adamsoa@phillynews.com

NOTES: Philacon Valley
Reporting on how our region plugs in to the New Economy

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Winifred Hayes, president and CEO of Hayes Inc., says the growth in technology
has created a need for companies to research the effectiveness of new medical
treatments. (STEVEN M. FALK, DAILY NEWS)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             127 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 29, 2000, Sunday 4 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 310 words

HEADLINE: Sickle cell disease cure is near, researcher says

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: BIRMINGHAM, Ala.

BODY:

   BIRMINGHAM, Ala. - A researcher at the University of Alabama-Birmingham said
his team is five or six years away from discovering a cure for sickle cell
disease.

   Dr. Tim Townes, director of UAB's Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center, said his
team's work may yield a cure in which a patient's blood stem cells are removed,
purified, bolstered with antisickling genes, then put back into the patient's
body.

   Sickle cell disease is an inherited blood disorder that affects about 70,000
Americans, most of them black. It causes a deformity in the red blood cells. The
abnormal cells clog blood and oxygen flow.

   The result is often a low blood count - called anemia - as well as chronic
pain and organs damaged by insufficient oxygen and nutrients that are delivered
in blood. That can lead to kidney failure, heart attacks and strokes.

   "Our goal is to see patients cured, whether it's done first in Birmingham or
anyplace in the world. But we want to be the first," Townes said.

   His center is one of 10 sickle cell research facilities in the nation funded
by the National Institutes of Health. It is exploring several possible cures and
treatments.

   Dr. Gregory Evans of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, which
oversees the NIH-supported sickle cell research centers, said research into
hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying component of red blood cells, appears more
promising than the gene therapy approach.

   The most immediate cure, he said, may result from improvements in bone marrow
transplants. A bone marrow transplant can stop sickle cell disease, but doctors
recommend it only in the most severe cases. A transplant requires a matched
donor and poses the risk of rejection and complications.

   Townes, whose lab is home to hundreds of sickle cell mice, predicted that his
researchers will be able to cure a diseased mouse within two years.


TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2000


                             128 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                   October 29, 2000 Sunday City final Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 06J

LENGTH: 1813 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING BACK;
As a rare disease stalks their young son, Hoosiers parents seek private funds
for clinical trials of gene therapy.

BYLINE: STORIES BY T.J. BANES STAFF WRITER PHOTOS BY MATT DETRICH   STAFF
PHOTOGRAPHER

BODY:

   When disease invades a family, it forces everyone into survival mode.

   And with it often come feelings of social and emotional isolation.

   "It was like we were all alone on an island. It was us against this disease.
At first, even our family and friends didn't know what to do to help," said
32-year-old Phil Milto.

   Two years ago, Phil and Tricia Milto's son Nathan was diagnosed with Batten
disease, which attacks the nervous system and is always fatal. It is diagnosed
in three of every 100,000 children born in the United States.

   In a matter of months, Nathan, now 6, once a bright, athletic, outspoken
preschooler, lost his sight, his ability to speak clearly and many of his motor
skills. He now is a primary student at the Indiana School for the Blind, and
receives most of his medical care through occupational, speech and physical
therapy there.

   Nathan's parents spend each day hopelessly loving the dark-haired, dark-eyed
little guy, whose life expectancy is 10 to 12 years.

   "We were told to contact a parent support group and to learn to cope. We're
not coping and dealing," said Phil Milto. "We're doing something; we're doing
all we can. We're all he's got."

   For the Miltos that means making Nathan as comfortable and as secure as they
can.

   Today, Nathan seems happiest when tuning into the things he remembers from
his toddler years -- when he could see and laugh with his favorite Disney videos
and sports heroes. On his sixth birthday, Nathan believed he was turning 2.

   As he regresses physically and cognitively day by day, his parents know there
is no federally approved drug that can stop this disease. In time, Nathan may no
longer be able to enjoy shooting hoops (his parents bang on the backboard so he
can hear where to shoot) with his dad, or eating pizza with his family. He may
be bedridden and dependent on a feeding tube for nourishment.

   Because there are so few experts in Batten disease, Nathan doesn't even have
regular doctor's visits. There's no reason to -- the doctors can't do anything
for him. His therapy at the Indiana School for the Blind has done him the most
good, his parents say.

   "The best historian for a child's well-being is his parents," said Nathan's
pediatrician, Dr. Gregory Smith. "There wasn't anything concrete from an exam,
but his parents noticed a change."

   Just as family members struggle to make sense of Batten disease, Smith has to
cope with the challenge of serving a patient diagnosed with a rare illness.

   Smith first checked Nathan at the age of 4 when his mother felt he was
regressing in basic skills. Soon afterward, he began to lose his sight. He
underwent a battery of tests and was fortunate in that his neurologist at Riley
Hospital for Children had seen about 12 cases of Batten disease.

   Smith compares the debilitating illness to Alzheimer's disease in that Nathan
is slowly losing touch with the environment and the people he knows so well.

   "This is the closest I've ever come to this type of sickness, and I will
probably never have another patient like this," said Smith.

   Beyond basic health care, Smith's hands are tied.

   "I do a lot of phoning and researching, and I find quite a few physicians who
aren't familiar with Batten disease," he said. "In our major medical journal,
there are only about four sentences. Even genetic experts I know talk about how
unusual it is."

   Dealing with a child who has a terminal illness makes everyone re-evaluate
their roles.

   "The family is the framework for the way in which a child adjusts to the
illness," said Andrew Harner, a clinical coordinator for Riley Hospital's social
work services who often counsels families like the Miltos. "Families come to us
with their own coping mechanisms in place. We try to enhance those coping
mechanisms."

   That coping can take many forms. For many parents, the first line of defense
is academic -- to learn all they can about the disease. Harner said this
approach is much healthier than emotionally shutting down and closing off from
outside support.

   "You have to respect and value each person's coping mechanisms, whether it's
right or not, but you want to encourage them to stay focused. We are constantly
re- evaluating a family's needs."

   Harner encourages families to allow the child to give them cues.

   "Sometimes they just want to be a normal kid. They don't always think about
what their life could have been; they think about what their life is now."

   For Tricia, 32, a recent visit to her son's school meant coming to terms with
Nathan's independence.

   "It was so tough to let him go, knowing that our days are numbered."

   At first, Tricia followed her motherly instincts by picking Nathan up from
school two days a week. It was her way of keeping in touch with his teachers
and, most of all, with Nathan. But after a while, she backed off.

   School is a familiar and safe place for Nathan. From his Greenwood home,
Nathan gets on a school bus every weekday morning at 6:10 and doesn't return
until 4:30 p.m.

   "It's such a long day, and I hated being away from him," says Tricia. But
when she picked Nathan up, he protested, insisting that his mom let him ride the
bus. She relented, but sometimes secretly follows the bus as she fights to let
go.

   "I was doing what was best for me. He is happy here," she says, peering in
from the doorway of Nathan's classroom. Nathan doesn't even know she is there as
he sings out loudly, whistles and stomps to The Good Morning Song .

   In classroom No. 120, Nathan is one of Nancy Bingham's "shining stars." He
plays with a guinea pig named Scooby Doo, learns the days of the week and the
seasons of the year, plays ball in physical education, eats lunch in a cafeteria
and has friends named Jacob, Skylar, Drew and Lincoln.

   "With Nathan, our main goal is to help him continue having enthusiasm for
school. He has some pretty big obstacles ahead of him but he needs to have fun
and learn along the way," Bingham said.

   When he comes home at the end of the day, he shares his two-story brick home
in a quiet Southside suburb with his parents, his younger brothers, Nicholas, 4,
and P.J., 3, and his black Labrador, Mia.

   Tricia admits frequently worrying about the development and behavior of
Nathan's two younger brothers. "Is Nicholas acting out this way because of his
brother's illness, or is this just typical middle-child behavior?" she asks.
"Are P.J.'s speech difficulties early signs of bigger problems, or is it just
his age?" While she second-guesses herself, Tricia continues to resist testing
Nathan's two younger brothers for Batten disease. She says she has about all she
can cope with right now.

   "The hardest thing with me is that I'd like to dedicate every minute of every
day to Nathan, but I have two other children who need me," said Tricia.

   This often is the time other family members find their new roles.

   Opting for early retirement from Eli Lilly and Co., Tricia's mom, Wilma
Evers, sold her Downtown home, and she and Tricia's stepfather moved to the
Southside -- two minutes from the Miltos -- to be closer to their grandchildren.

   Almost daily, Evers can be found pushing Nathan on the swing, helping around
the house, or listening as her daughter pours out her heart.

   "I'm doing exactly what I want to do and what the Lord wants me to do," Evers
said. As she holds Nathan on her lap, he pretends to snore. His humor makes his
brothers, grandmother and mother laugh aloud.

   Tricia says: "I'm thankful I can still tickle Nathan and hear him laugh, but
I sure do miss the eye contact. I'd love for him to look me in the eyes again."

   Phil Milto stayed on the academic path to coping.

   He spends countless hours studying and researching Batten disease and raising
money to fund the clinical drug trial of a potential cure -- a form of gene
replacement therapy.

   Clinical drug trials for common diseases almost always are conducted and
funded by pharmaceutical companies and large teaching universities. The rare
diseases often don't garner the attention needed to make new drugs. Phil is
trying to change that.

   "There are many days that I think, 'Nathan was supposed to be my all-star
basketball player; this wasn't supposed to happen,' " said Phil. "When I
realized I'm just lucky to have him, forget basketball, I decided I had to
separate the emotion and develop a business plan."

   He relies on his business degree and training at his family's dry cleaning
operation to guide him.

   "We wonder if God has done this for a reason," said Phil. "Tricia has
experience in event planning that will lead us toward raising funds, and she has
always had an interest in special-needs children. I have the background in
management and business to help move us toward a cure."

   Even so, Phil and Tricia often find themselves living in different worlds.

   "I'm busy shuttling the kids around, and Phil's got the research stuff going
on. He interacts with so many people every day that sometimes we don't even talk
about it. We both have bad days, but fortunately, it's usually on opposite
days," said Tricia.

   "Phil copes by being proactive . . . finding a way to make the situation
better or to change it," said Denise Sedgwick, a family friend. "Tricia copes by
making the kids' childhood as normal as she can. In the beginning, it was a lot
of denial. They've definitely reached the acceptance level and are making the
best of every day."

   Asking for help is the most important way a family can get off of their
island, and become connected with a support network, said Dr. Megan Abshir,
medical director of St. Vincent Hospice. "People are willing to help, but you
have to guide them. It's like a funeral. When people say, 'Call me if you need
me,' you have to think of specific things they can do to assist you. Ask them to
pick up the kids from day-care or throw in an extra load of laundry."

   Sedgwick, along with a number of other friends and relatives, have been a
part of various projects involving Nathan to promote awareness of the disease.
They have been hosts of a dinner, golf outing and circus event to raise money in
support of the private sponsorship of a clinical trial for gene therapy.

   Even Nathan's neighborhood pals have gone door-to-door raising funds while
wearing T-shirts in support of their sick friend.

   Sedgwick said once the Miltos made it known that they were working toward a
federally approved therapy, their friends had a goal and a direction.

   "At first we felt helpless, and when we asked what we could do, it seemed
like so little compared to the challenges they faced," said Sedgwick. "A lot of
people sometimes distance themselves. It's not done because they don't care,
it's because they don't know what to say and they don't want to say the wrong
thing. . . . Sometimes all it takes is being there and listening."

   Contact T.J. Banes

   at (317) 444-6815 or via e-mail

   at tj.banes@starnews.com

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             129 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            October 29, 2000 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1793 words

HEADLINE: FIGHTING BACK

BYLINE: STORIES BY T.J. BANES STAFF WRITER PHOTOS BY MATT DETRICH STAFF
PHOTOGRAPHER

BODY:

   When disease invades a family, it forces everyone into survival mode.

   And with it often come feelings of social and emotional isolation.

   "It was like we were all alone on an island. It was us against this disease.
At first, even our family and friends didn't know what to do to help," said
32-year-old Phil Milto.

   Two years ago, Phil and Tricia Milto's son Nathan was diagnosed with Batten
disease, which attacks the nervous system and is always fatal. It is diagnosed
in three of every 100,000 children born in the United States.

   In a matter of months, Nathan, now 6, once a bright, athletic, outspoken
preschooler, lost his sight, his ability to speak clearly and many of his motor
skills. He now is a primary student at the Indiana School for the Blind, and
receives most of his medical care through occupational, speech and physical
therapy there.

   Nathan's parents spend each day hopelessly loving the dark-haired, dark-eyed
little guy, whose life expectancy is 10 to 12 years.

   "We were told to contact a parent support group and to learn to cope. We're
not coping and dealing," said Phil Milto. "We're doing something; we're doing
all we can. We're all he's got."

   For the Miltos that means making Nathan as comfortable and as secure as they
can.

   Today, Nathan seems happiest when tuning into the things he remembers from
his toddler years -- when he could see and laugh with his favorite Disney videos
and sports heroes. On his sixth birthday, Nathan believed he was turning 2.

   As he regresses physically and cognitively day by day, his parents know there
is no federally approved drug that can stop this disease. In time, Nathan may no
longer be able to enjoy shooting hoops (his parents bang on the backboard so he
can hear where to shoot) with his dad, or eating pizza with his family. He may
be bedridden and dependent on a feeding tube for nourishment.

   Because there are so few experts in Batten disease, Nathan doesn't even have
regular doctor's visits. There's no reason to -- the doctors can't do anything
for him. His therapy at the Indiana School for the Blind has done him the most
good, his parents say.

   "The best historian for a child's well-being is his parents," said Nathan's
pediatrician, Dr. Gregory Smith. "There wasn't anything concrete from an exam,
but his parents noticed a change."

   Just as family members struggle to make sense of Batten disease, Smith has to
cope with the challenge of serving a patient diagnosed with a rare illness.

   Smith first checked Nathan at the age of 4 when his mother felt he was
regressing in basic skills. Soon afterward, he began to lose his sight. He
underwent a battery of tests and was fortunate in that his neurologist at Riley
Hospital for Children had seen about 12 cases of Batten disease.

   Smith compares the debilitating illness to Alzheimer's disease in that Nathan
is slowly losing touch with the environment and the people he knows so well.

   "This is the closest I've ever come to this type of sickness, and I will
probably never have another patient like this," said Smith.

   Beyond basic health care, Smith's hands are tied.

   "I do a lot of phoning and researching, and I find quite a few physicians who
aren't familiar with Batten disease," he said. "In our major medical journal,
there are only about four sentences. Even genetic experts I know talk about how
unusual it is."

   Dealing with a child who has a terminal illness makes everyone re-evaluate
their roles.

   "The family is the framework for the way in which a child adjusts to the
illness," said Andrew Harner, a clinical coordinator for Riley Hospital's social
work services who often counsels families like the Miltos. "Families come to us
with their own coping mechanisms in place. We try to enhance those coping
mechanisms."

   That coping can take many forms. For many parents, the first line of defense
is academic -- to learn all they can about the disease. Harner said this
approach is much healthier than emotionally shutting down and closing off from
outside support.

   "You have to respect and value each person's coping mechanisms, whether it's
right or not, but you want to encourage them to stay focused. We are constantly
re- evaluating a family's needs."

   Harner encourages families to allow the child to give them cues.

   "Sometimes they just want to be a normal kid. They don't always think about
what their life could have been; they think about what their life is now."

   For Tricia, 32, a recent visit to her son's school meant coming to terms with
Nathan's independence.

   "It was so tough to let him go, knowing that our days are numbered."

   At first, Tricia followed her motherly instincts by picking Nathan up from
school two days a week. It was her way of keeping in touch with his teachers
and, most of all, with Nathan. But after a while, she backed off.

   School is a familiar and safe place for Nathan. From his Greenwood home,
Nathan gets on a school bus every weekday morning at 6:10 and doesn't return
until 4:30 p.m.

   "It's such a long day, and I hated being away from him," says Tricia. But
when she picked Nathan up, he protested, insisting that his mom let him ride the
bus. She relented, but sometimes secretly follows the bus as she fights to let
go.

   "I was doing what was best for me. He is happy here," she says, peering in
from the doorway of Nathan's classroom. Nathan doesn't even know she is there as
he sings out loudly, whistles and stomps to The Good Morning Song .

   In classroom No. 120, Nathan is one of Nancy Bingham's "shining stars." He
plays with a guinea pig named Scooby Doo, learns the days of the week and the
seasons of the year, plays ball in physical education, eats lunch in a cafeteria
and has friends named Jacob, Skylar, Drew and Lincoln.

   "With Nathan, our main goal is to help him continue having enthusiasm for
school. He has some pretty big obstacles ahead of him but he needs to have fun
and learn along the way," Bingham said.

   When he comes home at the end of the day, he shares his two-story brick home
in a quiet Southside suburb with his parents, his younger brothers, Nicholas, 4,
and P.J., 3, and his black Labrador, Mia.

   Tricia admits frequently worrying about the development and behavior of
Nathan's two younger brothers. "Is Nicholas acting out this way because of his
brother's illness, or is this just typical middle-child behavior?" she asks.
"Are P.J.'s speech difficulties early signs of bigger problems, or is it just
his age?" While she second-guesses herself, Tricia continues to resist testing
Nathan's two younger brothers for Batten disease. She says she has about all she
can cope with right now.

   "The hardest thing with me is that I'd like to dedicate every minute of every
day to Nathan, but I have two other children who need me," said Tricia.

   This often is the time other family members find their new roles.

   Opting for early retirement from Eli Lilly and Co., Tricia's mom, Wilma
Evers, sold her Downtown home, and she and Tricia's stepfather moved to the
Southside -- two minutes from the Miltos -- to be closer to their grandchildren.

   Almost daily, Evers can be found pushing Nathan on the swing, helping around
the house, or listening as her daughter pours out her heart.

   "I'm doing exactly what I want to do and what the Lord wants me to do," Evers
said. As she holds Nathan on her lap, he pretends to snore. His humor makes his
brothers, grandmother and mother laugh aloud.

   Tricia says: "I'm thankful I can still tickle Nathan and hear him laugh, but
I sure do miss the eye contact. I'd love for him to look me in the eyes again."

   Phil Milto stayed on the academic path to coping.

   He spends countless hours studying and researching Batten disease and raising
money to fund the clinical drug trial of a potential cure -- a form of gene
replacement therapy.

   Clinical drug trials for common diseases almost always are conducted and
funded by pharmaceutical companies and large teaching universities. The rare
diseases often don't garner the attention needed to make new drugs. Phil is
trying to change that.

   "There are many days that I think, 'Nathan was supposed to be my all-star
basketball player; this wasn't supposed to happen,' " said Phil. "When I
realized I'm just lucky to have him, forget basketball, I decided I had to
separate the emotion and develop a business plan."

   He relies on his business degree and training at his family's dry cleaning
operation to guide him.

   "We wonder if God has done this for a reason," said Phil. "Tricia has
experience in event planning that will lead us toward raising funds, and she has
always had an interest in special-needs children. I have the background in
management and business to help move us toward a cure."

   Even so, Phil and Tricia often find themselves living in different worlds.

   "I'm busy shuttling the kids around, and Phil's got the research stuff going
on. He interacts with so many people every day that sometimes we don't even talk
about it. We both have bad days, but fortunately, it's usually on opposite
days," said Tricia.

   "Phil copes by being proactive . . . finding a way to make the situation
better or to change it," said Denise Sedgwick, a family friend. "Tricia copes by
making the kids' childhood as normal as she can. In the beginning, it was a lot
of denial. They've definitely reached the acceptance level and are making the
best of every day."

   Asking for help is the most important way a family can get off of their
island, and become connected with a support network, said Dr. Megan Abshir,
medical director of St. Vincent Hospice. "People are willing to help, but you
have to guide them. It's like a funeral. When people say, 'Call me if you need
me,' you have to think of specific things they can do to assist you. Ask them to
pick up the kids from day-care or throw in an extra load of laundry."

   Sedgwick, along with a number of other friends and relatives, have been a
part of various projects involving Nathan to promote awareness of the disease.
They have been hosts of a dinner, golf outing and circus event to raise money in
support of the private sponsorship of a clinical trial for gene therapy.

   Even Nathan's neighborhood pals have gone door-to-door raising funds while
wearing T-shirts in support of their sick friend.

   Sedgwick said once the Miltos made it known that they were working toward a
federally approved therapy, their friends had a goal and a direction.

   "At first we felt helpless, and when we asked what we could do, it seemed
like so little compared to the challenges they faced," said Sedgwick. "A lot of
people sometimes distance themselves. It's not done because they don't care,
it's because they don't know what to say and they don't want to say the wrong
thing. . . . Sometimes all it takes is being there and listening."

   Contact T.J. Banes

   at (317) 444-6815 or via e-mail

   at tj.banes@starnews.com

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                             130 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            October 29, 2000 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 228 words

HEADLINE: Research is key to developing treatment, cure

BODY:

   Nathan Milto is helping write new pages in medical and scientific research,
because his illness, Batten disease, is so rare.

   His parents, Phil and Tricia Milto, have joined other parents of afflicted
children under an umbrella of the Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Research
Alliance. The group is working with scientists, doctors, university experts,
drug companies, advisers, and representatives from the Food and Drug
Administration and the National Institute of Health, to find a cure.

   One possible treatment, gene therapy, may be effective for late infantile
Batten disease. However, a clinical trial is needed first.

   Just this month, under Phil Milto's guidance, the alliance moved a step
closer to introducing a cure. An East Coast university has agreed to begin
planning a clinical study on a gene transfer therapy to produce the enzyme in
which Nathan is deficient.

   Nathan's parents are racing against time to raise the necessary $2 million.
To date, they have collected $450,000.

   In addition, Phil hopes his efforts to organize a not-for-profit sponsorship
group may help with other rare diseases.

   To learn more about Batten disease, visit www .bdsra .org, write to Batten
Disease Support and Research Association at 2600 Parsons Ave., Columbus, Ohio
43207, visit www. nathansbattle .com or write to Nathan's Battle Foundation, 459
S. Ind. 135, Greenwood, Ind. 46142.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2009


                             131 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 578 words

HEADLINE: Moving faster on the road to cancer cure

BYLINE: PETER ROWE

BODY:
 Big picture.  Big ideas.  Big words.  My chat with Dr. Harmon J. Eyre, the
American Cancer Society's executive vice president for research and medical
affairs, went like this:

   EYRE: "Now, carcinogenesis ...  "

   ME: "Eh?"

   EYRE: "The process of apotosis ...  "

   ME: "Wha?"

   EYRE: "In anti-angiogenesis ...  "

   ME: "Huh?"

   Karen Baker sympathized.  "You want to hear from the researchers," said this
breast cancer survivor from Point Loma.  "My eyes sort of glaze over, but I'm
glad that they know about my oncogenes."

   My eyes, Eyre noted two minutes into our talk, looked like a Winchell's
display case.  So he jolted me awake with the verbal equivalent of a
triple-espresso: "As a male in America, your lifetime risk of getting cancer is
one out of two."

   More coffee with those doughnuts?

   An earlier 'early'

   If you're not fluent in oncology, understanding Eyre can be tough.  Just
listening to him is tough, if you or a loved one are among the 500,000 Americans
who will perish this year from cancer.

   "People who are dying hear this optimism and say, 'Hold on a minute,' " he
admitted when we met in La Jolla earlier this month, at the society's annual
statewide conference.  "But this progress is real; so is the acceleration of
discovery."

   In fact, this dispatch from medicine's far horizon thrilled many
conference-goers.  "The research updates are always uplifting," said Stephen
Browning, vice president of the society's San Diego-Imperial County chapter.
"For the volunteers and staff, some of whom are being treated for cancer, this
is a terribly life-affirming message."

   Baker agreed.  "I've got that hope thing down," she said.

   The Point Loma woman is a success story, alive and well seven years after her
diagnosis.  But Eyre sees a future where the indignities visited on Baker and
other cancer patients -- from chemotherapy's nausea to surgery's scars -- will
be stored in science's attic, next to the leeches and other discards.

   He believes in the promise of early detection.  Extremely early.

   "Mammograms can catch breast cancer at about a half centimeter right now," he
said.  "That means the progress of the cancer has been going on for 15 to 20
years, usually."

   Imagine, though, a future where scientists can find the signposts, the
"molecular markers," on this lethal route.  Where they can track a cell's
carcinogenesis, the process by which it became cancerous.  Where gene therapy
can halt and repair the damage.

   In such a future, how early could doctors intervene?

   "Perhaps you could do that in the embryo," Eyre said, "and give normal genes
to every cell."

   Consider, too, certain liver cancers and cancer of the cervix.  In theory,
Eyre says, vaccines could be developed to destroy these virus-borne diseases.

   Another treatment under investigation, anti-angiogenesis, would defeat all
cancers.  "Every cancer beyond the size of a pea needs new blood vessels.  We
could develop drugs to block those vessels from getting into the cancer cells."

   Streaking

   In laboratories across the world, cancer is under attack.  In San Diego
County alone, 33 ongoing research projects are being funded by the American
Cancer Society.  When will we see dramatic advances in treatment and prevention?
"I'm very optimistic that a lot of this will happen in 10 to 15 years."

   "Discovery goes in streaks," said Eyre, an Atlanta Braves fan, "like baseball
teams."

   Peter Rowe can be reached at (619) 293-1227 or peter.rowe@uniontrib.com.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2000


                             132 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-6

LENGTH: 707 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurial scientists overcome conflict issues

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 For the envious outsider, there are probably few things more annoying than
reading about the multimillionaire who insists he never got into it for the
money.

   But Dr. H. Kirk Hammond -- blue-jeaned, a little shaggy, a child of the '60s
who insists he still "hates authority" -- stands by the statement.  Turning a
nifty piece of gene-therapy research into a life-saving product, and getting it
to patients as quickly as possible, was the prime mover in his life, he said.

   "I had really labored at this for 10 years as a grunt scientist, trying to
find ways to treat heart disease, so this discovery was huge to me," Hammond
said.  "I wanted to get this to patients."

   Yet getting it there was a problem.  And that is the reason Hammond, a
cardiologist and professor at the University of California San Diego, has joined
the ranks of a new generation of entrepreneurial scientists.

   While at UCSD, where he remains an associate professor of medicine, Hammond
patented a promising gene-therapy technique that promotes the growth of blood
vessels in diseased hearts.  In 1995, unable to find a company willing to
commercialize the potential product, Hammond joined with a group of venture
capitalists to form Collateral Therapeutics.

   In 1998, the company went public and the therapy, for patients with
congestive heart failure, is being tested in early clinical trials.  And
Hammond's equity stake, about 1.9 million shares or 14 percent of the company,
is worth about $47 million, based on Friday's closing price.

   With one foot in academia, and one foot in Collateral, Hammond said he has
worked hard, and successfully, to divorce self-interest from science.  Yet the
potential for a conflict-of-interest came to a head this year.

   A committee at UCSD that oversees conflict-of-interest issues called on
Hammond to decrease his commitment to the company or not take part in a
federally funded research project on campus.  Last month, Hammond resigned from
Collateral's board and as the company's chief scientist, and agreed to reduce
his equity stake in Collateral over time.

   He now has a consulting contract with Collateral -- and is moving forward
with his research at UCSD.

   "Stepping back from it, the function of the conflict-of-interest committee
was good," Hammond said.  "I hate to say it, I fought them tooth and nail, I
didn't agree with anything they said, but I think the system worked."

   Dr. Floyd Bloom, a scientist at Scripps Research Institute who last week
formed Neurome, a privately held neuroscience company with a technology derived
from his research, has grappled with the issue, too.

   Like Hammond, Bloom wants to see his life's work transformed into something
useful.

   "Making a financial killing is not exactly why I want to do this," Bloom
said.  "I want to know more about the brain in my lifetime, and doing it the
old-fashioned way isn't going to get us there."

   Bloom said Neurome's work will require well over $3 million a year, a sum
that federal grant makers are unlikely to pony up.

   "The industrialized approach to moving discovery forward is something
thatmoney fuels," said Bloom.

   "I think the private company's ability to discover will be far greater than
anything I can do here (at Scripps) with my own two hands."

   To avoid conflict of interest, Bloom is taking a sabbatical as chairman of
the department of neuropharmacology at Scripps.  Instead, he will serve as
Neurome's chief executive and nurture the fledgling Neurome.

   The company, which combines neuroscience, genomics and high-speed computer
data-collecting and analysis, hopes to develop a complete, three-dimensional
view of a mouse's brain that will depict gene expression, or how a gene is
activated in the brain.

   Ultimately, that computer picture might allow drug companies to discover
where disease-associated genes are activated in the human brain and to develop
therapies to treat such ailments as Alzheimer's disease.

   Bloom predicts it will take Neurome about five years to complete the map of a
mouse brain.

   "The brain is the organ we know the least about," Bloom said.  "There are
approximately 50,000 genes in the genome of a mouse, we know the location of
less than 1,000. We have a lot of work to do."


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2000


                             133 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Moving faster on the road to cancer cure

BYLINE: PETER ROWE

BODY:

   Big picture.

   Big ideas.

   Big words.

   My chat with Dr. Harmon J. Eyre, the American Cancer Society's executive vice
president for research and medical affairs, went like this: EYRE: "Now,
carcinogenesis ...

   " ME: "Eh?" EYRE: "The process of apotosis ...

   " ME: "Wha?" EYRE: "In anti-angiogenesis ...

   " ME: "Huh?" Karen Baker sympathized.

   "You want to hear from the researchers," said this breast cancer survivor
from Point Loma.

   "My eyes sort of glaze over, but I'm glad that they know about my oncogenes."
My eyes, Eyre noted two minutes into our talk, looked like a Winchell's display
case.

   So he jolted me awake with the verbal equivalent of a triple-espresso: "As a
male in America, your lifetime risk of getting cancer is one out of two." More
coffee with those doughnuts? An earlier `early' If you're not fluent in
oncology, understanding Eyre can be tough.

   Just listening to him is tough, if you or a loved one are among the 500,000
Americans who will perish this year from cancer. "People who are dying hear this
optimism and say, `Hold on a minute,' " he admitted when we met in La Jolla
earlier this month, at the society's annual statewide conference.

   "But this progress is real; so is the acceleration of discovery." In fact,
this dispatch from medicine's far horizon thrilled many conference-goers.

   "The research updates are always uplifting," said Stephen Browning, vice
president of the society's San Diego-Imperial County chapter.

   "For the volunteers and staff, some of whom are being treated for cancer,
this is a terribly life-affirming message." Baker agreed.

   "I've got that hope thing down," she said. The Point Loma woman is a success
story, alive and well seven years after her diagnosis.

   But Eyre sees a future where the indignities visited on Baker and other
cancer patients -- from chemotherapy's nausea to surgery's scars -- will be
stored in science's attic, next to the leeches and other discards. He believes
in the promise of early detection.

   Extremely early. "Mammograms can catch breast cancer at about a half
centimeter right now," he said.

   "That means the progress of the cancer has been going on for 15 to 20 years,
usually." Imagine, though, a future where scientists can find the signposts, the
"molecular markers," on this lethal route.

   Where they can track a cell's carcinogenesis, the process by which it became
cancerous.

   Where gene therapy can halt and repair the damage. In such a future, how
early could doctors intervene? "Perhaps you could do that in the embryo," Eyre
said, "and give normal genes to every cell." Consider, too, certain liver
cancers and cancer of the cervix.

   In theory, Eyre says, vaccines could be developed to destroy these
virus-borne diseases. Another treatment under investigation, anti-angiogenesis,
would defeat all cancers.

   "Every cancer beyond the size of a pea needs new blood vessels.

   We could develop drugs to block those vessels from getting into the cancer
cells." Streaking In laboratories across the world, cancer is under attack.

   In San Diego County alone, 33 ongoing research projects are being funded by
the American Cancer Society.

   When will we see dramatic advances in treatment and prevention?

   "I'm very optimistic that a lot of this will happen in 10 to 15 years."
"Discovery goes in streaks," said Eyre, an Atlanta Braves fan, "like baseball
teams." Peter Rowe can be reached at (619) 293-1227 or peter.rowe@uniontrib.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             134 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 29, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. H-6

LENGTH: 696 words

HEADLINE: Entrepreneurial scientists overcome conflict issues

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   For the envious outsider, there are probably few things more annoying than
reading about the multimillionaire who insists he never got into it for the
money. But Dr. H. Kirk Hammond -- blue-jeaned, a little shaggy, a child of the
'60s who insists he still "hates authority" -- stands by the statement. Turning
a nifty piece of gene-therapy research into a life-saving product, and getting
it to patients as quickly as possible, was the prime mover in his life, he said.
"I had really labored at this for 10 years as a grunt scientist, trying to find
ways to treat heart disease, so this discovery was huge to me," Hammond said.

   "I wanted to get this to patients." Yet getting it there was a problem.

   And that is the reason Hammond, a cardiologist and professor at the
University of California San Diego, has joined the ranks of a new generation of
entrepreneurial scientists. While at UCSD, where he remains an associate
professor of medicine, Hammond patented a promising gene-therapy technique that
promotes the growth of blood vessels in diseased hearts.

   In 1995, unable to find a company willing to commercialize the potential
product, Hammond joined with a group of venture capitalists to form Collateral
Therapeutics. In 1998, the company went public and the therapy, for patients
with congestive heart failure, is being tested in early clinical trials.

   And Hammond's equity stake, about 1.9 million shares or 14 percent of the
company, is worth about $47 million, based on Friday's closing price. With one
foot in academia, and one foot in Collateral, Hammond said he has worked hard,
and successfully, to divorce self-interest from science.

   Yet the potential for a conflict-of-interest came to a head this year. A
committee at UCSD that oversees conflict-of-interest issues called on Hammond to
decrease his commitment to the company or not take part in a federally funded
research project on campus.

   Last month, Hammond resigned from Collateral's board and as the company's
chief scientist, and agreed to reduce his equity stake in Collateral over time.
He now has a consulting contract with Collateral -- and is moving forward with
his research at UCSD. "Stepping back from it, the function of the
conflict-of-interest committee was good," Hammond said.

   "I hate to say it, I fought them tooth and nail, I didn't agree with anything
they said, but I think the system worked." Dr. Floyd Bloom, a scientist at
Scripps Research Institute who last week formed Neurome, a privately held
neuroscience company with a technology derived from his research, has grappled
with the issue, too. Like Hammond, Bloom wants to see his life's work
transformed into something useful. "Making a financial killing is not exactly
why I want to do this," Bloom said.

   "I want to know more about the brain in my lifetime, and doing it the
old-fashioned way isn't going to get us there." Bloom said Neurome's work will
require well over $3 million a year, a sum that federal grant makers are
unlikely to pony up. "The industrialized approach to moving discovery forward is
something thatmoney fuels," said Bloom. "I think the private company's ability
to discover will be far greater than anything I can do here (at Scripps) with my
own two hands." To avoid conflict of interest, Bloom is taking a sabbatical as
chairman of the department of neuropharmacology at Scripps.

   Instead, he will serve as Neurome's chief executive and nurture the fledgling
Neurome. The company, which combines neuroscience, genomics and high-speed
computer data-collecting and analysis, hopes to develop a complete,
three-dimensional view of a mouse's brain that will depict gene expression, or
how a gene is activated in the brain. Ultimately, that computer picture might
allow drug companies to discover where disease-associated genes are activated in
the human brain and to develop therapies to treat such ailments as Alzheimer's
disease. Bloom predicts it will take Neurome about five years to complete the
map of a mouse brain. "The brain is the organ we know the least about," Bloom
said.

   "There are approximately 50,000 genes in the genome of a mouse, we know the
location of less than 1,000. We have a lot of work to do."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             135 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                October 28, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1866 words

HEADLINE: Selling Evolution in Ways Darwin Never Imagined;
If You Can Build a Better Gene, Investors May Come

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Novo Nordisk is designing better enzymes for detergents. Dow Chemical is
trying to cut the cost of food processing. Pioneer Hi-Bred is aiming for better
crops, and MedImmune a stronger version of its main drug.

   What these works-in-progress have in common is their reliance on a new
version of a process that is as old as life itself -- evolution.

    The process, known as directed molecular evolution, aims to harness the
principle of survival of the fittest -- but at a microscopic level in a test
tube rather than in the jungle, and in weeks rather than in millenniums.

   The result, proponents say, could be a whole panoply of improved drugs and
industrial chemicals, and the creation of a new business sector. Three companies
that specialize in directed molecular evolution -- Maxygen, Diversa and Applied
Molecular Evolution -- have gone public in the last year. So has Genencor
International, an enzyme company that uses directed evolution as one of its
tools.

   Directed evolution works by making numerous mutations in a gene that produces
a particular protein. These mutated genes are put into bacteria to make the
mutated proteins, which are then tested to see how well they perform a given
task. The genes for the best proteins can be mutated again and again in hopes of
evolving an even better protein.

   This is somewhat similar to the breeding of crops and livestock, but in this
case it is molecules, not living things, that are bred.

   "You can do better than nature," said James Young, executive vice president
for research and development at Med Immune, a biotechnology company in
Gaithersburg, Md.

   MedImmune is one company benefiting from directed evolution, which is also
called molecular breeding. The company's two-year-old drug, Synagis, is an
antibody used to prevent a serious infection in infants from respiratory
syncytial virus. But treatment requires five injections over five months at a
cost of $5,000, limiting Synagis's use to those most at risk -- mainly premature
infants. If the drug could be made more potent, reducing the cost and number of
injections, the market could be expanded to other infants.

   So MedImmune turned to Applied Molecular Evolution, which evolved several
improved versions, the best of which is 30 times stronger than Synagis.
MedImmune expects to begin clinical trials next year.

   For all its promise, however, directed evolution still remains largely
unproved. Only three products -- all laundry detergent enzymes -- have reached
the market so far. Some say the technique might be too costly and complex for
some applications. Shares of Maxygen and Diversa, which have been public the
longest, declined dramatically early this year along with the stocks of other
biotechnology companies on concerns about gene patents.

   Until now, scientists have improved natural proteins by making specific
changes to them, a process called protein engineering. But scientists usually do
not know enough to predict the best changes to make.
 Directed evolution removes the need to understand the protein to improve it.
"Nature's been doing this for millions of years and nature has very little
theory," said William D. Huse, founder and chief executive of Applied Molecular
Evolution.

   Of course, if natural evolution has honed proteins for millions of years, one
could reasonably ask if there is much room left for improvement. The answer is
yes, because evolution selects proteins that help an organism survive and
reproduce. It does not select for a protein that is good at, say, doing the
wash.

   One use of directed evolution is to improve enzymes, which are proteins that
speed up chemical reactions inside cells.

   Genencor used directed evolution to achieve a fivefold improvement in the
stain-removing ability of a bacterial enzyme in a year. Using the older
technique of protein engineering the company could make only a twofold
improvement in two years. That enzyme, as well as two developed by rival Novo
Nordisk, are in use in detergents.

   Still, the market for industrial enzymes is less than $2 billion a year.
That's why some directed evolution companies are turning to pharmaceuticals, a
much bigger market.

   Maxygen is developing improved versions of proteins that are already being
sold as drugs by other companies, posing a potential threat to other
biotechnology companies. The company, based in Redwood City, Calif., published a
paper showing it could improve the antiviral activity of interferon alpha, now
used to treat hepatitis C and other diseases, by as much as a factor of 285,000.
Maxygen has licensed one such protein, which it will not identify, to H.
Lundbeck, a Dutch drug company, which has not yet begun clinical trials.

   Russell J. Howard, president and chief executive of Maxygen, said patents on
human proteins or genes held by other companies would not stop Maxygen because
evolutionary techniques can be performed on the equivalent animal genes, which
usually are not patented.

   There are two basic approaches to directed evolution, and they can be used
separately or in combination.

   One is to create numerous mutations in a single gene. This is often done by
deliberately introducing errors into a technique used to copy DNA. One way
organisms evolve in nature is through chance mutations.

   The second way is to mimic another powerful method of evolution -- sexual
reproduction. Two parents mix their genes and a different combination is given
out to each child. No child is exactly like either parent and some children have
traits not evident in either parent.

   In molecular sex, two or more similar genes are broken into pieces, which are
then recombined in new configurations.

   Unlike natural sex, molecular sex is not restricted to the same species.
Scientists trying to create a better hormone might cut and paste the genes for
that hormone from humans, cows, pigs and mice. Nor is molecular sex restricted
to two parents. Maxygen improved subtilisin, an enzyme used in detergents, by
shuffling 26 subtilisin genes, each from a different type of bacteria.

   Maxygen pioneered the recombination approach, which it calls DNA shuffling. A
similar approach is used by Enchira Biotechnology, a directed evolution company
in a Houston suburb. Diversa and Applied Molecular Evolution tend to use
mutations in a single gene.

   A drawback of the sexual approach is that some changes are not possible.
Proteins are chains of amino acids, and if all the parent genes code for the
same amino acid in a given position in the chain, then all the offspring will as
well.

   The mutation approach, in contrast, can try out all 20 different amino acids
at any given position. The drawback is that changes can only be made in one or
two positions before the numbers become astronomical. In a typical
300-amino-acid protein, there are 5,700 ways to change just one amino acid, but
16 million ways to change two amino acids and 30 billion ways to change three.

   Despite its stock decline, Maxygen is rated by investors as the best of the
breeders. Its market capitalization is about $1.3 billion, compared with $830
million for Diversa and $555 million for Applied Molecular.

   Maxygen was co-founded by Alejandro Zaffaroni, who also founded Alza,
Affymetrix and other biotechnology companies. It is developing improved enzymes
for Novo Nordisk, helping Pfizer with the manufacturing of a drug, developing
better crop proteins for Pioneer Hi-Bred and AstraZeneca, and evolving
biowarfare treatments for the Pentagon.

   Diversa, based in San Diego, collects microbes from extreme environments,
like the polar ice caps and geysers. The company believes that enzymes that can
survive harsh conditions make better starting points for evolving industrial
enzymes.

   "You don't breed mules to make racehorses," said Jay M. Short, Diversa's
president. "You start with thoroughbreds."

   Starting with an enzyme from bacteria found near deep-sea thermal vents,
Diversa and its partner, Dow Chemical, are evolving an enzyme to convert starch
into corn syrup under acidic conditions. Diversa is also working with Aventis
Animal Nutrition and Celanese, among others.

   Applied Molecular, once known as Ixsys and also based in San Diego, focuses
on antibodies. Besides improving MedImmune's respiratory drug, it has developed
a cancer drug licensed to MedImmune.

   Enchira, once known as Energy Biosystems, tried to apply directed evolution
to removing sulfur from oil but could not attract customers. So the company
changed its name and repositioned itself as a pharmaceutical molecular evolution
company. Its stock rose sharply, but the market valuation is still only $52
million.

   Evolution does not solve every problem. Scott D. Power, a research fellow at
Genencor, said the technique was too complex for some applications. To develop a
detergent enzyme that will not be destroyed by bleach, he said, it is simpler to
change the part of the enzyme that is damaged by the bleach.

   And Glenn E. Nedwin, president of a research division of Novo Nordisk, said
that while evolution can make new enzymes, it does not readily address a bigger
problem -- making enzymes cheaper to compete with alternative chemicals. "I have
plenty of interesting enzymes that no one wants to buy because they can't
compete, for example, with the price of chlorine," he said.

   Screening can also be difficult. Researchers at the California Institute of
Technology tried to develop an enzyme for cold water detergents by evolving
enzymes that could withstand colder and colder temperatures. The resulting
enzymes could indeed survive cold water, but could not lift stains very well.

   "The fundamental rule of directed evolution is you get what you screen for,"
said Frances H. Arnold, a professor of chemical engineering and biochemistry at
Caltech.

   But new horizons are opening beyond proteins. Maxygen has evolved a virus to
carry genes into the body for gene therapy. And both Maxygen and Diversa are
evolving entire micro-organisms to make them better at fermentation.

   Scientists are also evolving substances that are not proteins themselves but
produced in organisms by reactions directed by enzymes. By changing the enzymes,
it is possible to change the final products.

   "Now we're evolving whole metabolic pathways," said Dr. Arnold, who has made
bacteria produce carotenoids -- the nutrients that make carrots orange -- that
they would not normally make.

   Ultimately, it might be possible to replace chemical factories with
biological processes that use less energy and create less pollution. Maxygen
this week announced an agreement with Chevron to develop such bioprocesses to
produce specific petrochemical products. John Shanklin, a biochemist at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, is evolving vegetable oils that
could be used to make plastics.

   Enzymes could also be evolved to withstand the harsh conditions of chemical
factories. Right now, because they work best at the moderate temperatures found
in living things, enzymes are used mainly in detergents, food and textile
processing and animal feeds.

   "There isn't any reason," Dr. Arnold said, that "we couldn't base a whole
chemical industry on biotechnology."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart/Diagram: "Mimicking Nature in the Lab"
By mutating genes and screening for enhanced properties, academic researchers
and scientists at companies that specialize in directed evolution hope to create
improved versions of proteins that can be used in everything from detergents to
drugs.

A gene or group of genes that code for a particular protein is selected.

To shuffle the genetic code, scientists cut the genes (above) and assemble the
fragments in new combinations (right). In another technique, they introduce
numerous errors into one type of gene.

The new genes are inserted into microbial cells, like bacteria, that produce
proteins based on the mutated genes.

Colonies of the bacteria are grown and tested for the presence of an improved
protein. For example, scientists would test an enzyme for enhanced ability to
remove stains or a drug for increased potency.

The genes of proteins exhibiting improved properties are isolated and can be
used to repeat the mutation process as many times as necessary to get the best
possible traits.

(Source: Frances H. Arnold, California Institute of Technology)

Graph: "Survival of the Fittest "
On Wall Street, investors are not sure which of the companies specializing in
directed evolution will succeed.

Graph tracks share prices of Enchira Biotechnology, Maxygen, Diversa*, Genencor
International* and Applied Molecular Evolution* since Jan.
(Source: Bloomberg Financial Markets)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2000


                             136 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       October 28, 2000, Saturday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; MEDICINE ; Pg. 22A

LENGTH: 425 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's gene test shows hope

BYLINE: Paul Recer


BODY:  WASHINGTON - A gene therapy experiment relieved severe symptoms of
Parkinson's disease in monkeys, and experts say the technique offers promise for
treating the 1.2 million Americans who suffer from the disease.

    A virus that had been joined with a gene that prompts production of
dopamine, a chemical neurotransmitter, was injected into the brains of monkeys
who had chemically induced Parkinson's disease.

    Three monkeys that had severe symptoms of Parkinson's were restored to near
normal by the gene therapy, said Jeffrey Kordower, first author of a study
appearing Friday in the journal Science.

    "We are able to stop the disease in its tracks and to keep it from
progressing," said Kordower, the director of the Research Center for Brain
Repair at the Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

    "The experiment showed dramatic protective effects," said Dr. Ted Dawson,
head of the Parkinson's Disease Research Center at Johns Hopkins University
Medical Center. "It is promising, but I would be only cautiously optimistic."

    Parkinson's disease, which affects about 1.2 million Americans, is a
progressive disorder that affects brain cells that make dopamine.

    The loss of dopamine causes the classic Parkinson's symptoms: trembling,
slow and stiff movement of limbs, a halting walk, speech difficulties and loss
of balance. Cause of the disease is unknown and there's no cure.

    Before the gene therapy could be tried in humans, questions about safety
would have to be answered, Dawson said.

    Dr. Mark Tuszynski, head of a brain disorder research center at the
University of California at San Diego, said the experiment was "fascinating" and
offers the promise of "a very attractive therapy."

    He said, however, that it's not known whether the brain cells affected by
the chemically induced Parkinson's in monkeys are precisely the same as those
affected by the actual disease in humans.

    Kordower said a separate safety study is under way in monkeys, and when that
is completed in about six months, an application for human clinical trials would
be prepared for presentation to the Food and Drug Administration.

    If all of the studies go smoothly, Kordower said, the gene therapy could be
ready for human testing in three to five years.

    Researchers at the Lausanne University Medical School in Switzerland altered
a virus so it carried a human gene for a brain chemical called glial-derived
neurotrophic factor.

    This chemical prompts the production of dopamine.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2000


                             137 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              October 27, 2000, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; NATION/WORLD BRIEFS; Pg. 40

LENGTH: 513 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy reverses effects of Parkinson's in old monkeys

BODY:


   Researchers at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center have successfully
used gene therapy to reverse the damage of Parkinson's disease in the brains of
aged monkeys, and to stop the progression of the disease in its early stages in
younger animals. By inserting a gene that increases the production of the
chemical nerve transmitter dopamine directly into the animals' brains,
scientists at Rush and Lausanne University in Switzerland were able to
significantly reverse the cellular brain damage. A report on their research is
in today's issue of the journal Science.

   Spacecraft gets close-up look at Eros asteroid The NEAR spacecraft buzzed the
asteroid Eros early Thursday, flying to within 18,000 feet of its boulder-strewn
surface. It was the nearest any spacecraft has come to an asteroid, and
scientists pored over the first of the 227 high-resolution pictures NEAR sent
back, looking for clues to the structure, geology and history of Eros' surface.
The first images revealed a landscape sculpted by faint craters, and littered
with boulders -- some the size of houses, and others as small as 4 feet across.
The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous was launched from Cape Canaveral, Fla., in
February 1996. It has been orbiting the 20-mile-long Eros since Feb. 14, 2000.

   Report faults response to mad cow disease Britain on Thursday promised
millions of dollars in compensation for families stricken by the human version
of mad cow disease, as it released a report showing officials were slow to
respond to its threat to human health. Eighty people have died from the
brain-wasting disease, and five other cases are suspected in Britain. Three
lawsuits have been filed against the government. The report said mistakes were
made in the handling of the crisis, including a six-month delay in informing the
public about the disease after government scientists identified it in late 1995,
for fear of causing panic and damaging British trade.

   Home ownership rate reaches record high Home ownership rates have soared to
67.7 percent, the highest level in history, during the third quarter of 2000,
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo said Thursday.  The rate
surpasses the 67.5 percent target the Clinton Administration set in 1995. Cuomo
said 71.6 million Americans own homes, a record number of them minorities, women
and city dwellers.  The new numbers show that 48.2 percent of minorities and 53
percent of women own homes.  And for the first time more than half of all urban
residents are homeowners.  Cuomo attributed the surge in home ownership to the
strong economy.

   Court clears way for young killers to gain parole

   Two boys who were 10 years old when they tortured and killed a toddler in
1993 are now eligible for parole, a British court ruled Thursday.  Robert
Thompson and John Venables, who were tried as adults, could be released as early
as February, Lord Chief Justice Woolf said.  The victim, 2-year-old James
Bulger, had been led away from a shopping mall near Liverpool, tormented and
beaten to death.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                             138 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                   October 27, 2000, FRIDAY, Midwest Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 298 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy attacks Parkinson's

SOURCE: Scripps Howard News Service

BYLINE: BY LEE BOWMAN

BODY:


   Researchers at a Chicago medical center have successfully used gene therapy
to reverse the damage of Parkinson's disease in the brains of aged monkeys, and
to stop the progression of the disease in its early stages in younger animals.

   By inserting a gene that increases the production of the chemical nerve
transmitter dopamine directly into the animals' brains, scientists at
Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center and Lausanne University in
Switzerland were able to significantly reverse the cellular brain damage.

   Doctors now usually try to make up for the loss of dopamine with a drug that
helps the brain produce it, but the effect eventually wears off. Some success
has been achieved by grafting fetal nerve tissue into brains of Parkinson's
patients, but this doesn't stop the loss of the original cells. The big hope
lies in some way of stopping the loss of the critical dopamine-producing cells
before the disease advances too far.

   "The study suggests a new approach to forestall disease progression in newly
diagnosed Parkinson's disease patients," said Jeffrey Kordower, director of the
Research Center for Brain Repair at Rush and lead author of a report on the
research published today in the journal Science.

   Key to the treatment is a special virus, called lenti-GDNF, developed by
Swiss researchers, that can deliver the gene for glial-derived neurotrophic
factor into the brains of the primates.

   Parkinson's is a slowly progressive disease that can cause tremors, limb
stiffness, balance and gait problems, and can contribute to dementia.
Parkinson's affects nearly 1 million Americans, most of whom are over the age of
60, but most develop the disease much earlier. The cause is unknown, but is
thought to have both genetic and environmental factors.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                             139 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     October 27, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 545 words

HEADLINE: Hope renewed for finding way to treat Parkinson's disease;
Gene experiment on monkeys shows promise

BYLINE: PAUL RECER Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- A gene therapy experiment relieved severe symptoms of
Parkinson's disease in monkeys, and experts say the technique offers promise for
treating the 1.2 million Americans who suffer from the disease.

   A virus that had been joined with a gene that prompts production of dopamine,
a chemical neurotransmitter, was injected into the brains of monkeys that had
chemically induced Parkinson's disease.

   Three monkeys that had severe symptoms of Parkinson's were restored to near
normal by the gene therapy, said Jeffrey H. Kordower, first author of a study
appearing today in the journal Science.

   "The experiment showed dramatic protective effects," said Ted M. Dawson, head
of the Parkinson's Disease Research Center at Johns Hopkins University Medical
Center. "It is promising, but I would be only cautiously optimistic."

   Parkinson's disease is a progressive disorder that affects brain cells that
make dopamine. The loss of dopamine causes the classic Parkinson's symptoms:
trembling, slow and stiff movement of limbs, a halting walk, speech difficulties
and loss of balance. Cause of the disease is unknown, and there is currently no
cure.

   Before the gene therapy could be tried in humans, questions about safety
would have to be answered, Dawson said.

   Mark H. Tuszynski, head of a brain disorder research center at the University
of California-San Diego, said it is not known whether the brain cells affected
by the chemically induced Parkinson's in monkeys are precisely the same as those
affected by the actual disease in humans.

   Kordower said a separate safety study was under way in monkeys, and when that
is completed in about six months, an application for human clinical trials would
be prepared for presentation to the Food and Drug Administration.

   If all of the studies go smoothly, said Kordower, the gene therapy could be
ready for human testing in three to five years.

   In the experiment, researchers Patrick Aebischer and Nicole Deglon at the
Lausanne University Medical School in Switzerland altered a virus so it carried
a human gene for a brain chemical called glial- derived neurotrophic factor, or
GDNF. This chemical prompts the production of dopamine. The virus was modified
so it would not cause an infection.

   The altered virus was injected into the brains of aged monkeys. Autopsies
later showed the gene caused brain cells to make dopamine and halted the normal
degeneration of brain cells.

   In effect, said Kordower, the GDNF gene restored parts of the aged brains to
a "youthful" condition, including an increase in the production of dopamine.

   Kordower said the researchers then injected a group of Rhesus monkeys with a
drug, MPTP, that artificially induces Parkinson's disease symptoms in both
monkeys and humans. Ten of the monkeys developed slow movement and other
symptoms of the disease.

   Five of the monkeys were then given GDNF gene therapy injections into the
brain. Five others were given a placebo. One monkey in each group died, for
unknown reasons, following the injections.

   Of the four remaining monkeys in the gene therapy group, three were totally
relieved of the Parkinson's symptoms. The four control monkeys continued to show
signs of the disease and became " severely impaired," said Kordower.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                             140 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       OCTOBER 27, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 760 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY ENCOURAGES RESEARCH INTO PARKINSON'S A NEW TREATMENT
REVERSED THE DISEASE'S EFFECTS IN MONKEYS. BUT OBSTACLES REMAIN BEFORE HUMAN
TESTS.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Scientists have used a novel gene therapy to reverse signs of Parkinson's
disease in monkeys, a finding that could lead to breakthrough treatments for the
debilitating neurological disorder that causes uncontrollable tremors and muscle
weakness in people.

   The experimental gene drug - developed by a team of American, Swiss and
French scientists - makes use of a gutted AIDS virus to deliver a growth-factor
gene to the part of the brain that is destroyed in Parkinson's.

   The drug, which was injected directly into the brains of four aging rhesus
monkeys and five young adult monkeys, prevented the brain-cell death that occurs
with Parkinson's and reversed symptoms of the disease, scientists report in
today's issue of the journal Science.

   "It's the most potent approach I've seen," said Jeffrey H. Kordower, a
neurologist at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, who led
the research team.

   Since monkeys do not naturally acquire Parkinson's, the scientists
artificially induced the disease by giving the younger monkeys a toxic chemical
that kills the same brain cells that are destroyed in the human illness and
causes the same symptoms.

   Before they got the gene drug, the monkeys were so disabled they could not
reach out and pick up fruit during a test of their motor skills. After the
therapy, they could.

   By contrast, untreated monkeys never regained their motor function.

   Kordower said the therapy, if it panned out in further tests, could be a
potent treatment and potential cure for a disease that afflicts between 500,000
and one million Americans, with about 50,000 cases diagnosed every year. But he
said it would take three to five years to gain the regulatory approval needed to
test the approach in humans - and many more years to bring any drug to the
market.

   Howard Hurtig, a neurologist who codirects the Parkinson's Disease and
Movement Disabilities Center at Pennsylvania Hospital, said the study was
impressive. He said the approach had great potential but cautioned that what
worked in artificially diseased monkeys might not work in the naturally
occurring disease in humans.

   In an accompanying commentary in Science, Lars Olson, a neuroscientist at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, said the approach provided "an
optimistic outlook" for treating not just Parkinson's but also other fatal
neurological disorders like Lou Gehrig's disease.

   Parkinson's, described as "the saddest of diseases" by James Parkinson in
1817, involves the progressive loss of muscle control. Although people typically
retain full mental capacity until the end, they have uncontrollable muscle
tremors, stiffness and weakness that make it difficult to eat, wash and dress
themselves.

   The cause of the illness, which usually afflicts people over 60, is unknown.
It occurs when certain nerve cells deep in the brain begin to die, reducing the
production of dopamine, a chemical messenger that regulates muscle contractions.

   The current mainstay of treatment is a drug known as L-dopa (levodopa), which
replaces the lost dopamine. The treatment alleviates symptoms, but only
temporarily.

   Experimental approaches involve transplants of fetal nerve cells into the
brains of Parkinson's victims and injections of growth-factor protein - as
opposed to the gene coding for that protein - into the brain.

   Neither has succeeded, and scientists turned to gene therapy as a possible
alternative.

   First, they removed all the genes from the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), which causes AIDS. Without its genes, the virus cannot trigger the fatal
illness, but it can act as a vehicle to shuttle genetic material into brain
cells.

   Then, they inserted into the HIV shell the gene that codes for a naturally
occurring protein that promotes the growth and repair of the dopamine-producing
cells in the brain.

   Finally, the scientists used a thin needle syringe to inject these doctored
viruses directly into the brains of the monkeys. The viruses entered the target
cells and delivered their genetic payload, prompting the cells to churn out
dopamine.

   Because of potential safety concerns, Kordower said, the team is working on
ways to install a chemical switch that would allow scientists to turn off the
growth-factor gene in the event of side effects. Too much of the factor, for
instance, could trigger psychotic illness.

   That issue, he said, will have to be worked out in monkey studies before
scientists proceed to human trials.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             141 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    October 27, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-7, NATIONAL BRIEFS

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: BIOTERRORIST BILL PASSES SENATE

BODY:


   WASHINGTON -- The Senate yesterday passed, by unanimous consent, an $ 919.5
million bill yesterday intended to improve the nation's ability to respond to a
bioterrorist attack, modernize federal disease laboratories and move toward
placing heart defibrillators in all federal buildings.

   A major portion of the bill authorizes $ 540 million to strengthen the
nation's ability to deal with serious public health threats such as
antimicrobial resistance and bioterrorist attacks. It provides grants to study
how well public health agencies respond to disease outbreaks, coordinates
efforts between federal agencies and authorizes the National Institutes of
Health and Centers for Disease Control to develop new vaccines for biological
weapons.

The heart defibrillator provision allows the Health and Human Services
Department to make recommendations on placing these external devices in federal
buildings. It also protects helpers from liability.

   Serial killer sentenced

   SPOKANE, Wash. -- Robert L. Yates Jr., who confessed to killing 13 people and
one attempted murder dating back a quarter-century to avoid the death penalty,
asked God to right his wrongs as he was sentenced yesterday to 408 years in
prison.

   Last week, the 48-year-old Army veteran and National Guard helicopter pilot
admitted to 10 Spokane-area slayings from 1996 to 1998, the murders of a young
man and woman in southern Washington in 1975 and the murder of a woman in the
state's northeastern corner in 1988.

Yates, a father of five, could still face the death penalty in Pierce County in
western Washington, where he is charged with two additional slayings.

   Hockey injury sentence

   WAUKEGAN, Ill. -- A high school hockey player who slammed an opponent into
the boards, leaving him paralyzed, was given two years' probation yesterday.

   In August, the 16-year-old boy, whose name was withheld because of his age,
entered a plea to misdemeanor battery in which he did not admit guilt but
acknowledged there was enough evidence to find him guilty.

   The boy was ordered to perform 120 hours of community service, most of it at
hospitals that care for paralyzed patients, and was forbidden to play contact
sports while on probation.

   The boy pushed Neal Goss, 16, from behind and slammed him into the boards at
a game last November. Goss was paralyzed from the chest down.

Goss' family is suing the other player's family.

   Parkinson's inroads

   Scientists have used a novel gene therapy to reverse signs of Parkinson's
disease in monkeys, a finding that could lead to breakthrough treatments for the
debilitating neurological disorder that causes uncontrollable tremors and muscle
weakness in people.

   The experimental gene drug -- developed by a team of American, Swiss and
French scientists -- makes use of a gutted AIDS virus to deliver a growth-factor
gene to the part of the brain that is destroyed in Parkinson's.

The drug, which was injected directly into the brains of four aging rhesus
monkeys and five young adult monkeys, prevented the brain-cell death that occurs
with Parkinson's and reversed symptoms of the disease, scientists report in
today's issue of the journal Science.

   Also in the nation

   Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger was hospitalized Wednesday in New
York City with pulmonary cardiac symptoms, but his office in Washington said
yesterday he was "doing well" ... Home ownership rates have soared to 67.7
percent, the highest level in history, during the third quarter of 2000, Housing
and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo said yesterday ... Washington state
voters yesterday lost authority to veto government-imposed tax and fee
increases, but got to keep cheap car registration fees after the state Supreme
Court declared a voter-approved tax cut initiative unconstitutional.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2000


                             142 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 27, 2000, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Parkinson's research promising; Genetic drug therapy reverses disease
in monkeys; human treatment years off

BYLINE: KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Scientists have used a novel gene therapy to reverse signs of Parkinson's
disease in monkeys, a finding that could lead to breakthrough treatments for the
debilitating neurological disorder that causes uncontrollable tremors and muscle
weakness in people.

   The experimental gene drug -- developed by a team of American, Swiss and
French scientists -- makes use of a gutted AIDS virus to deliver a growth-factor
gene to the part of the brain that is destroyed in Parkinson's.

   The drug, which was injected directly into the brains of four aging rhesus
monkeys and five young adult monkeys, prevented the brain-cell death that occurs
with Parkinson's and reversed symptoms of the disease, scientists report in
today's issue of the journal Science.

   "It's the most potent approach I've seen," said Jeffrey Kordower, a
neurologist at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago, who led
the research team.

   Since monkeys don't naturally acquire Parkinson's, the scientists
artificially induced the disease by giving the younger monkeys a toxic chemical
that kills the same brain cells that are destroyed in the human illness and
causes the same symptoms.

   Before they got the gene drug, the monkeys were so disabled that they
couldn't reach out and pick up fruit during a test of their motor skills.  After
the therapy, they could.

   By contrast, untreated monkeys never regained their motor function.

   Kordower said the therapy, if it pans out in further tests, could be a potent
treatment and potential cure for a disease that afflicts 1 million Americans,
with some 50,000 new cases diagnosed every year.  But he said it would take
three to five years to gain the regulatory approval needed to test the approach
in humans -- and many more years to bring any drug to the market.

   Dr. Howard Hurtig, a neurologist who co-directs the Parkinson's Disease and
Movement Disabilities Center at Pennsylvania Hospital in Philadelphia, called
the study "very impressive." He said the approach has great potential, but
cautioned that what works in artificially diseased monkeys may not work in the
naturally occurring disease in humans.

   In an accompanying commentary in Science, Lars Olson, a neuroscientist at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, said the approach provides "an
optimistic outlook" for treating not just Parkinson's but also other fatal
neurological disorders such as Lou Gehrig's disease.


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2000


                             143 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                October 27, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A2

LENGTH: 362 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY IN MONKEYS CONTROLS SYMPTOMS OF PARKINSON'S DISEASE

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTONMEDICAL RESEARCH; ANIMAL TRIAL; PARKINSON'S DISEASE

BODY:


   A gene transferred to the brains of monkeys was able to control symptoms of
Parkinson's disease in an experiment that experts say offers promise for human
patients.

   The test used a virus that had been linked to a gene that prompts production
in the brain of dopamine, a chemical neurotransmitter. The loss of dopamine is
thought to cause Parkinson's disease.

   Three monkeys with chemically induced Parkinson's disease were restored to
near normal by the gene, said Jeffrey H. Kordower, first author of a study
appearing today in the journal Science.

   "We are able to stop the disease in its tracks and to keep it from
progressing," said Kordower, the director of the Research Center for Brain
Repair at Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

   "The experiment showed dramatic protective effects," said Dr. Ted M.  Dawson,
head of the Parkinson's Disease Research Center at Johns Hopkins University
Medical Center. Dawson said there still are questions of safety that would have
to be answered before the gene therapy could be tried in humans.

   In the experiment, two researchers at the Lausanne University Medical School
in Switzerland developed an altered virus that carries a gene for a brain
chemical, GDNF, that prompts the production of dopamine.

   The virus with the GDNF gene was injected into the brains of aged monkeys,
and autopsy later showed that the gene caused brain cells to make dopamine and
halted the normal degeneration of brain cells.

   Kordower said that the researchers then injected a group of Rhesus monkeys
with a drug, MPTP, that artificially induces Parkinson's disease symptoms. Ten
of the monkeys developed pronounced symptoms.

   Five of the 10 were then given the GDNF gene therapy injection into the
brain. Five others were given a placebo injection. One monkey in each group died
following the injections.

   Of the four remaining monkeys in the gene therapy, three were totally
relieved of the Parkinson's symptoms. The four control monkeys continued to show
signs of the disease and became "severely impaired," said Kordower.

   Symptoms of Parkinson's include trembling, a halting walk and speech
difficulties.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000


                             144 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            October 27, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 435 words

HEADLINE: Monkey experiment shows promise for fighting Parkinson's

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A gene therapy experiment relieved severe symptoms of Parkinson's disease in
monkeys, and experts say the technique offers promise for treating the 1.2
million Americans who suffer from the disease, experts say.

    A virus that had been joined with a gene that prompts production of
dopamine, a chemical neurotransmitter, was injected into the brains of monkeys
who had chemically induced Parkinson's disease.

    Three monkeys that had severe symptoms of Parkinson's were restored to near
normal by the gene therapy, said Jeffrey H. Kordower, first author of a study
appearing today in the journal Science.

    ``We are able to stop the disease in its tracks and to keep it from
progressing," said Kordower, the director of the Research Center for Brain
Repair at the Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.

    ``The experiment showed dramatic protective effects," said Ted M. Dawson,
head of the Parkinson's Disease Research Center at Johns Hopkins University
Medical Center. "It is promising, but I would be only cautiously optimistic."

    Parkinson's disease, which affects about 1.2 million Americans, is a
progressive disorder that affects brain cells that make dop-mine. The loss of
dopamine causes the classic Parkinson's symptoms: trembling, slow and stiff
movement of limbs, a halting walk, speech difficulties and loss of balance.
Cause of the disease is unknown and there is no cure.

    Before the gene therapy could be tried in humans, questions about safety
would have to be answered, Dawson said.

    Mark H. Tuszynski, head of a brain disorder research center at the
University of California, San Diego, said the experiment in mon- keys was
"fascinating" and offers the promise of "a very attractive therapy."

    He said, however, that it is not known whether the brain cells affected by
the chemically induced Parkinson's in monkeys are precisely the same as those
affected by the actual disease in humans.

   Kordower said a separate safety study is under way in monkeys, and when that
is completed in about six months, an application for human clinical trials would
be prepared for presentation to the Food and Drug Administration.

    If all of the studies go smoothly, said Kordower, the gene therapy could be
ready for human testing in three to five years.

    In the experiment, researchers Patrick Aebischer and Nicole Deglon at the
Lausanne University Medical School in Switzerland altered a virus so it carried
a human gene for a brain chemical called glial-derived neurotrophic factor, or
GDNF. This chemical prompts the production of dopamine. The virus also was
modified so it would not cause an infection.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2007


                             145 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    October 27, 2000, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy could help treat Parkinson's Critics: Success in monkeys
could fail in humans

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

BODY:

   Gene therapy in primates has succeeded in reversing the nerve
damage that occurs in Parkinson's disease, a study out today says.

   U.S. and Swiss researchers say the therapy relieved the tremors,
stiffness and other motor symptoms caused by the disease.

   "We can stop the progression of Parkinson's disease," says Jeffrey
Kordower, lead author of the study in today's Science.
"We can stop the motor deficits from emerging and from getting
worse."


   Researchers praise the study, but they caution that many potential
therapies don't make the leap from primates to humans.

   "It's a tour de force," says Abraham Lieberman of the National
Parkinson Foundation in Miami Beach. "For the first time, they
have targeted a growth factor to an area of the brain in Parkinson's."

   About 1.2 million people in the USA and Canada have Parkinson's
disease, a progressive breakdown of the brain region that affects
motor skills. This region, called the substantia nigra, is stocked
with cells that produce dopamine, which governs smooth movement.

   "We have fairly effective ways of treating (Parkinson's) symptoms,
but the disease continues to progress," says Matthew Stern, director
of the University of Pennsylvania's Parkinson's Disease and Movement
Disorders Center. "But how can we prevent the damage from occurring?

   "The next generation of therapies will be aimed at the disease
process itself. This research is the gateway."

   Kordower of Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago
and his team used a gene that makes a nerve-cell growth factor
called GDNF, which safeguards brain cells that die in Parkinson's
disease. The researchers inserted the gene into a special virus
and injected it into monkeys' brains.

   Six injections increased dopamine production dramatically in eight
monkeys who were used to study the therapy's biological impact.
The researchers also injected the gene into 20 other monkeys,
90% of whose dopamine-producing cells had been destroyed. The
injections reversed the brain cell destruction and improved their
motor-skills performance to "near normal."

   However, Lieberman cautions, "the monkey isn't an entirely faithful
model of Parkinson's disease. Parkinson's evolves slowly, and
the mechanism of cell destruction may be different." In the study,
researchers simulated Parkinson's in monkeys by giving them a
chemical that destroyed certain brain cells.

   Another obstacle is the challenge of delivering genes to the brain.
Human gene therapy trials have been on hold since the death of
a patient at the University of Pennsylvania last fall. "As long
as the safety profile looks promising in experimental models,"
Stern says, "I think we should look for human trials in a few
years."

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                             146 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               October 26, 2000, THURSDAY, Final Markets Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 303 words

HEADLINE: Therapy shows promise in treating Parkinson's

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A gene therapy experiment relieved severe symptoms of Parkinson's disease in
monkeys, and the technique is promising for treating the 1.2 million Americans
who suffer from the disease, experts say.

   A virus that had been joined with a gene that prompts production of dopamine,
a chemical neurotransmitter, was injected into the brains of monkeys that had
chemically induced Parkinson's disease.

   Three monkeys that had severe symptoms of Parkinson's were restored to near
normal by the gene therapy, said Jeffrey H. Kordower, author of a study
appearing in the journal Science.

   "We are able to stop the disease in its tracks and to keep it from
progressing," said Kordower, director of the Research Center for Brain Repair at
Rush Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center.

   "The experiment showed dramatic protective effects," said Dr. Ted M. Dawson,
head of the Parkinson's Disease Research Center at Johns Hopkins University
Medical Center. "It is promising, but I would be only cautiously optimistic."

   Parkinson's disease, which affects about 1.2 million Americans, is a
progressive disorder that affects brain cells that make dopamine. The loss of
dopamine causes the classic Parkinson's symptoms: trembling, slow and stiff
movement of limbs, a halting walk, speech difficulties and loss of balance.
Cause of the disease is unknown, and there is no cure.

   Before the gene therapy could be tried in humans, questions about safety need
to be answered, Dawson said.

   Kordower said a separate safety study is under way in monkeys, and when that
is completed in about six months, an application for human clinical trials would
be prepared for presentation to the Food and Drug Administration.

   If the studies go smoothly, the gene therapy could be ready for human testing
in three to five years, Kordower said.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000


                             147 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   October 25, 2000, Wednesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Program encourages girls' participation in sciences

BODY:

   More than 60 Bellaire High School students have been participating in a
series of Career Seminars for Girls in Math, Science and Technology.

   The new program, sponsored by the National Science Foundation and
administered through a grant with Rice University, recruits volunteers from
industry and academia to visit the campus on a bi-monthly basis. At one meeting,
a guest speaker presents working experiences and answers questions that the
students might have. The second meeting invites eight to 10 mentors to discuss
college and career experiences in a small discussion group of five to 10
students. The program has scheduled 12 meetings throughout the school year.

   This program, while new to Bellaire High School, has been in effect for three
years at a number of HISD high schools and middle schools. Historically,
colleges and universities have awarded a relatively small percentage of their
degrees in math, science and technology to women and minorities. This program
was created to help increase those numbers. It's objective is to provide
information, role models and encouragement for girls, and minorities to consider
careers in math, science and technology. While it is orientated toward girls and
minorities, the Seminar Series is open to all students.

   "I'm excited about the possibilities of this program," said co-sponsor Dick
Granoff, who teaches physics at Bellaire. "I first heard about this program last
year when Rice announced a workshop on Equity Initiatives for Science and
Mathematics. As the father of two daughters and the husband of an engineer, I'm
rather sensitive to the special needs of women as I'm concerned about my
daughter's futures. While my own daughters are blessed with a mother and several
aunts in technical careers to serve as role models, I recognized that many girls
at Bellaire are not so fortunate. I thought that this program might help change
that situation.

   "Our first meeting featured Corliss Denman, MS, CHE, a program director at
The Methodist Hospital who is responsible for the Center for Cell and Gene
Therapy (CAGT). She provided a brief slide presentation about her recent efforts
in developing the CAGT and then answered a number of questions. Feedback from
students was that they especially liked her frank responses to their questions,"
Granoff said.

   The second meeting involves a number of mentors to discuss "the college
experience" with the students in small groups. "We are fortunate to have several
very talented professionals with a wide range of experiences to mentor our
students," said co-sponsor Kristin Roland, who teaches biology. "Our mentors
include architects, medical residents, directors, research scientists and
college professors. I'm confident that their varied backgrounds will benefit our
students as they struggle with college and career choices."

   Professionals who would like to volunteer and participate in the program are
invited to contact Sandy Bankston at 713-349-1800 ext. 319. She is one of the
program coordinators at Rice University.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Gail Frazier, middle, talks with Bellaire students at a recent
career day session at the school.; R. Clayton McKee photo

TYPE: -LINKS-

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2000


                             148 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 22, 2000, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: Man desperate for gene therapy testing to resume

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio

BODY:

   COLUMBUS, Ohio - Last year, Donovan Decker became the first recipient of a
gene therapy injection to test the safety of a possible treatment for muscular
dystrophy. Now he's worried his cure won't come soon enough.

   The experiment ended abruptly after the death of a teen-ager who received a
different gene therapy treatment.

   Decker, of Huron, S.D., suffers from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, a
disease that mostly damages muscles that stabilize the hips and shoulders. The
36-year-old air traffic controller cannot walk long distances, and his condition
is worsening.

   Researchers at Ohio State University Medical Center, in conjunction with the
University of Pennsylvania, injected the therapeutic gene into a muscle on the
top of Decker's foot on Sept. 3, 1999. The injection contained a cold virus
modified to carry genes for a muscle protein Decker was missing because of a
genetic flaw.

   The injection was sufficient only to test the procedure, not to improve
Decker's health. Doctors warned that the procedure could worsen his condition
and put him in a wheelchair earlier than expected, Decker said, but he recalls
feeling happy and hopeful at taking some action.

   "If nothing is done I am pretty much going to be in a wheelchair in three
years anyway," Decker said.

   Adding to Decker's urgency, four of his seven siblings have the disease. His
only sister without it has two daughters with MD.

   "A couple of my sisters are in wheelchairs all the time," he said.

   Decker's mother, Ruth Weber, found out 21 years ago that five of her children
have MD.

   "It was very traumatic. You have your hopes and dreams for your kids and I
thought they wouldn't be able to do anything," Weber said. "Which was wrong
because they all have excelled in their lives."

   Decker was the first of an expected six participants in the Muscular
Dystrophy Association-funded experiment. A 14-year-old boy, whom doctors would
not identify, also received an injection.

   The testing was stopped after Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died
Sept. 17, 1999, four days after a University of Pennsylvania team injected a
gene into his liver to combat an inherited disease.

   "As soon as I heard about the Pennsylvania patient's death over the radio I
called the hospital," Decker said. "They told me it was a different type of
virus and process."

   In March, the Food and Drug Administration suspended the trials at the
University of Pennsylvania Institute for Human Gene Therapy. Gelsinger's family
filed a wrongful death lawsuit against his doctors and the university in
September.

   "The entire gene research industry got shook up. Any studies connected to the
University of Pennsylvania were stopped," said Dr. Jerry Mendell, chairman of
Ohio State's neurology department.

   Mendell, who performed the procedure on Decker and the boy, said even those
two cases will provide a lot of information.

   "We are not back to square one because we made good strides toward finding
out how much the body accepted the gene therapy," Mendell said. "We will have a
complete analysis of the whole program in the next few months to present to the
FDA."

   The Muscular Dystrophy Association spent $ 29 million this year toward
finding a cure for the 250,000 Americans with the disease and still considers
gene therapy the most promising treatment, research director Ronald
Schenkenberger said.

   While gene injections are restricted, the association is concentrating on
other avenues such as stem-cell research, Schenkenberger said.

   "Bone marrow transplants - like the method used to treat leukemia - are a
means to introduce stem cells to the body," he said. "Because it is not a new
procedure the restrictions are less."

   Cheryl Wall, an Ohio State Medical Center nurse, said she has talked with
hundreds of people who have family members with MD who hope the federal agency
reviewing the research will allow gene therapy trials to resume.

   "They understand a need for safety but they also want to see the FDA move a
little faster," she said. "They are watching their loved ones disintegrate. They
see a daily decline."


LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                             149 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            October 22, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: MONEY; Economic Development; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: Research billed as economic booster

BYLINE: Stewart Yerton

BODY:

   New Orleans is in a prime position to use the building blocks of humans to
build up the city's economy: That was the overriding message presented to
business executives last week at a Health Sciences Safari sponsored by the
Downtown Development District and the New Orleans Regional Chamber of Commerce.

   A group of several dozen business people toured Louisiana State University's
Health Sciences Center, Tulane University's Health Sciences Center and the
Tulane Primate Center on the north shore. Attendees saw what people in the New
Orleans science community have long known: The universities have tremendous
research and development assets, particularly in the nascent field of gene
therapy.

   The trip's organizers sought to explain to business leaders the economic
value of biotechnology, as well as the steps needed to take products from the
laboratory to the shelves of doctors' offices and pharmacies.

   Participants toured labs where scientists are finding new methods of
identifying cancer cells and seeking cures for diseases such as breast cancer.
They heard presentations from Dr. Jay Kolls, director of LSU's gene therapy
program, and Darwin Prockop, Kolls' counterpart at Tulane.

   Beyond the fundamental work of trying to save lives through diligent
research, Kolls and Prockop are doing their part for the city's economy by
building staffs of highly trained researchers, who in turn do their part by
landing grant money to support their endeavors. Prockop brought 15 scientists to
New Orleans from Philadelphia for his center at Tulane and is in the process of
hiring another 15.

   Scientists at Tulane and LSU invent a wealth of patentable drugs. Tulane
ranks seventh among universities nationally in revenue produced from
patent-licensing deals, said Paul Whelton, senior vice president of Tulane
University Health Sciences Center and interim dean of Tulane's medical school.

   A major issue is how to create pharmaceutical firms in New Orleans that will
take ideas from the patent stage to the market.

   St. Charles Pharmaceuticals Inc. is an example of just such a company.
Founded by Dr. Nicolas Bazan, chairman of LSU's Neuroscience Center of
Excellence, the company has a deal to take drug technology developed by LSU
scientists from the patent stage, through clinical trials, regulatory approvals
and eventually to the public. The company has produced a painkiller as an
alternative to Tylenol, and has more ideas in the pipeline.

   Barry LeBlanc, chief financial officer of St. Charles Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
said the company is continuing to look for venture capital to finance the
clinical trials and other steps needed to take new drugs to the market.

   The business leaders' trip ended at Tulane University's Primate Center, where
monkeys are bred to use in clinical trials.

   These various assets -- scientists, laboratories and the primate center --
let New Orleans researchers take ideas from the earliest stages to near the
point where they may be ready to be tested on people.

   Rebecca Conwell, a legislative affairs executive with Tulane, said the idea
for the trip came from a 1999 Chamber of Commerce trip to Minneapolis, where she
said business executives were impressed by presentations on the Twin Cities'
success in using its university medical centers to build a high-tech industry.
Many of the New Orleans executives on the trip, Conwell said, were not aware of
what New Orleans had.

   Conwell's co-organizer was James Hardy, director of technology development
for LSU Health Sciences Center Foundation.

   Hardy said the next important steps are to make an inventory of private
venture capital available locally and to develop an incubator that scientists
can use to take their ideas from the laboratories to the shelves of doctors'
offices and pharmacies. The city also needs to take steps to make the New
Orleans medical corridor more attractive to private investors, he said.

   "We have the research raw material that can feed an industry," Hardy said.
"We need that second and third element of money and infrastructure."

   . . . . . . .

Stewart Yerton covers economic development. He can be reached at (504) 826-3495
or via e-mail at syerton@timespicayune.com

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY CHUCK COOK Local business leaders look at monkeys that
look back at them Tuesday afternoon during a tour of the Tulane Primate Center
near Covington. The visit was sponsored by the New Orleans Regional Chamber of
Commerce and the Downtown Development District.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000


                             150 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    October 17, 2000, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 24 Medicine

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: FOCUS: LACTOSE INTOLERANCE;
DIETARY DILEMMA;
Dairy doesn't sit well with everyone, so some find calcium elsewhere

SOURCE: Staff

BYLINE: JANETTE RODRIGUES

BODY:

   The "Got milk?" ads - and the mustachioed celebrities in them - make for one
of the most memorable campaigns in recent history.

   But dairy doesn't always do a body good.

   David O suffers from lactose intolerance, the inability to properly digest
dairy foods. His self-imposed ban began at 16.

   "Whenever I had something with dairy in it, it would hurt and I'd get just an
immense pain in the (gastrointestinal) tract," said O, a local artist in his
early 20s.

   Although most American adults consume milk, cheese and other dairy products
with no difficulties, others - particularly racial and ethnic minorities -
experience digestive problems that may include abdominal cramps, nausea,
excessive gas, bloating and diarrhea.

   Researchers also recently connected a type of chronic eczema, an itchy skin
condition, to lactose intolerance.

   According to the National Institutes of Health, some 30 million to 50 million
American adults may be lactose intolerant to varying degrees. Experts estimate
that about 8 percent to 15 percent of white adults in the United States are
lactose intolerant, while 75 percent of blacks suffer from it, as do a like
number of Jews and American Indians and about 50 percent of Hispanics. It also
affects some people of Southern European and Middle Eastern ancestry.

   Approximately 90 percent of Asian-American adults, like O, who is Chinese
American, are lactose intolerant.

   "There's not a lot of media coverage of this problem," O said. "I don't think
there is a lot of information disseminated to the public."

   Dr. Buford Nichols Jr., emeritus director of the Baylor College of Medicine
Children's Nutrition Research Center, noted that among adults, lactose
intolerance is actually one of the most common enzyme deficiencies.

   Lactase, an enzyme produced by the small intestine that is needed to digest
the milk sugar lactose, is lacking in those who have trouble with dairy
products. The symptoms usually occur from 30 minutes to two hours after eating.

   Although thousands of papers have been written about lactose intolerance, the
condition doesn't generate great public concern in this country because it
usually isn't life threatening and the majority of the population isn't affected
by it, said Nichols, who is also a Baylor professor of pediatrics.

   Lactose intolerance sneaks up on you, say sufferers and those who treat them.

   Nutritionist Brenda K. Kirk, executive director of the Houston Food Bank,
said that the onset of the condition is often gradual and the symptoms are
intermittent. She added that it's not always readily evident to people that
their gastrointestinal problems are related to the dairy content of their food.

   Laura Hsu, a Rice University clinical microbiologist, believes many Asians
are unaware of the problem because milk isn't a staple of their normal diet,
which includes calcium-rich vegetables, tofu and legumes.

   "However, when we change our diets to one that is loaded with milk and milk
products, that is when the symptoms begin," Hsu said.

   She and her husband, Tom Hsu, are Chinese American. They found out about
lactose intolerance 30 years ago when doctors put Tom Hsu on a milk diet for an
ulcer.

   "I became sicker, in more pain, emaciated and so weak that I had to be
hospitalized," said Tom Hsu, a University of Houston engineering professor.

   While hospitalized, he was put on yet more stringent milk and cream diets and
subjected to a barrage of tests for cancer, metabolic diseases, autoimmune
conditions, mental and emotional disorders, colitis and even tropical parasitic
infections.

   It was an Asian medical intern who brought up the possibility of lactose
intolerance.

   "At the time, lactose intolerance was only an exotic notion that was
certainly not widely known among medical practitioners," Tom Hsu said.

   Nutrition experts note there are plenty of calcium-rich alternatives to milk.
Many nondairy foods have it. Green vegetables such as broccoli and collard
greens, as well as tofu, molasses, enriched soy and rice milk, and fish with
soft, edible bones are alternative sources for the calcium needed to maintain a
strong and healthy body.

   Some people can tolerate lactose-reduced or lactose-free milk, hard cheeses,
yogurt and goat milk. Others use a lactase enzyme pill such as Lactaid to
alleviate the symptoms.

   But the pills and special milks don't work for everyone.

   And in the future, there may be no need for them.

   A type of gene therapy that might cure the condition is being developed at
Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. Implementation is still years away.

   In the meantime, O and others just want the issue of lactose intolerance to
get more public attention.

   "We need to mount a campaign," he said. "I didn't know so many Asian
Americans had this."





   For more information


   The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
www.niddk.nih.gov

   The Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research,
www.mayohealth.org

   The American Dietetic Association, Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 4
p.m., 1-800-366-1655, www.eatright.org.


GRAPHIC: Mug: 1. Dr. Buford Nichols; Photo: 2. David O is lactose intolerant. He
gets his calcium from sources other than dairy.  Broccoli is one calcium- rich
food that O finds easier to digest; Graph: 3. For more information (TEXT); 2.
Andrew Innerarity / Chronicle

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000


                             151 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     October 16, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: SEVERAL IPOS AWAIT CALMER MARKET;
 WALL ST.: ALMOST 180 FIRMS HAVE SET ASIDE PLANS SO FAR THIS YEAR, VERSUS JUST
131 IN ALL OF 1999, ANALYSTS SAY.

BYLINE: DENISE DUCLAUX, REUTERS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:


   Companies hoping to float new stock offerings, including agricultural giant
Monsanto Co. and Chinese oil firm Sinopec, are on pins and needles in the wake
of last week's dramatic market volatility.

   After plummeting from Monday through Thursday last week, the Nasdaq composite
index surged 7.9% on Friday, its second-biggest one-day point gain ever.

   As the market tumbled for much of the week, many companies shelved plans for
initial public offerings or slashed terms of the deals.

   Only five of about 15 IPO deals tentatively scheduled to begin trading last
week actually ventured onto Wall Street, according to financial data site
WorldFinanceNet.com.

   Some of the companies that did come to market faced sharply reduced deals.
Gene therapy firm Introgen Therapeutics Inc. (ticker symbol: INGN) sold 4
million shares at $ 8 each, the bottom of its expected range. Software firm
Synplicity Inc. (SYNP) sold 4.3 million shares at $ 8. It had hoped to get as
much as $ 12 a share.

   By Friday's close, investors who took a chance on those two issues at the
offering prices were rewarded: Introgen closed at $ 10.44 on Friday; Synplicity
closed at $ 14.

   "I suspect with this exceptional volatility in the market right now companies
that don't have to come to market may choose to wait until there is more
stability," said Christopher Ely, co-manager of Loomis Sayles Small-Cap Growth
Fund. "I would not be surprised if we saw some back off despite the rally" on
Friday.

   Among the firms that withdrew planned IPOs last week were software maker
YouCentric Inc., broadband services provider B2 Bredand and biotech firm
Drugabuse Sciences Inc.

   Almost 180 companies have withdrawn or postponed IPOs so far this year,
versus just 131 in all of 1999, according to research firm Thomson Financial
Securities Data.

   Among the deals that might test the waters this week is an IPO from Monsanto.
The maker of herbicides, seeds and related products became part of drug giant
Pharmacia Corp. (PHA) in a merger earlier this year.

   Now, Pharmacia wants to spin off about 14% of Monsanto to the public. The
shares are expected to be priced between $ 21 and $ 24 and trade under the
symbol MON.

   Another deal expected to begin U.S. trading this week is the stock offering
from Sinopec, whose formal name is China Petroleum Chemical Corp. The company
explores for oil and gas in China and also refines and markets gasoline.

   Though high oil prices might be expected to give a boost to the offering,
Sinopec is China's largest refiner, and thus suffers from higher costs as crude
prices rise.

   The stock is expected to begin U.S. trading at $ 20.65 a share this week.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2000


                             152 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    October 16, 2000 Monday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B01, Silicon Forest Watch

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: FIVE OREGON INTERNET COMPANIES LOOK TO STATE SCHOOLS FOR RESEARCH

SOURCE: STEVE WOODWARD - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Stand aside, dot-coms. Academics are clamoring for a piece of the action,
too.

   This month, five Oregon companies, whose technologies emerged from Oregon
universities, told their stories at Spin-Out 2000, a companion event to the
Venture Oregon conference in Portland.

   * Activated Cell Systems of Portland is using gene technology to target human
diseases caused by viruses. Headed by longtime Portland biotech entrepreneur and
financier Brock Metcalf, the company relies on its own research and
company-sponsored research at the Vaccine/Gene Therapy Institute at Oregon
Health Sciences University.

   * AirAdvice of Portland is developing a personal air-monitoring system to
provide continually updated air-quality information to asthma and allergy
sufferers. The product includes a low-cost indoor air-quality monitor, a
database of outdoor air-quality data and a messaging system that analyzes data
and delivers personalized advice via the Internet to clients. The technology is
based on work in Portland State University's Atmospheric Research Group.

   * VerteDyne of Portland has developed bone-regenerating technology that
initially will target doctors who repair spinal fractures caused by
osteoporosis. Based on technology developed at Oregon Health Sciences
University, VerteDyne's product consists of two parts: a combination of bone
precursor cells and a stabilizing compound, and an endoscope that enables
surgeons to inject the materials into patients.

   * Zaps Technologies' sensor technology enables users to analyze water quality
remotely, automatically and in real time. The Corvallis company's Zero Angle
Photon Spectrometer can measure substances such as dissolved organic carbon,
airplane de-icer fluids and pesticides. The technology comes out of Oregon State
University.

   * On Time Systems of Eugene uses artificial intelligence to make large-scale
industrial and military manufacturing more efficient. Based on optimization
technology from the University of Oregon's Computational Intelligence Research
Laboratory, On Time Systems already has solved problems such as reducing fuel
costs for U.S. Air Force cargo planes.  -- Steve Woodward

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2000


                             153 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 14, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   CardioDynamics rumors swirl

   CardioDynamics International's stock rose yesterday on speculation that it
may sign a deal to integrate its heart monitoring technology with Agilent
Technologies' hospital bedside monitors.  The San Diego medical device company,
responding yesterday to a report in Business Week magazine, denied any deal was
imminent.  The company said it has held preliminary discussions with Agilent and
other medical products companies, but none have led to an agreement.  The
company's stock, which trades under the symbol CDIC, closed yesterday at $5.25,
up 56 cents.

   Sempra unit completes deal

   Sempra Energy said its international subsidiary has completed the $145
million purchase of Dominion Resources natural gas and electricity assets in
Argentina.  Sempra also announced it has agreed to sell one of the acquired
assets, a 25 percent interest in Baeco, a holding company, to Camuzzi Argentina
for an undisclosed amount.

   AMCC ready to split stock

   AMCC shareholders will receive one additional share of common stock for every
share held on Monday, Oct. 16, as part of a 2-for-1 split announced earlier this
week.  The additional shares will be distributed Oct. 30. San Diego-based AMCC,
which makes communications chips, said the split will also automatically adjust
the exchange ratio in AMCC's proposed merger with MMC Networks.

   Testing due on Genvascor

   Collateral Therapeutics Inc. said its strategic partner, Schering AG, has
filed regulatory applications to launch clinical trials in Europe for its gene
therapy, Genvascor.  Collateral said it expects the Phase I/II trials, set to
begin later this year, to enroll up to 130 patients at 10 European medical
centers.  The trials will test the gene therapy product on patients with
peripheral vascular disease.  The compound has the potential to restore blood
flow to oxygen-deprived regions of the leg, according to the company.

   Trega Biosciences, J&J link

   Trega Biosciences said it has licensed its predictive drug development
software to two subsidiaries of Johnson & Johnson, the company's largest deal to
date.  Terms of the multi-year arrangement were not disclosed.  The software
predicts how potential drug candidates will be absorbed and metabolized.

   Hollis-Eden widens holdings

   Hollis-Eden Pharmaceuticals said that it has acquired a 21 percent stake in
Tucson-based Aeson Therapeutics.  As part of the deal, Hollis-Eden will obtain
an exclusive, worldwide sublicense to three patents concerning adrenal steroids.
The San Diego drug development company will pay $2 million in cash and 208,681
shares of its stock for its equity interest in Aeson.  The company also has an
option to acquire the remainder of Aeson in the next 30 months.

   Diversa expanding pact

   Diversa Corp. announced an expanded collaboration agreement with Novartis
Agribusiness Biotechnology Research Inc. under which it will receive research
payments, milestones and product royalties.

   Ameranth receives funding

   Springboard Capital, a venture capital firm based in Laguna Beach, said it
has made a $5 million investment in Ameranth Technology Systems Inc., a San
Diego wireless company.  Ameranth provides wireless system software to the
hospitality industry.

   Gateway widens market

   The U.S. Army and other government agencies have added desktop PCs made by
San Diego-based Gateway to a $300 million preferred PC purchasing program.  By
adding its name to the contract, Gateway said it has expanded its reach into the
government market.

   Power plant wins support

   A California Energy Commission staff report is recommending approval of a
controversial power plant in the heart of Silicon Valley.  The plant is opposed
by the mayor of San Jose because of its location near a residential
neighborhood.  Cisco Systems, a supplier of key Internet equipment, also opposes
the project because it plans a facility of its own in the area.  The power plant
now faces a vote by the San Jose City Council at the end of November.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Ford to boost dividend

   Ford Motor Co. said it will increase its quarterly dividend 5 percent.  A
dividend of 30 cents, up from 28.5 cents, will be paid Dec. 1 to shareholders of
record as of Nov. 1. In September, Ford paid a quarterly dividend of 50 cents,
which is converted to 28.5 cents when adjusted for the No. 2 carmaker's value
enhancement plan, announced in August.  Under the plan, Ford said it would
distribute $5.7 billion in cash to its shareholders to convince investors they
were undervaluing the company.


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2000


                             154 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           October 14, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 748 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA CardioDynamics rumors swirl CardioDynamics
International's stock rose yesterday on speculation that it may sign a deal to
integrate its heart monitoring technology with Agilent Technologies' hospital
bedside monitors.

   The San Diego medical device company, responding yesterday to a report in
Business Week magazine, denied any deal was imminent.

   The company said it has held preliminary discussions with Agilent and other
medical products companies, but none have led to an agreement.

   The company's stock, which trades under the symbol CDIC, closed yesterday at
$5.25, up 56 cents. Sempra unit completes deal Sempra Energy said its
international subsidiary has completed the $145 million purchase of Dominion
Resources natural gas and electricity assets in Argentina.

   Sempra also announced it has agreed to sell one of the acquired assets, a 25
percent interest in Baeco, a holding company, to Camuzzi Argentina for an
undisclosed amount. AMCC ready to split stock AMCC shareholders will receive one
additional share of common stock for every share held on Monday, Oct. 16, as
part of a 2-for-1 split announced earlier this week.

   The additional shares will be distributed Oct. 30. San Diego-based AMCC,
which makes communications chips, said the split will also automatically adjust
the exchange ratio in AMCC's proposed merger with MMC Networks. Testing due on
Genvascor Collateral Therapeutics Inc. said its strategic partner, Schering AG,
has filed regulatory applications to launch clinical trials in Europe for its
gene therapy, Genvascor.

   Collateral said it expects the Phase I/II trials, set to begin later this
year, to enroll up to 130 patients at 10 European medical centers.

   The trials will test the gene therapy product on patients with peripheral
vascular disease.

   The compound has the potential to restore blood flow to oxygen-deprived
regions of the leg, according to the company. Trega Biosciences, J&J link Trega
Biosciences said it has licensed its predictive drug development software to two
subsidiaries of Johnson & Johnson, the company's largest deal to date.

   Terms of the multi-year arrangement were not disclosed.

   The software predicts how potential drug candidates will be absorbed and
metabolized. Hollis-Eden widens holdings Hollis-Eden Pharmaceuticals said that
it has acquired a 21 percent stake in Tucson-based Aeson Therapeutics.

   As part of the deal, Hollis-Eden will obtain an exclusive, worldwide
sublicense to three patents concerning adrenal steroids.

   The San Diego drug development company will pay $2 million in cash and
208,681 shares of its stock for its equity interest in Aeson.

   The company also has an option to acquire the remainder of Aeson in the next
30 months. Diversa expanding pact Diversa Corp. announced an expanded
collaboration agreement with Novartis Agribusiness Biotechnology Research Inc.
under which it will receive research payments, milestones and product royalties.
Ameranth receives funding Springboard Capital, a venture capital firm based in
Laguna Beach, said it has made a $5 million investment in Ameranth Technology
Systems Inc., a San Diego wireless company.

   Ameranth provides wireless system software to the hospitality industry.
Gateway widens market The U.S. Army and other government agencies have added
desktop PCs made by San Diego-based Gateway to a $300 million preferred PC
purchasing program. By adding its name to the contract, Gateway said it has
expanded its reach into the government market. Power plant wins support A
California Energy Commission staff report is recommending approval of a
controversial power plant in the heart of Silicon Valley.

   The plant is opposed by the mayor of San Jose because of its location near a
residential neighborhood.

   Cisco Systems, a supplier of key Internet equipment, also opposes the project
because it plans a facility of its own in the area.

   The power plant now faces a vote by the San Jose City Council at the end of
November. WORLD AND NATION Ford to boost dividend Ford Motor Co. said it will
increase its quarterly dividend 5 percent.

   A dividend of 30 cents, up from 28.5 cents, will be paid Dec. 1 to
shareholders of record as of Nov. 1. In September, Ford paid a quarterly
dividend of 50 cents, which is converted to 28.5 cents when adjusted for the No.
2 carmaker's value enhancement plan, announced in August.

   Under the plan, Ford said it would distribute $5.7 billion in cash to its
shareholders to convince investors they were undervaluing the company.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             155 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               October 11, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1978 words

HEADLINE: Caught in Headlights Of the Biotech Debate;
A Gene-Testing Lab and Its Critics

BYLINE: By DAVID BARBOZA

DATELINE: FAIRFIELD, Iowa

BODY:

   In 1984, John B. Fagan, a molecular biologist at the National Institutes of
Health, left a promising job as a cancer researcher in Washington to come to
this sleepy farm town to practice transcendental meditation and begin a new life
as a university professor.

   He took a post at the Maharishi International University here and became a
star researcher, attracting N.I.H. research grants. But in the early 1990's, he
began to have second thoughts about gene therapy and the genetic engineering of
crops.

    In 1994 he turned down a $614,000 research grant from the N.I.H. to study
gene therapy because of concerns about the "dangerous consequences" of
manipulating human genes. And two years later, he founded a company that tests
crops for genetic alterations, giving processed-food makers the option of
steering clear of biotechnology ingredients.

   In September, Dr. Fagan's company, Genetic ID, found that a batch of grocery
store taco shells sold by Kraft Foods, a unit of Philip Morris, were made with a
genetically engineered corn that had not been approved for human consumption.
The findings forced Kraft to recall millions of taco shells and reignited a
long-standing debate over the safety and labeling of genetically altered foods.

   The discovery also led to renewed allegations from the biotechnology industry
that Genetic ID, one of the nation's largest testing labs, was working closely
with opponents of that technology.

   Genetic ID executives acknowledged Dr. Fagan's activism, but said the company
itself was neutral about genetically altered crops, and relied on a widely
accepted DNA testing technique, known as polymerase chain reaction, or P.C.R.
And, they note, the taco shell results were independently confirmed by Kraft and
the Food and Drug Administration.

   The biotechnology industry, which has invested billions of dollars to create
genetically altered crops, says Genetic ID has secretly waged war on the
industry under the cloak of doing impartial testing for food companies, many of
which support biotechnology. Genetic ID, many in the industry say, is trying to
create a biotech scare to increase demand for testing.

   "They claim to be impartial but their principal scientist for the past
several years has made a name going around and raising questions about the
safety of biotechnology without any supporting scientific data," said Val
Giddings, a top official at the Biotechnology Industry Organization.

   The high-stakes debate over testing is certain to intensify as global food
companies weigh the merits of marketing genetically altered foods to consumers,
and companies exporting products to Europe and Asia move to comply with new
restrictions and labeling requirements on genetically altered foods.

   And like it or not, Dr. Fagan, the soft-spoken 52-year-old chairman of
Genetic ID, is caught in the middle of the debate over biotechnology. The
scientist-turned-activist-turned-corporate-officer is now trying to explain the
intersection of those lives.

   Dr. Fagan, who was born in Michigan and raised in northern Idaho, earned a
bachelor's degree in chemistry from the University of Washington at Seattle,
where a neighbor introduced him to transcendental meditation and the teachings
of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, an Indian seer. Maharishi teaches that meditation and
a more organic approach to life can raise consciousness, reduce crime rates and
improve the environment, among other things.

   After earning a Ph.D. at Cornell University, Dr. Fagan established himself in
the field seeking to find genetic links to cancer. But after leaving Washington
for the cornfields of southeastern Iowa -- where he could practice
transcendental meditation with other adherents who had gathered around the
Maharishi International University here -- Dr. Fagan began to have doubts.

   "I was seeing a lot of hype about gene therapy and how it could be used, and
it was beginning to get to me," he said. "I started to wonder whether I was
doing the right thing in my profession."

   Dr. Fagan said he came to believe that scientists and biotechnology companies
were moving too aggressively to alter the genetic code of the world's food
supply, and that not enough testing had been done to assess the risks and
consequences.

   And so in 1995, at the request of the Maharishi, he wrote a book critical of
genetic engineering, which he called a "grave threat." His solution? "Vedic
engineering," following the holistic principles of the Maharishi that call for,
among other things, organic farming and transcendental meditation.

   A year later, as concern over the safety of genetically altered crops grew in
Europe and Asia, Dr. Fagan and a group of local investors founded Genetic ID to
help companies determine that their products were free of genetically altered
ingredients.

   Dr. Fagan served the company as scientific adviser even as he doubled as an
outspoken critic of genetic engineering. He spoke at conferences, published
articles and served as an informal adviser to the Natural Law Party, which
sought a moratorium on the commercialization of genetically altered foods. He
was even a plaintiff in a 1998 lawsuit challenging an F.D.A. determination that
genetically altered foods were safe. The United States District Court for the
District of Columbia recently dismissed the suit.

   Genetic ID executives, however, say that when Dr. Fagan took over as chairman
of the company and became a shareholder in 1998, he agreed to cease his public
criticism of genetically modified foods lest the company be seen as taking
sides.

   Dr. Fagan said he now took a more moderate position. He is not opposed to
genetic engineering, he now says in softer tones; he is simply troubled by its
what he regards as its premature commercialization. He also said that his book,
"Genetic Engineering: The Hazards; Vedic Engineering: The Solutions," might hint
at a tougher stance than he actually holds because it was written for followers
of the Maharishi, who largely accept organic or vegetarian diets.

   Still, in December 1999, when the F.D.A. was holding public hearings on the
issue of genetically modified foods, Dr. Fagan identified himself as a Genetic
ID official and raised questions about the safety of genetically engineered
foods.

   Such outspokenness bothers some in the food industry. Gene Grabowski, a
spokesman for the Grocery Manufacturers of America, which represents the
nation's largest food companies, said Genetic ID's decision to hold a news
conference to publicize the Kraft test raised suspicions about the company,
which had tested the taco shells for Genetically Engineered Food Alert, a
coalition of anti-biotechnology organizations.

   "The fact that the company has ties to Maharishi doesn't mean they can't do
good research," Mr. Grabowski said. "But their tactics clearly indicate that
they are not neutral on the issue of biotechnology."

   At least one major food maker that in the past used Genetic ID for testing
appears to be turning to other labs. General Mills now tests at the United
States division of Hanse Analytik, a German company.

   Genetic ID executives blame the biotechnology industry, which they say has
tried to discredit the company and the transcendental meditation movement to
deflect attention from the debate over the safety of biotechnology.

   Indeed, when biotechnology industry executives were asked about Genetic ID,
they supplied The New York Times with handouts and "backgrounders" on the
company, including descriptions of Dr. Fagan's affiliation with practitioners of
transcedental meditation, which the notes said had "some very peculiar
quasi-religious beliefs about food and health."

   Dr. Fagan denounced the effort as "slanderous and bigoted." Transcendental
meditation, he said, is not a religion.

   Despite such attacks, the privately held company said its business was
booming, though it declined to disclose a list of clients, citing
confidentiality agreements. Food and agriculture experts agreed that Genetic ID
was clearly among the biggest companies in the newly emerging testing field,
partly because it was an early entrant into the business, whose growth has been
fueled by European and Japanese restrictions on genetically modified foods. It
now competes with such companies as Qualicon, a subsidiary of DuPont, and
Strategic Diagnostics, a Delaware company that sells test kits.

   Business was not always so good, however. Dr. Fagan said a lack of business
two years ago forced him to find new investors and bring in an old friend, an
organic-fertilizer entrepreneur named Bill Witherspoon, to reorganize the
company.

   Mr. Witherspoon, another transcendental meditation practitioner, created a
new kind of corporation, where decisions, he said, would be "agreed upon" by the
employees. Company offices would be devoid of the "negative forces" often
present in corporate America, he said.

   "There are no Harvard M.B.A.'s, no biz school geniuses," he said. "There's a
group of people comfortable responding to the environment rather than people who
want to push the environment. We are not hierarchical, we're a network of
intelligences."

   Mr. Witherspoon, who once was fined by federal officials for carving
geometric designs into an Oregon desert to "enliven human consciousness," said
he joined Genetic ID on the condition that he could continue to work
intuitively.

   He personally hired nearly all of Genetic ID's employees, many of whom are
followers of the Maharishi because so many of Fairfield's 10,000 residents are
transplants who practice transcendental meditation.

   Still, executives say the science behind the company's testing is divorced
from the Maharishi's "vedic" principles, based on the sacred writings of the
Hindus. At Genetic ID labs, biologists grind and homogenize samples of, say,
corn, then extract the DNA and use the polymerase chain reaction process to
detect and amplify the presence of genetically modified DNA. The company said it
could detect genetically altered DNA content as low as one part in 10,000.

   Industry experts say P.C.R. tests are not entirely reliable, and are
susceptible to falsely indicating the presence of genetically modified material
even when it is not actually present. But Genetic ID executives said it
triple-tests each sample to narrow the chances of a false result. And, the
company noted, the United Kingdom Accreditation Service has certified Genetic ID
as qualified to find genetically modified DNA in food. It is seeking similar
accreditation from a new F.D.A. program.

   After Genetically Engineered Food Alert brought grocery store taco shell
samples to the company for testing, scientists were able to detect the presence
of StarLink, a strain of biotechnology corn that was approved only for animal
feed. Kraft announced a recall four days later, saying it had confirmed the
result.

   Critics questioned Genetic ID's methods, citing a test of corn snacks for a
consumer group in Japan this year in which the company said it found an
unapproved variety of bioengineered corn in some samples. The Japanese Ministry
of Agriculture said its own tests on a similar batch were negative.

   Genetic ID executives countered that the ministry's failure to confirm the
result did not mean the company was wrong.

   "You cannot disprove one sample with another sample that may have not come
from the same lot," said Jeffrey Smith, a spokesman at Genetic ID. "We still
stand behind our methods."

   The company, which licenses its methods to other labs in Europe and Asia,
said that it was likely to face continued hostility from major biotechnology
companies. Dr. Fagan said the campaign against Genetic ID might drive him out of
the company he created.

   "I don't know what's going to happen," he said, noting that he has tried to
keep his own views separate from company policies. "Maybe they're going to have
to get rid of me."


   http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 18, 2000, Wednesday October 23, 2000, Monday

CORRECTION:

   An article in Business Day last Wednesday about Genetic ID, the laboratory
that found genetically modified corn in a batch of taco shells, misidentified
the agency that is considering starting a program to certify food as being free
of modified ingredients. It is the Department of Agriculture, not the Food and
Drug Administration.




   An article in Business Day on Oct. 11 about Genetic ID, a testing lab for
genetically modified crops and foods, referred incorrectly to a press briefing
that followed the company's discovery of unapproved corn in a brand of taco
shells. Genetic ID announced the briefing in August, the month before the
taco-shell findings were disclosed by opponents of bioengineered foods; the
company says the gathering was not called to publicize the discovery.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Bill Witherspoon of Genetic ID in the headquarters in
Fairfield, Iowa. The building is surrounded by cornfields. "There are no Harvard
M.B.A.'s, no biz school geniuses," he said. (Photographs by Mark Tade for The
New York Times); John B. Fagan, the chairman of Genetic ID, says he is not
against genetic engineering, just troubled by what he sees as its premature
commercialization. (Genetic ID)(pg. C1); Technicians at work in the Genetic ID
labs in Fairfield, Iowa. While some industry experts say tests are not entirely
reliable, Genetic ID executives say they triple-test each sample to narrow the
chances of a false result. (Mark Tade for The New York Times)(pg. C14)

Chart: "Sowing Altered Seeds"
Share of U.S. acreage used to grow gene-altered crops. This year farmers planted
79.6 million acres of corn and 74.5 million acres of soybeans.

Graph shows SOYBEANS and CORN shares from 1995-2000. (Sources: Morgan Stanley
Dean Witter; U.S. Agriculture Department)(pg. C1)

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000


                             156 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     OCTOBER 11, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C03

LENGTH: 1363 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS NEWS IN BRIEF

BODY:

   IN THE REGION Gripes about utilities are on the rise in Pennsylvania

   More Pennsylvanians complained about shabby treatment from the state's major
utility companies in 1999 than in 1998, and one of the biggest culprits was
Verizon Corp., the state's largest telephone company, according to a new report.
The report, released yesterday by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission,
says residential consumers filed about 17,700 complaints with the PUC in 1999, a
33 percent increase from 1998, after experiencing service problems with their
telephone, electric, gas or water companies. The report examined only utilities
with at least 100,000 customers. More customers - nearly 3,500 - reported having
service difficulties with the former Bell Atlantic-Pennsylvania, now Verizon
Corp., than with any other, said Mitch Miller, director of the PUC's Bureau of
Consumer Services. Among electric companies, the biggest increase in complaints
in 1999 involved Peco Energy Co., Philadelphia, and PP&L Inc. The PUC fielded
almost 4,200 complaints about the six largest electric utilities last year, an
increase of about 20 percent over 1998. A spokesman for Verizon said some of the
dissatisfaction last year might have been caused by a reorganization of
technicians that resulted in some workers responding only to complaints from
commercial customers, while others handled only residential problems. A Peco
spokesman said he had not yet seen the report and could not comment.

   Acquisition by Cephalon approved by Anesta shareholders

   Anesta Corp.'s shareholders yesterday approved its merger with Cephalon Inc.,
West Chester. Cephalon said that Anesta's common stock would no longer be traded
on the Nasdaq stock market and that the Salt Lake City company would operate as
a wholly owned unit of Cephalon. Anesta shareholders will receive 0.4765 share
of newly issued Cephalon common stock for each Anesta share. The acquisition is
valued at roughly $317.3 million. Shares of Cephalon, a biopharmaceutical
company, closed up $3.30 at $49.48.

   Annovis acquires supplier of DNA fragments for research

   Annovis Inc., Aston, has acquired CyberSyn, also of Aston. Both companies
supply researchers with oligomimetics, which are chemically modified DNA
fragments used in gene therapy and DNA diagnostics. Terms of the acquisition
were not disclosed. Annovis is the former Symphony Pharmaceuticals.

   USDA Wyndmoor station acquires irradiation research partner

   Scientists at the research arm of the U.S. Department of Agriculture
announced a partnership with Ion Beam Applications to study irradiation and food
safety. The five-year agreement is between the Agricultural Research Service
Food Safety Research Unit in Wyndmoor and Ion Beam's Food Safety Division in
Memphis.

   VerticalNet joins to form marketplace for catalysts

   VerticalNet Inc., Horsham, W.R. Grace & Co., and Aspen Technology Inc. have
formed a business-to-business joint venture, e-Catalysts Inc., for online
purchases and sales of catalysts and related products and services. The
companies said they expect to launch e-Catalysts.com in December. It will
operate for companies in the refining, petrochemical, chemical, pharmaceutical
and biotechnology industries. W.R. Grace makes chemical catalysts and silica
products, specialty construction chemicals, building materials, and
container-protection products. VerticalNet owns and operates online,
industry-specific trade communities. Aspen Technologies is a software provider.

   Moyco, Dentsply settle lawsuits over patent infringement

   Moyco Technologies Inc., Montgomeryville, and Dentsply International Inc.,
York, have settled their patent infringement litigation pending in the U.S.
District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania. The companies entered
into two license agreements. Dentsply licensed from Moyco three U.S. patents and
related foreign patents covering inventions related to endodontic (root canal)
instrument tips. Moyco licensed from Dentsply four U.S. patents covering
inventions related to nickel-titanium endodontic instruments.

   ELSEWHERE Vitamin firms to pay to settle price-fixing claims

   Six vitamin companies agreed to pay $335 million to settle a lawsuit alleging
they conspired to fix prices, Wisconsin's attorney general announced. F.
Hoffmann-La Roche of Switzerland, BASF of Germany, Aventis of France, and
Japanese companies Takeda Chemical Industries Ltd., Eisai Co. and Daiichi
Pharmaceutical Co. took part in the settlement. The lawsuit alleged that the
companies, which produce vitamin pills and supplements for fortified foods and
agricultural feed, met in secret to fix prices from 1989 to 1998. The companies
will pay $305 million to 22 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico.
Some businesses will be eligible to participate in a $107 million claim fund. In
addition, 43 state governments, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico,
will receive $30 million for overcharges on products purchased by the
governments.

   IBM to build plant to make thinner computer chips

   International Business Machines Corp., the world's largest computer-maker,
said it would spend $2.5 billion to build an advanced chip-making plant as part
of a $5 billion expansion. IBM said it expected to be the first chip-maker to
mass-produce semiconductors at microscopic line-widths below 0.10 micron, or
1,000 times thinner than a human hair and far thinner than the 0.18-micron
technology now used. The move to 0.10-micron technology would allow IBM to pack
more transistors into smaller spaces, boosting chip performance and speed, and
cutting costs.

   NDB gets $1 billion offer from Deutsche Bank

   National Discount Brokers Group Inc. said that an affiliate of Germany's
Deutsche Bank AG has made a cash offer to acquire all of its outstanding stock
for $49 a share, valuing NDB at about $1 billion. Through its affiliates,
Deutsche Bank already owns about 16 percent of NDB. National Discount Brokers
Group, Jersey City, is the parent company of two financial-services businesses.
National Discount Brokers Corp./NDB.com is an online stockbroker with assets of
about $11 billion and about 270,000 customers. The other subsidiary, NDB Capital
Markets Corp., is a leading market maker, facilitating stock transactions for
more than 4,000 Nasdaq and other over-the-counter securities. NDB said it was
reviewing proposals from other companies interested in acquiring or merging with
it.

   Man pleads not guilty in Emulex fraud case

   A man charged with defrauding Emulex Corp. investors by issuing a phony news
release pleaded not guilty to federal wire- and securities-fraud charges. Mark
S. Jakob, 23, could be sentenced to as much as 15 years in prison if convicted
on all counts. In Los Angeles, U.S. District Judge Dickran Tevrizian set a Nov.
21 trial date. Jakob is free on a $100,000 bond. A federal grand jury last month
indicted Jakob on 11 counts of wire and securities fraud. Jakob is accused of
scheming to manipulate the price of Emulex shares by distributing the bogus
release, then earning about $241,000 by trading shares in the company.

   3-month T-bill yield unchanged; 6-month-bill yield rises

   Interest rates on short-term Treasury securities were mixed in yesterday's
auction. The Treasury Department sold $11 billion in three-month bills at a
discount rate of 6.075 percent, the same rate as last week's. An additional $10
billion was sold in six-month bills at a rate of 6.055 percent, up from 6.040
percent. The new discount rates understate the actual return to investors -
6.257 percent for three-month bills, with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,846.40,
and 6.333 percent for a six-month bill selling for $9,693.90.

   One-year T-bill yield dips in secondary market

   The Federal Reserve said the average yield for one-year Treasury bills in the
secondary market, the most popular index for making changes in adjustable-rate
mortgages, edged down to 6.06 percent last week from 6.08 percent the previous
week.

   * Compiled from staff reports, the Associated Press, Bloomberg News, Reuters
and other wire services.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             157 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      October 8, 2000 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: FORUM OPINION & IDEAS; Pg. 2G

LENGTH: 351 words

HEADLINE: PERFECTLY SCARY GENETICS

BODY:

   The 1997 movie "Gattaca," showed how a society that uses gene therapy to
create perfect babies can raise the bar on what is considered normal.

   In the movie, anyone conceived outside of a test tube and suffering the
normal range of tolerable defects that Mother Nature occasionally tosses our way
- near-sightedness, pimply skin, shortness - is considered defective.

   The American Association for the Advancement of Science had a glimpse of the
same dystopia lurking in the drive to create perfect babies, according to its
report on Human Inheritable Genetic Modification. And it rightly raised the
caution flag for any scientist eager to speed down this dangerous road.

   Animal experiments show that gene modification is too dangerous at this stage
to try on humans, says the report, 2 1/2 years in the making.

   "Inheritable genetic modification" is the art and science of modifying genes
at conception to remove the bad ones and enhance the good ones, allowing
designer offspring to grow up and reproduce.

   The report warns that this could produce a social revolution that might
reduce the value we place on ordinary humans and create a society in which
children with even minor flaws are judged defective.

   It recommends stronger federal oversight, open reporting of test results and
public discussions about how to use inheritable genetic modification if and when
it is perfected.

   Going slow makes sense. Gene modification for enhancement is far more
questionable than gene modification to banish disease.

   Parents might be able to pick their children's eye color and tweak their math
and spatial skills, but as everyone knows, a child is more than just a double
helix. Nurturing and environment count, too. What does the world gain if a child
grows up handsome but delinquent?

   The report gives no recommendations on the greatest danger it sees ahead - in
vitro fertilization clinics dangling not only the promise of pregnancy, but of
"perfect" babies as well.

   Until society decides how far it is willing to go in search of perfection,
government should stand ready to put up the blockades.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2000


                             158 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 8, 2000, Sunday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 715 words

HEADLINE: A keen gene scene; S.D. companies involved in post-genomics

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 San Diego biotechnology companies, new and old, are mining genes for research
gold.  And a little of the real stuff.

   Though few have a precise handle on the value of genomic information, some
experts predict that the pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies that develop
drugs will spend $2 billion a year to get it.

   Unlike San Diego's traditional biotechnology companies, which take drug
candidates through the full, laborious stages of research, clinical trials and
regulatory approval, the new generation of post-genomic companies are trying to
corner a smaller piece of the process.

   What follows is a partial list of local companies, public and private, that
are developing research tools, databases and technologies to decipher genes and
devise new therapies to treat disease.

   Public post-genomic and genomics-related companies:

   [] Nanogen (NGEN): The company has developed the NanoChip, a system that
detects single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs. SNPs (pronounced "snips") are
places in which a person's DNA differs from most others.  They provide genetic
markers for everything from a person's genetic propensity to develop a disease
to how he or she might metabolize a drug.

   [] Sequenom (SQNM): The company has developed MassArray, an automated
screening system that can spot SNPs in large numbers of gene samples.

   [] Illumina (ILMN): The company has developed BeadArray, a technology that
uses fiber optics to evaluate genes.

   [] Aurora Biosciences (ABSC): The company specializes in developing assays,
or tests, to measure the effectiveness of compounds in altering gene activity.

   [] Isis Pharmaceuticals (ISIP): Through its new GeneTrove division, the
company has automated its gene-inhibiting antisense technology.  By inhibiting,
or turning off, genes, drug developers can better understand gene function and
determine whether a gene will make a good drug target.

   [] Applied Molecular Evolution (AMEV): The company, through its AMESystem
technology, alters genes to produce different proteins, resulting in improved
versions of existing drugs.

   [] Discovery Partners International (DPII): The company offers post-genomic
drug-discovery services including chemistry technologies and high throughput
screening.

   [] Diversa Corporation (DVSA): The company applies proprietary technology,
dubbed Gene Site Saturation Mutagenesis and GeneReassembly, to obtain genetic
material from uncultured organisms and develop enzymes and compounds.

   [] Invitrogen (IVGN): The company, which went public in 1999, makes
prepackaged clones of human genes and other products for biotechnology research.

   Private post-genomic and genomics-related companies include:

   [] Structural GenomiX: Dedicated to protein analysis, the company uses X-ray
crystallography to determine the three-dimensional structure of proteins -- the
building blocks of cells and important drug targets.

   [] Syrrx: The company, spun off from the Novartis Research Foundation's
Genomics Institute in 1999, also uses X-ray crystallography to determine the
three-dimensional structure of proteins.

   [] GeneFormatics: The company uses proprietary software to predict protein
structure and function through the use of mathematical algorithms.

   [] Structural Bioinformatics: The company and its wholly-owned subsidiaries,
SBI Advanced Technologies and SBI Moldyn, generate three-diminsional protein
structures using proprietary computer technology.

   [] Elitra Pharmaceuticals: The company describes itself as a leader in
"antimicrobial functional genomics," and has filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission for an initial public offering.

   [] CIStem Molecular Corporation: Formed in 1999, the company focuses on gene
controls known as CIS sites and transacting factors, which serve as master
switches for genes.

   [] Anadys Pharmaceuticals: The company, formed through a merger in May
between Scriptgen and Asklipios, has developed its GATE (Genetics Assisted
Target Evaluation) technology to measure the effects of removing a specific gene
from a cell.

   [] Gene Therapy Systems: Founded in 1998, the company designs, develops and
commercializes gene-therapy products and other molecular biological reagents for
scientists specializing in gene-therapy research.


CORRECTION-DATE: October 10, 2000

CORRECTION:

   FOR THE RECORD | Because of a production error, paragraphs describing the
work of two separate companies were blended into one paragraph about one company
in an Oct. 8 story (correct in text of this online version). The company
information should have read: [] Structural Bioinformatics: The company and its
wholly owned subsidiaries, SBI Advanced Technologies and SBI Moldyn, generate
three-diminsional protein structures using proprietary computer technology. []
Elitra Pharmaceuticals: The company describes itself as a leader in
"antimicrobial functional genomics," and has filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission for an initial public offering. The Union-Tribune regrets
the error.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2000


                             159 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             October 8, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 702 words

HEADLINE: A keen gene scene;
S.D. companies involved in post-genomics

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   San Diego biotechnology companies, new and old, are mining genes for research
gold.

   And a little of the real stuff. Though few have a precise handle on the value
of genomic information, some experts predict that the pharmaceutical and
biotechnology companies that develop drugs will spend $2 billion a year to get
it. Unlike San Diego's traditional biotechnology companies, which take drug
candidates through the full, laborious stages of research, clinical trials and
regulatory approval, the new generation of post-genomic companies are trying to
corner a smaller piece of the process. What follows is a partial list of local
companies, public and private, that are developing research tools, databases and
technologies to decipher genes and devise new therapies to treat disease. Public
post-genomic and genomics-related companies: [] Nanogen (NGEN): The company has
developed the NanoChip, a system that detects single nucleotide polymorphisms,
or SNPs. SNPs (pronounced "snips") are places in which a person's DNA differs
from most others.

   They provide genetic markers for everything from a person's genetic
propensity to develop a disease to how he or she might metabolize a drug. []
Sequenom (SQNM): The company has developed MassArray, an automated screening
system that can spot SNPs in large numbers of gene samples. [] Illumina (ILMN):
The company has developed BeadArray, a technology that uses fiber optics to
evaluate genes. [] Aurora Biosciences (ABSC): The company specializes in
developing assays, or tests, to measure the effectiveness of compounds in
altering gene activity. [] Isis Pharmaceuticals (ISIP): Through its new
GeneTrove division, the company has automated its gene-inhibiting antisense
technology.

   By inhibiting, or turning off, genes, drug developers can better understand
gene function and determine whether a gene will make a good drug target. []
Applied Molecular Evolution (AMEV): The company, through its AMESystem
technology, alters genes to produce different proteins, resulting in improved
versions of existing drugs. [] Discovery Partners International (DPII): The
company offers post-genomic drug-discovery services including chemistry
technologies and high throughput screening. [] Diversa Corporation (DVSA): The
company applies proprietary technology, dubbed Gene Site Saturation Mutagenesis
and GeneReassembly, to obtain genetic material from uncultured organisms and
develop enzymes and compounds. [] Invitrogen (IVGN): The company, which went
public in 1999, makes prepackaged clones of human genes and other products for
biotechnology research. Private post-genomic and genomics-related companies
include: [] Structural GenomiX: Dedicated to protein analysis, the company uses
X-ray crystallography to determine the three-dimensional structure of proteins
-- the building blocks of cells and important drug targets. [] Syrrx: The
company, spun off from the Novartis Research Foundation's Genomics Institute in
1999, also uses X-ray crystallography to determine the three-dimensional
structure of proteins. [] GeneFormatics: The company uses proprietary software
to predict protein structure and function through the use of mathematical
algorithms. [] Structural Bioinformatics: The company and its wholly-owned
subsidiaries, SBI Advanced Technologies and SBI Moldyn, generate
three-diminsional protein structures using proprietary computer technology. []
Elitra Pharmaceuticals: The company describes itself as a leader in
"antimicrobial functional genomics," and has filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission for an initial public offering. [] CIStem Molecular
Corporation: Formed in 1999, the company focuses on gene controls known as CIS
sites and transacting factors, which serve as master switches for genes. []
Anadys Pharmaceuticals: The company, formed through a merger in May between
Scriptgen and Asklipios, has developed its GATE (Genetics Assisted Target
Evaluation) technology to measure the effects of removing a specific gene from a
cell. [] Gene Therapy Systems: Founded in 1998, the company designs, develops
and commercializes gene-therapy products and other molecular biological reagents
for scientists specializing in gene-therapy research.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             160 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     October 6, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 998 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME-TKT BATTLE HEATING UP DRUG DATA DISCLOSED IN RACE FOR APPROVAL

BYLINE: By Naomi Aoki, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. yesterday gave doctors and
investors their first peek at the data behind the companies' dueling
applications to become the sole provider of a breakthrough therapy for Fabry
disease, a rare genetic disorder.

   The presentations at the annual meeting of the American Society of Human
Genetics in Philadelphia left investors debating about the merits of the two
studies and sparked another round of speculation about which company will win
the race to gain approval for their nearly identical drugs to treat the painful
disease.

      US Food and Drug Administration rules require that only one drug be
approved to treat a rare disease such as Fabry, which afflicts only a few
thousand people worldwide. The "orphan drug" act, meant to encourage companies
to invest in research for rare diseases, gives a company 10 years to sell its
drug unhindered by competition in exchange for being the first to develop a drug
to treat a rare disease.

   The rule seems to turn the race for approval into a winner-take-all
proposition for one of the Cambridge companies.

   Analysts say the regulatory agency never before has been faced with two
applications submitted within weeks of each other for two nearly identical drugs
to treat the same rare disease. The situation, they say, puts pressure on the
FDA to approve the better drug or to find a loophole that allows approval of
both drugs.

   "The orphan drug act never contemplated this situation," said Dennis Harp, an
analyst with Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown. "I think the FDA will review the drugs
together and reach a decision on the same day - out of fairness and to dodge the
orphan drug issue. If they are both approved, the companies could sue or they
could compete head-to-head and let the market decide."

   People with Fabry disease are missing an enzyme known as alpha-galactosidase
that breaks down fatty lipids in the body.

   Genzyme's Fabrazyme and TKT's Replagal are so similar that Genzyme has filed
a lawsuit against TKT, claiming that Replagal infringes on patents for
Fabrazyme. TKT has called the suit, which is pending, "groundless."

   In yesterday's presentations, both companies reported significant
improvements in patients treated with their drugs as opposed to those in the
studies treated with placebos.

   Genzyme treated half of the 58 patients in its study with Fabrazyme and the
other half with a placebo. Of the 29 patients treated with the drug, 20 appeared
to have no buildup of a fatty lipid known as GL-3 in the kidney, the study's
primary evaluation measure, after 20 weeks of treatment. The other nine showed
significant decreases. The study also showed lower levels of the lipid in the
heart and skin. But it showed no significant difference in the improvement of
pain between the two groups.

   TKT's study, on the other hand, focused primarily on pain as its evaluation
measure. In that study, 26 patients were split evenly into a Replagal-treated
group and a placebo group. TKT said the treated group reported significantly
lower levels of pain than the placebo group, with some of the 13 treated
patients stopping pain medications altogether. The study also showed improved
functioning of the kidney and the heart.

   Some analysts said they found TKT's study superior, citing the pain findings
and its convenience - it takes about 40 minutes to administer intravenously once
every two weeks compared to about two hours with Genzyme's drug. Others,
however, felt Genzyme's was a larger and better study with more objective
measurements.

   "The good thing about the Genzyme data is that they got such great
statistical significance," said Rachel Leheny, an analyst with Lehman Brothers.
"It was a better-done trial, a larger trial. But without the improvement in
pain, it's still a tossup as to which is a better drug."

   Genzyme already markets a drug for another genetic disease to the same set of
doctors who would treat Fabry patients, giving the company an edge. But if TKT's
drug proves easier to use and has fewer side effects, it could beat out
Fabrazyme.

   "My opinion is unchanged," Harp said. "I think both are approvable. I think
the FDA will probably try to approve both simultaneously and then leave it up to
the marketplace."

   In the marketplace, however, Harp believes TKT will have an advantage. TKT's
Replagal took significantly less time to administer and produced fewer side
effects associated with the intravenous delivery of drugs, such as rash, chills,
and fever.

   Although neither company has set a price for its drugs, analysts estimate
that each drug could cost about $50,000 to $100,000 a year.

   "Not many ways that the FDA could approve both drugs," said Abbey Meyers,
president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders, the group that helped
draft the orphan drug act. "But nobody would be happier than us to see both
drugs on the market. The main thing is that the people with Fabry disease who
desperately need the drug get it."

   Genzyme Corp. shares closed yesterday at $62.88, down $1.19, on the Nasdaq
Stock Market. TKT stock rose $4.56, to $46.63, also on the Nasdaq.  Fabry
disease

   Fabry disease is a rare inherited disorder that afflicts an estimated 2,000
to 5,000 people worldwide. Those with the disease lack an enzyme known as
alpha-galactosidase that breaks down fat lipids in the body. The buildup of
those lipids causes intense pain in hands and feet and an inability to sweat,
and eventually causes kidney failure, heart attack or stroke, usually killing
its victims around age 40.

   Genzyme Corp.'s Fabrazyme and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc.'s Replagal are
both recombinant forms of alpha-galactosidase, the enzyme missing in people with
Fabry disease. The drugs are similar in structure and were submitted to the Food
and Drug Administration within weeks of each other. But FDA rules generally
allow only one drug to be approved to treat rare disorders such as Fabry
disease.

   NAOMI AOKI

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2000


                             161 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 October 6, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NAME: Michael Smith

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

HEADLINE: Michael Smith, 68; Won Chemistry Nobel

BYLINE: By HENRY FOUNTAIN

BODY:

   Michael Smith, who shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for developing
one of the basic tools of genetic engineering, died on Wednesday at Vancouver
General Hospital in Vancouver, British Columbia. He was 68.

   The cause was cancer, said a spokeswoman for the University of British
Columbia, where Dr. Smith was a professor for many years and founded a
biotechnology laboratory.

    Working at the university in the 1980's, Dr. Smith determined how to change
the sequence of the chain of building blocks that make up DNA. The technique,
given the tongue-twisting name oligonucleotide-based, site-directed mutagenesis,
essentially allowed researchers to reprogram the genetic code, altering the
structure and functions of the proteins encoded by DNA.

   "It was the first technique that allowed you to go in with a pair of tweezers
and change what the DNA was," said Brett Finlay, a professor at the university's
biotechnology laboratory. "It was a major breakthrough."

   "Of course, he didn't set out to do it," Dr. Finlay added. At the time, Dr.
Smith was doing research that required that he change one amino acid in a
particular protein. "So he had to figure out a way to change the DNA to change
the amino acid," Dr. Finlay said.

   Dr. Smith submitted a paper describing the technique to the prestigious
journal Cell. It was promptly rejected. In later years, Dr. Finlay said, Dr.
Smith expressed pride that his work "was not good enough for Cell, but good
enough for a Nobel Prize."

   Victor Ling, vice president of research at the British Columbia Cancer Agency
and Research Center, said that Dr. Smith understood that a key to the technique
was putting the rearranged DNA back to work producing altered proteins.

   "Part of his genius is that he recognized that it was important to put it
back in living organisms, to make something biologically important," Dr. Ling
said.

   As the field of genome science has advanced, Dr. Ling added, Dr. Smith's
technique now holds potential for fighting certain genetically based diseases
through gene therapy -- by undoing existing mutations that cause disease, in
effect putting abnormal DNA sequences back to normal.

   "His technology will allow us to learn how, perhaps, to correct these
mutations," Dr. Ling said.

   Dr. Smith was born in the English seaside town of Blackpool, where his mother
worked in a boarding house and his father grew market vegetables. He studied
chemistry at the University of Manchester beginning in 1950, eventually
receiving his doctorate in 1956. He moved to Vancouver that year, after being
offered a fellowship with the British Columbia Research Council.

   He joined the University of British Columbia in 1966 and founded the
biotechnology laboratory in 1987. Upon his retirement from the university three
years ago, he became director of a new Genome Sequencing Center at the Cancer
Agency, a post he held at his death.

   Dr. Smith, who separated from his wife, Helen, in 1983, is survived by a
partner, Elizabeth Raines, two sons and a daughter.

   Dr. Ling said that Dr. Smith was pleasantly surprised when he learned of the
Nobel award, which he shared with Kary B. Mullis, an American chemist who
developed another fundamental genetic engineering tool, the polymerase chain
reaction.

   But since Dr. Smith's name is quite a common one, there was a brief delay in
his receiving the news by telephone from Sweden. The Nobel officials called
another Michael Smith in Vancouver first.

   "That Michael Smith was definitely surprised," Dr. Ling said.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Smith in 1968. (Camera Press)


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2000


                             162 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 6, 2000, Friday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-5

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: RELIGION & ETHICS; IN BRIEF

BYLINE: Religion News Service | Associated Press

BODY:
 Ethics panel urges restraint in use of gene modification on humans

   WASHINGTON -- A report by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science says it would be unsafe and ethically irresponsible to use newly
discovered genetic technology on humans at this time.

   Most current research involves gene therapy, modifying the genes of an
individual to treat a disease.  This is known as somatic genetic modification.
Modifying the genes of future generations is called inheritable genetic
modification or IGM. The latter practice is what the panel of ethicists and
scientists chiefly addressed.

   "We've developed a series of genetic technologies without looking at the
larger consequences for society," said Audrey R. Chapman, director of the
association's program on dialogue, ethics and religion.  "The ability to remold
the genetic heritage of children has potentially more implications than anything
we have developed so far."

   It's important to "stay ahead of the science" of this developing technology,
Chapman said.  "Debate on such an important topic can't be left solely to
experts.  It needs public deliberation." Religion News Service

   Course work with Christian perspective

   PURCELLVILLE, Va. -- The nation's first college for students who were
schooled at home is not what you would call a party school.

   The 90 students who recently began classes at the new Patrick Henry College
can expect course work with a Christian perspective, mandatory morning chapel
services and a requirement to show "evidence of a personal relationship with
Jesus Christ." Men and women won't be permitted in each other's dorm rooms.

   "It'll be a refuge from sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll.  Well, at least sex and
drugs," said founder Michael Farris, whose home schooling association estimates
that more than 1.5 million children are taught at home by their parents, and the
number increases by 15 percent a year.

   Many home-schooled youngsters are from fundamentalist Christian families who
believe the schools are not inculcating morals.  Other parents -- some of them
high academic achievers themselves -- cite dissatisfaction with the quality of
public education and worries about violence and drugs. Associated Press

   'Crusaders' replaced with 'Thunder'

   WHEATON, Ill. -- While San Diego State University wrestles with whether to
replace its Aztec mascot, a small evangelical Christian school has done away
with its nickname used for 70 years.

   Wheaton College has announced that it is replacing the "Crusaders" mascot
with "The Wheaton Thunder."

   President Duane Litfin said the "Thunder" name has a strong appeal and met
the criteria of the selection committee, including that it be gender-neutral and
could stand the test of time.  There also are several biblical references to
thunder representing God.

   Earlier this year, writing to the college community about the decision to no
longer use "Crusaders," Litfin said, "We are hard-pressed to find anything in
these disastrous waves of fighting that our Lord might have approved, despite
the fact that the conflict was ostensibly carried out in his name." Religion
News Service


LOAD-DATE: October 9, 2000


                             163 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    October 5, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A26

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: BIOLOGY FOR ALL

BODY:

   AT A TIME WHEN mankind's understanding of the basic building blocks of life
is advancing more quickly than it ever has in the past, citizens can be excused
for feeling that it is difficult to keep up. But a helpful antidote to that is
available each Wednesday night this fall in a classroom at Harvard Medical
School on Longwood Avenue in Boston.

   A biology graduate student there, Elizabeth Hick, decided earlier this year
that she wanted to do something about the public's lack of literacy in this
field. She broadcast an e-mail to 250 fellow graduate students and a couple of
post-docs asking if any wanted to join her in offering admission-free evening
seminars on the basic biology behind hot topics in the news, ranging from
genetic therapy to antibiotic resistance. There's no pay and no class credit,
but Hick still got 30 responses, and based on them has organized a teaching
cadre of 20. Nineteen are from Harvard; one is from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

      The first class a week ago, on the genome and genetic testing, reflected
the several hours of preparation that each of the three presenters put into his
or her segment.  The presenters knew their stuff, used graphics well, and
encouraged questions, however basic, from the 60 or so "students." They included
social workers, teachers, a deli supervisor, engineers, homemakers, computer
programmers, journalists, and others.

   What they learn can help them, Hick said in her introductory remarks, when it
comes to voting or to explaining biology to their children. It will also aid in
understanding what is going on in their bodies and in the cutting-edge
laboratories on both sides of the Charles. Next Wednesday's subject is
antibiotic resistance.  Others will cover cloning and stem cells, cancer, AIDS,
gene therapy, and genetically modified foods.  With these classes, there is one
less excuse for being in the dark about the basics of life.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2000


                             164 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     October 5, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 038

LENGTH: 288 words

HEADLINE: Building's history appeals to TKT

BYLINE: By Jennifer Heldt Powell

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. hopes to soon add to a long list of major
advances that happened in an old brick building at 28 Osborn St. in Cambridge.

   The mill-like structure housed half of the first two-way telephone call, the
invention of the modern railroad car, the perfection of the steam heating system
and the development and perfection of Polaroid film.

   Transkaryotic will use the space to develop treatments for a variety of
medical problems, including hemophilia and Hunter's Syndrome, a rare genetic
disorder.

   The company plans a groundbreaking celebration tomorrow for what will become
its new headquarters and laboratory space. Gov. Paul Cellucci is expected to
attend, along with Cambridge Mayor Anthony Galluccio.

   "This has a lot of benefits," said Daniel Geffken, Transkaryotic's chief
financial officer. "It's on a large site, there will be above-ground parking,
and it will have a lot of charm and appeal in that you will have a very
good-looking brick mill building and then this modern glass addition."

   Plus, the building has a rich history, he said.

   "It's a good segue for us because we consider ourselves to be on the cutting
edge," Geffken said.

   It's also in a prime location, near other biotech companies and research
centers. The company settled on the site after a two-year search.

   The building is being renovated and added on to by the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, which will lease the space to Transkaryotic. The
company leases its existing space from MIT. The project will add 180,000 square
feet to the company's existing 110,000 square feet.

   "It will provide the company space to grow," Geffken said.

   Transkaryotic hopes to be in the new space by the spring of 2002.


LOAD-DATE: October 05, 2000


                             165 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   October 4, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D4

LENGTH: 711 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / IN THE PIPELINE;
TRANSKARYOTIC OPENING NEW HEADQUARTERS

BYLINE: BY RONALD ROSENBERG and NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge may be on the opposite side in its
patent battles with Amgen Inc. and Genzyme Corp., but it does have one thing in
common with its Kendall Square rivals: new construction.

   On Friday, TKT will break ground for a new headquarters at 28 Osborne St. in
Cambridge, a brief subway ride from Genzyme's Charles River site where it plans
to hold a similar dirt shoveling ceremony to launch construction of its 12-story
corporate offices.

      Meanwhile, Amgen's 280,000-square-foot research and development center off
Binney Street in Cambridge is rising next to Genzyme's current headquarters.
Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company, is based in Thousand Oaks,
Calif.

   The TKT building is not entirely new. The existing 130,000-square-foot
building, last used by Polaroid Corp., is a historic preservation site where
Alexander Graham Bell made his first "long-distance" telephone call - to Boston.
TKT, spending more than $25 million to refurbish the building, is also adding
50,000 square feet of office and lab space behind it.

   Amgen sued TKT for allegedly violating five patents covering Epogen, an
anemia-fighting drug used by kidney dialysis patients that is the world's
best-selling biotech drug. TKT and its partner Aventis SA insist their approach
to making the same drug is significantly different and does not infringe on
Amgen's patent. A decision by US District Judge William Young is expected
shortly.

   TKT was recently sued by Genzyme for infringing on a patent to manufacture an
enzyme replacement drug to treat Fabry disease, a rare disorder that affects
2,000 to 3,000 men. Both companies are in a close race to become the first
company to gain FDA approval and the "orphan drug" status that would enable one
company to control the lucrative Fabry market.

   Cancer treatments undergo clinical trials

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology said it has started two clinical trials of cancer
treatments, one for melanoma and the other for kidney disease. Both use a
proposed new cancer vaccine technology that combines patients' dendritic cells,
which are immune system stimulators, with their inactivated tumor cells.

   The dendritic/tumor combination is injected back into patients to stimulate
an immune response against the cancer.

   About 20 patients will be in the melanoma study and another 20 in the
advanced kidney cancer study. Both will be conducted in Boston hospitals,
initially at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Each is a combined Phase I
and Phase II clinical trial.

   "Cell fusion technology eliminates the need to identify specific antigens for
these vaccines, because it incorporates the entire menu of antigens found on the
original tumor to provide targets to the immune system," said Dr. Donald Kufe,
professor of medicine at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical
School.

   Kufe developed the technology, called dendritric/cancer cell fusion, with Dr.
David Avigan, director of the bone marrow transplant program at Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, and Dr. Jianlin Gong, an instructor at Harvard Medical
School.

   Those interested in participating in the advanced stage melanoma or kidney
cancer clinical trials are invited to contact Carolyn Stone in Avigan's office
at 617-667-3029.

   Acusphere, Elan unit form joint venture

   Acusphere Inc. of Cambridge said it has formed a joint venture with a
subsidiary of Elan Corp. PLC to develop controlled-released drugs that are
delivered to the lungs to treat asthma and other respiratory diseases.

   The venture's initial goal is to create a once-a-day inhaled drug to replace
the four to eight doses of albuterol and other medications used by people with
asthma, said Steven Delaney, vice president of finance and administration at Acu
sphere.

   Financial terms were not disclosed. But Delaney said Elan, based in Ireland,
will become Acusphere's largest corporate shareholder. The venture will be an
Acusphere subsidiary.

   Privately held Acusphere has developed a proprietary microparticle technology
that is being tested with an ultrasound contrast agent for detecting inadequate
blood flow to the heart. Elan, whose US operations are in King of Prussia, Pa.,
specializes in the field of pulmonary drug delivery.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2000


                             166 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                            October 3, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 758 words

HEADLINE: LSU unveils $43 million research building;
Complex tapped to be medical leader

BYLINE: By John Pope; Staff writer

BODY:

   With a Nobel laureate, corporate money and no small amount of determination,
Louisiana State University is preparing to dedicate the latest entry in New
Orleans' campaign to regain the medical glory it has lost to such comparative
upstarts as Birmingham, Ala., and Houston.

   In two days of speeches, ceremonies and scientific presentations that begin
today, LSU Health Sciences Center will unveil its $43 million Clinical Sciences
Research Building, a seven-story structure at 533 Bolivar St. between Gravier
and Perdido streets. Tenants, who are already at work in the 200,000-square-foot
structure, include the LSU-Tulane gene-therapy program, the Alcohol Research
Center and the Stanley S. Scott Cancer Center.

   With this addition, LSU leaders said they hope to awaken what Health Sciences
Center Chancellor Mervin Trail calls "a great sleeping giant in education and
research."

   The building will make research easier, LSU leaders say, not only because it
will have plenty of modern equipment, but also because it will provide enough
space for scientists who have been dispersed across LSU's medical center. Work
will be more efficient, LSU's visionaries say, because one of its laboratory
areas will eliminate duplication by doing work for several types of research.

   That particular area, known as the Core Laboratories, also is designed to be
a moneymaker because it will be hired out to other institutions of higher
learning and to companies that depend upon research. Leaders of LSU and the
business community hope it will become an economic dynamo, similar to such
nearby rivals as the University of Alabama at Birmingham and the massive Texas
Medical Center in Houston.

   Today's dedication hoopla, which is open to the public, includes a daylong
science symposium featuring a keynote address by Dr. Arthur Kornberg, a Stanford
University biochemist who shared a Nobel Prize in 1959 for discovering how DNA
makes copies of itself. Scientists from the Health Sciences Center, the
University of Pittsburgh and the National Institutes of Health also will lecture
during the convocation, which begins at 10 a.m. in Lecture Room B of the Medical
Education Building, 1901 Perdido St.

   Gov. Foster and New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial are scheduled to attend the
dedication Wednesday. That event will start at 9 a.m. with tours of the new
building, which was erected with $40 million from the state and $3 million from
Tenet HealthSystem, the organization whose local hospitals include Memorial and
Kenner Regional medical centers.

   "It's an investment," Bert Wallace, president of the LSU Health Sciences
Center Foundation, said of the organization's gift. "We have about 130 contracts
with Tenet."

   Because LSU physicians use Tenet hospitals and require good research
facilities as a condition for staying in New Orleans, "it makes good sense for
Tenet to support this," said Joseph M. Moerschbaecher, the Health Sciences
Center's vice chancellor for academic studies.

   Such partnerships are typical of what LSU wants to develop with the new
research center. In addition to enticing top-notch scientists who will be
expected to conduct cutting-edge research to revolutionize patient care, the
school leaders want the work to catch the attention of pharmaceutical companies
willing to spend money to develop promising drugs.

   The building "has a major positive impact for expanding our health-care
research and clinical base," said Barbara Johnson, MetroVision's senior vice
president. "It's one of the key pieces of the infrastructure that can help us
move in that direction."

   It is "a benchmark, a leaping-off place," Trail said.

   The local architectural firm Cimini Meric Duplantier designed the modernistic
structure.

The research building is the newest component of what has become known as the
New Orleans Medical Complex, a not-for-profit organization established nearly 10
years ago to maximize the research and economic possibilities of the area around
Charity Hospital and Tulane's and LSU's medical schools.

   The goal is to emulate the success of the University of Alabama at Birmingham
and the Texas Medical Center. Each is renowned for state-of-the-art research and
treatment, and each is the biggest employer in its respective state.

   So far, New Orleans Medical Complex has hung banners, set up a shuttle-bus
system and, most recently, erected a $50 million parking garage behind Charity
Hospital that also houses an environmentally friendly heating and cooling plant
for nearby buildings.

   0184.08

GRAPHIC: STAFF PHOTO BY ELIOT KAMENITZ Medical specialist Lisa Bothman works in
the Core Laboratories in the LSU Health Sciences Center Clinical Sciences
Research Building at 533 Bolivar St. The Core lab serves various testing
purposes, including DNA work.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000


                             167 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                   OCTOBER 2, 2000 Monday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS MONEYTALK; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 680 words

HEADLINE: GENE DOCS MAP TACTICS WORLD'S GENETICISTS HOLD HISTORIC MEETING HERE
TO COMPARE NOTES IN WAR TO CONQUER DISEASE

BYLINE: April Adamson, Daily News Staff Writer

BODY:

   SIX TIMES A DAY she tests her blood sugar, and each day she must attach an
insulin pump to her abdomen.

   For the past six years, since she was diagnosed with Type I diabetes,
Stephanie Harmelin has been living with the daily inconveniences that accompany
the disease.

   Harmelin is only 18 now, and she dreams she will see a cure in her lifetime.

   "I would love it," said the Cornell University freshman. "I am optimistic. .
.if a cure were to be found, any diabetic's life would be completely different."

   The world's leading geneticists are working toward that day, a day when
people with Type I diabetes, thyroid disease, breast cancer, Parkinson's disease
and other metabolic disorders will have a cure.

   Tomorrow, leading geneticists will come from around the world to assemble at
a roundtable for 10 hours here in Philadelphia, to discuss cutting-edge gene
research breakthroughs and to advance research toward cures for complex
diseases.

   This historic roundtable, which will precede the annual meeting of the
American Society of Human Genetics, has been lauded as the ideal time to
assemble such a group of great minds, since it comes just three months after the
discovery of the rough draft of the human genome, the sequence of chemical
instructions that makes us who we are.

   And for geneticists, the real work has only just begun.

   At a day-long panel discussion during the conference at the Philadelphia
Marriott, scientists are hoping to use their collective minds to take the next
step in gene study: using genome codes to crack complex diseases that debilitate
and kill.

   "It's time to reassess progress now that the genome has been discovered,"
said Dr. Terry Davies, director of endocrinology and metabolism at Mount Sinai
Hospital in New York.

   "The goal is to bring together the best minds, the most talented
geneticists," added Lee Ducat, president of the National Disease Research
Exchange, the event sponsor.

   Scientists from organizations like the Thyroid Association and the Juvenile
Diabetes Foundation, as well as independent researchers from England, Finland,
the United States and a host of countries, are expected to participate.

   One of the breakthrough announcements scientists plan to make is that they've
found a new gene for Type I diabetes. While that doesn't mean a cure will be
found tomorrow, the discovery does help scientists understand who is at risk.
And it will help screen newborns for the disease.

   Scientists will discuss what they have tried, what is failing and what still
seems an impossibility.

   "The ultimate goal is to improve the health of millions of people suffering
from complex diseases," Ducat said.

   The decoding of the genome is expected to eventually help doctors understand
who is likely to get what inherited illnesses, and to enable researchers to
treat diseases. Within a decade, ordinary people may be able to get their own
genetic maps telling them which diseases they should worry about, researchers
predict.

   But knowing who is predisposed to certain illnesses, or who might be carrying
a certain gene, could lead to discrimination or pose ethical dilemmas, said
University of Pennsylvania bioethicist Dr. Arthur Caplan, who will attend
tomorrow's conference to provide an ethicist's perspective on gene research.

   "I want to make sure they keep the importance of ethics at the forefront as
the science moves forward," said Caplan. "We have the dictionary, now how do we
make sentences, and how do we turn these sentences into cures?"

   The conference attendees also are expected to discuss:

   Changing the ways scientists map genes, including discussion of which
demographic groups they should test for their research and of how they should
collect their data

   What role genetics plays in mental health

   Which controversial gene therapy - or gene replacement - should be done and
how scientists will go about using the discovery.

   The conference will run from 8:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., and will incorporate
presentations and in-depth discussions.

   Send e-mail to adamsoa@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM;
DIAGRAM
DNA CODE: Blueprint for the Future (SOURCE: Knight Ridder Washington Bureau;
Knight Ridder, Tribune)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             168 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                October 2, 2000, Monday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B9

LENGTH: 770 words

HEADLINE: IT'S NOT EASY GLOWING GREEN

BYLINE: Jeremy ManierGENETIC ENGINEERING; USES; FRIVOLOUS

BODY:


BIOTECHNOLOGY

   OAK PARK, ILL., artist Eduardo Kac set out earlier this year to use genetic
engineering in the creation of something utterly, shockingly new: a living being
whose sole reason for existing is art.

The result was Alba, a rabbit that glows like a jellyfish.

   French researchers working with Kac injected genes similar to those in
fluorescent jellyfish into the embryo that became Alba. Although she looks
normal at first, Alba emits an eerie green glow when placed under a deep blue
light.

   For Kac, who says his brand of "transgenic art" is meant to spur a dialogue
about biotechnology, Alba is an artistic triumph. But for genetic researchers
hoping to earn trust from a wary public, the glowing bunny is a big headache.

   That's because Kac's seemingly frivolous project violates the bedrock
principles that have long guided genetic research.

   It's not that being green hurts the rabbit, or that this bizarre project
inevitably leads down the slippery slope toward cloning Josef Stalin. But in
using the rabbit genome as an artistic canvas, Kac has chipped away at the
tenuous, tacit contract between researchers and the public that allows DNA
research to continue.

   A chief pillar of that trust is the principle that such work should benefit
people or at least add to the vault of human knowledge. Such ground rules are
especially important in genetic research, which evokes deep-seated fears that
power-hungry scientists are tampering with nature. People put those fears aside
in hopes of a huge payoff down the road, in treatments for diseases or more
hardy food crops.

   But Alba benefits no one but Kac, who has reveled in the inevitable
controversy over the bunny's creation. His impishness seems to validate a common
suspicion about genetic research -- that it is merely a plaything for mad
scientists.

   According to Kac, it is justification enough that his project hurt no one,
not even Alba. Most experts agree that the protein responsible for Alba's odd
sheen -- called green fluorescent protein, or GFP -- is basically harmless. "As
a result of my work, a lovely rabbit was brought into the world," said Kac, an
assistant professor at the School of the Art Institute in Chicago. "Was that
justifiable? Yes."

   But if that's the standard, scientists might as well supply artists with
whatever lovely mutants they desire. The idea of toying with an animal's genes
to make a statement does not sit well with Stuart Newman, a professor of cell
biology at New York Medical College.

   "It's also possible to make a statement by torturing a baby and saying, 'Deal
with it,' " Newman said. "I think this has raised important questions, and
that's good. But I hope it's a one-shot deal."

   IN fact, Kac hopes to do more transgenic artworks, though he said he draws
the line at manipulating human genes for art's sake. Here, at least, Kac and the
scientific world agree. Although gene-therapy trials targeting specific human
cells have been under way for more than a decade, scientists have not yet taken
the next step, to create transgenic babies who would pass on their modifications
to future generations. There is a consensus that changing the reproductive cells
that pass on traits in humans is still beyond the pale.

   Even if work such as Kac's remains limited to animals, however, it could have
a harmful effect on legitimate genetic researchers by distorting public
perceptions.

   Lost in the hype over Kac's plans are the amazing insights that GFP, the
glowing protein in the bunny, has made possible. Since the gene that produces
GFP was isolated five years ago, scientists have learned to use it as a luminous
tracer in cells or whole organs. As a result, researchers have caught glimpses
of real-time changes within cells and embryos that would have been invisible
otherwise.

   Yet the productive applications of GFP are practically unknown. And it is
entirely possible that an incensed public will call for laws to put curbs on
transgenic art, said Sheldon Nahmod, a constitutional law expert at Chicago-Kent
College of Law.

   The constitutional right to free speech means you can't just ban the artistic
manipulation of genes. To withstand legal challenges, a curb on genetic
engineering would have to cover a broad spectrum of uses, including legitimate
research.

   As awesome as modern biotechnology can be, even more frightening is the
thought that it could become an instrument of creative provocateurs who see
themselves as accountable to no one. Artists who truly want to unite their work
with science may have to learn an unfamiliar concept: self-restraint.

NOTES:
Jeremy Manier is a staff writer for the Chicago Tribune. postnet.com/links Find
out more about the glowbunny on the artist's Web site.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO PHOTO by CHRYSTELLE FONTAINE - Artist Eduardo Kac and Alba, the
rabbit that glows.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000


                             169 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     October 2, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 309 words

HEADLINE: At issue: IPOs this week

BODY:

Shares
being    Expected
sold  price  mkt value
Co. (ticker), underwriter  (millions)   range   (mils.)<>

Advanced Switching Comm (ASCX), Morgan Stanley  6.3  $13-$15  $623
Access equipment to improve telecommunication network efficiency
Aristotle International (VOTE), WR Hambrecht & Co  2.0  $10-$14  $104
Database of registered voters for political campaign management
Asia Global Crossing (AGCX), Goldman Sachs  53.0  $14-$16  $8,232
Global Crossing, Microsoft venture on pan-Asian voice, data network
Coach (COH), Goldman Sachs   7.4  $14-$16  $636
Sara Lee spinoff of leather goods designer
Introgen Therapeutics (INGN), SG Cowen   5.0  $12-$14  $279
Develops gene therapy products for treating cancer
Kosan Biosciences (KOSN), Lehman Bros.   5.0  $14-$16  $373
Manipulates polyketides for developing drug candidates
New Skies Satellites (NSK), Goldman Sachs  28.5  $9-$11  $1,300
Satellite operator with five satellites in orbit and offices worldwide
Oplink Communications (OPLK), Robertson Stephens  13.7  $10-$12  $1,972
Makes fiber-optic components for optical networks
Tality (TLTY), Goldman Sachs  12.8  $10-$12  $998
Cadence spinoff of its chip design consulting firm
TNPC (New Power) (NPW), CS First Boston   21.0  $18-$20  $2,288
Enron spinoff of national electricity and gas provider to residents
Victory Entertainment (VICT), Weatherly Securities   2.3  $10-$12  $137
Makes 3D computer animation programs for TV and Internet use
WebSideStory (WSSI), Lehman Bros.  3.0  $13-$15  $213
Provides real-time Web-site traffic analysis

   Source: Renaissance Capital, 203-622-2978

LOAD-DATE: October 02, 2000


                             170 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     October 2, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F09

LENGTH: 1210 words

HEADLINE: AROUND THE REGION

BODY:


   WASHINGTON

   Bandwidth Exchange Buys TeleGeography

   Band-X Ltd., a private, London-based bandwidth exchange, last week bought
Washington-based TeleGeography Inc. for an undisclosed amount. TeleGeography,
which employs 25 people and tracks and analyzes international telecommunications
statistics, has been publishing annual reports on telecommunication traffic flow
since 1989. The chairman and founder of TeleGeography, Greg Staple, will step
down and will serve as an adviser to the Band-X board and an editorial
consultant to TeleGeography.

   BETHESDA

   Havas Acquires Snyder Communications

   Havas Advertising Group completed its acquisition of Snyder Communications
Inc., giving the French company a secure toehold in the United States and a
place to sell its American depositary receipts on the Nasdaq.

   Snyder, formerly owned by Redskins owner Daniel Snyder, was sold to Havas for
$ 2.2 billion. The deal was completed Sept. 26.

   Havas shares trade under the symbol HADV.

   BALTIMORE

   Miami Firm Buys Frederick Engineering

   Talk Visual Corp., a Miami video teleconferencing company, is buying
Baltimore-based Frederick Engineering Inc., a $ 4 million company that makes
computer-network monitoring equipment.

   Talk Visual, a publicly traded company, said it bought Frederick to get into
the field of network test equipment. Terms were not disclosed.

   CHANTILLY

   Christian Web Portal Agrees to Investment

   Crosswalk.com Inc. said Friday that it agreed to a $ 2 million private equity
investment.

   GroupHarbor.com, a maker of Web tools for churches and other Christian
groups, bought $ 2 million worth of preferred, convertible stock in Crosswalk as
a strategic investment. Crosswalk is a religious Web portal for Christians.

   The deal was strictly two-party; no fees, warrants or commissions were paid
to any brokers. GroupHarbor, based in Midland, Tex., gets to appoint one member
of Crosswalk's board.

   Crosswalk will use the money to develop new products.

   RESTON

   New Enterprise Associates Closes 10th Venture Fund

   New Enterprise Associates closed a new $ 2.2 billion venture-capital fund,
one of the largest such funds in history.

   New Enterprise Associates 10, the 10th fund raised by the company since its
founding, will go largely to technology companies across the United States. NEA,
which has its roots in Baltimore, is one of the most active investors in young
technology companies in the Washington area.

   All of NEA's major institutional investors put money in the fund, joined by
10 new investors.

   The last fund NEA closed raised $ 800 million.

   BALTIMORE

   Crown Petroleum Extends Deadline

   Crown Central Petroleum Corp. granted an extension of time for a suitor to
submit a buyout proposal.

   The Baltimore oil refining and marketing company granted the time to Apex Oil
Co., a St. Louis firm that Crown battled against earlier this year when it
rejected an earlier offer from Apex. Crown shareholders voted down a competing
offer from the family of Crown chairman and CEO Henry Rosenberg, setting the
stage for an offer from Apex.

   Apex had until Sept. 20 to make an offer. In a statement, Crown said Apex had
requested until Oct. 31 to complete its due diligence and submit a definitive
offer for Crown stock. Apex had earlier offered to buy Crown for $ 10.50 a
share.

   LETTER FROM . . . ARLINGTON

   A Leader for the Next Stage

   Like many start-ups that want to grow, Cyveillance Inc. is looking for a CEO
who is more grown-up.

   Arlington-based Cyveillance, an e-commerce intelligence company that measures
how companies are faring on the Internet, has begun a search for a chief
executive to succeed co-founder Brandy Thomas.

   Thomas stepped down to make way for more experienced leadership as the
company continues to expand rapidly. Thomas "has always been open about not
wanting to run a large company because he was an entrepreneur," said Rich Moore,
Cyveillance's vice president of sales and marketing. "And we're becoming a large
company."

   Cyveillance has gone from four employees to 150 since its 1997 founding. It
opened an international office in London last month.

   Explosive growth in Internet commerce is the driving force behind
Cyveillance's employee and revenue increases. It is becoming harder for
companies to find what they're looking for online, Moore said. "There are
literally billions of Web pages, and the Web's growing geometrically. There's no
way you can cover that without some fairly sophisticated technology that is
focusing on specific business issues," he said.

   Also, because e-business is becoming mainstream, a lot of executives who are
used to off-line market feedback get on the Internet and cannot see or feel the
competition. The demand is high for the kind of services Cyveillance provides,
said Kevin Burns, a Cyveillance board member and managing principle of Lazard
Technology Partners, the venture-capital firm that provided the company's first
round of funding.

   Burns says that two years ago, Cyveillance typically quoted a business
transaction at $ 25,000 to $ 50,000. Now the company routinely makes deals
averaging $ 150,000 to $ 200,000.

   With large-brand clients such as Nintendo, DeBeers, Associated Press,
DirectTV, Home Depot and Hyatt, Cyveillance has high hopes for a chief executive
who will lead the company through its next stage. Burns said the company is
looking for someone with experience in e-business, a chief operating officer or
division executive handling revenue on the order of $ 50 million a year and "who
would be simpatico with the existing managing team, who we believe is quite
capable." Oh, yeah, and it would be a plus if the new CEO has international
experience and is a "dealmaker" type and well-known on Wall Street, because the
company anticipates going public.

   -- Sara Gebhardt

   LETTER FROM . . . ROCKVILLE

   Growth Market in Biological Products

   BioReliance Corp., a biological testing and manufacturing company, last week
opened a new manufacturing facility to produce viral-based drugs and vaccines.

   The new 58,000-square-foot facility will expand the company's current
manufacturing capacity by 10 to 20 times, said John J. Gilly, BioReliance's vice
president of manufacturing.

   The $ 24 million facility, which sits next to BioReliance's corporate
headquarters and laboratories on Broschart Road in Rockville, will produce
vaccines and drugs to treat cancer, infectious diseases and genetic disorders.

   "This is the culmination of a two-to-three-year program to establish
large-scale manufacturing capability," Gilly said. "We've seen a growing demand
for larger-scale production of viral therapeutic products."

   The company recently signed deals to manufacture stockpiles of the smallpox
vaccine for the military and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
Atlanta.

   The company built the $ 24 million facility in anticipation of the growing
market for viral gene therapies. As new drugs progress through the development
pipeline, the company expects more business from companies that do not have
their own production facilities.

   "The industry is growing up," said Capers McDonald, BioReliance's chief
executive. "We're now growing up with our clients."

   -- Terence Chea

LOAD-DATE: October 02, 2000


                             171 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     October 1, 2000, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro News; Pg. 7C

LENGTH: 183 words

HEADLINE: CDC to add voices to genetics' debate;
 Conference examines how gene therapy and artificial tissues could affect public
health issues

BYLINE: M.A.J. McKenna, Staff

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Atlanta-based federal agency
whose scientists serve as "disease detectives" for much of the world, will open
its doors today to medical researchers and reporters from around the country.

   The gathering is one in a series of conferences held annually by the American
Medical Association to highlight the latest developments in medicine, science
and public health. On this year's agenda: genetics, gene therapy, artificial
tissues and aging, among other topics, along with an inside look at the workings
of the CDC.

   The three-day conference opens with an examination of how discoveries in
genetics may enhance research into public health, showcasing the work of CDC's
Office of Genetics and Disease Prevention.

   The group, founded in 1997, is examining how the increasing amount of
information becoming available about the human genome can be applied to the
public health questions of preventing or ameliorating disease across
populations, an endeavor that involves legal and ethical issues as well as
clinical and epidemiological ones.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2000


                             172 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            October 1, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-5

LENGTH: 1421 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL FINANCE; The Motley Fool

BYLINE: (C) Copyright 2000 The Motley Fool/Dist. by Universal Press Syndicate

BODY:
 Ask the Fool

   A Warrant for Stock Basics

   Q Is Wal-Mart stock traded publicly?  I've heard that you have to work for a
company in order to hold its stock. -- Rodger, via e-mail

   A You don't have to work for a company to own its stock (although working for
some companies means you get stock options or can buy shares of their stock at a
discount). You can work for one company and not own any of its stock (if it even
has stock), but own stock in a dozen other companies.

   Also, Wal-Mart is indeed a public company, so you can buy and sell shares of
its stock.  Most major companies that you can think of are publicly traded.
Examples: ExxonMobil, Sears, PepsiCo, Apple, Procter & Gamble, Caterpillar, Home
Depot, Johnson & Johnson, Motorola, Walgreen, Sara Lee, Toys R Us,
Anheuser-Busch, Gap, Whirlpool, Tupperware, IBM and Gillette.  There's no need
to invest in obscure companies you've never heard of or big companies you're not
familiar with.  Focus on what you understand well.

   Q Our investment club has been setting stop orders on the stocks we buy at
around 15 percent to 20 percent below the current price.  This has resulted in
our selling promising stocks (sometimes at a loss, even the same day) before
they have a chance to perform.  What's your opinion of stop orders?

   -- Gino Cirignano, Marina del Rey, Calif.

   A Stop orders are placed with brokers to automatically sell shares if they
drop to a certain level.  They're meant to protect you if a stock suddenly
plunges.  But as you've learned, they'll also kick you out of stocks
prematurely.  If you're planning to hang on to a stock for years, you might want
to expect some volatility and avoid stop orders.  Just keep up with your
holdings regularly.

   Got a question for the Fool? Send it in -- see Write to Us

   My Dumbest Investment

   Expensive penny

   IN THE SUMMER OF 1997, I saw a brand-new powered barge with the logo
"Enviro-Recovery" on the side.  Later, I happened to pass the company's
headquarters.  I went in and learned it was a new underwater logging company,
recovering 100-plus-year-old logs sunk in Lake Superior.  Being a woodworker, I
understood the value of that wood and believed the idea had great potential.
But I couldn't get much information on the company.  I risked 5 percent of my
IRA account and bought 1,000 shares at $2 1/2. What a thrill to own 1,000 shares
of something instead of 50 or 60 or 100. It's trading these days for pennies per
share.  I thought it had nowhere to go but up.

   -- E.S., Green Bay, Wis.

   The Fool Responds: Ouch. You were right to be curious about an intriguing
company, but never invest without knowing exactly what you're getting into.
Look for a proven track record.  Many penny stocks, even though they seem cheap,
get much cheaper.  You're usually better off with just a few shares of a more
proven company.

   Do you have an embarrassing lesson learned the hard way?  Boil it down to 100
words (or less) and send it to The Motley Fool c/o My Dumbest Investment.  Got
one that worked?  Submit to My Smartest Investment.  If we print yours, you'll
win a Fool's cap!

   The Fool School

   Credit check

   IT'S GOOD TO CHECK on your credit report now and then to make sure that it's
accurate.  This is especially true and can save you headaches if you plan to be
applying for credit (such as a mortgage) in the near future.

   There are three credit bureaus that keep credit records on consumers: Equifax
(800-685-1111, www.equifax.com), Experian (888-397-3742, www.experian.com) and
Transunion (800-888-4213, www.transunion.com). You should be able to contact any
or all of them to get a copy of your credit report.  Some experts recommend
getting all three reports, as some information on you may have been reported to
just one bureau.  You can order a copy of your combined credit report from all
three bureaus at www.truelink.com.

   In some circumstances, getting a report from one of these bureaus is free --
such as if you live in certain states (Colorado, Georgia, Massachusetts,
Maryland, New Jersey and Vermont, last time we checked), or within 60 days of
being denied credit, employment, insurance or rental housing.  Otherwise, it may
cost you about $8 per report, or more for a three-in-one combined report.

   If there are errors on your report, you can have them corrected.  Somewhere
in the report, often at the end, there should be instructions on how to dispute
anything that you believe is an error.  Credit bureaus are required to
investigate and correct mistakes.

   If some negative information there is correct, though, expect it to remain
there for seven to 10 years (usually seven, but 10 for bankruptcies). You can
lessen the sting of that information, though, by paying your bills on time.
Credit issuers tend to give more weight to your recent bill-paying history, so a
clean record for the last year or two can make a real difference.

   Finally, beware of "credit repair" clinics.  According to the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC), these are often scams.  Experian concurs, noting that
"consumers pay so-called credit clinics hundreds and even thousands of dollars
to 'fix' their credit report, but only time can heal bad credit."

   Learn more about credit issues at www.truecredit.com/Help/

   CreditCentral.asp, and www.ftc.gov. For copies of FTC brochures on credit
issues, call 877-FTC-HELP (877-382-4357).

   Name That Company

   MY ROOTS GO BACK TO 1865, when Fredrik Idestam, a Finnish mining engineer,
established a wood-pulp mill in southern Finland.  I later morphed into a
conglomerate involved in manufacturing things from paper to chemicals to rubber
galoshes to televisions, before finally evolving in the last decade into a major
digital communication company.  I'm the world's leading supplier of colorful
portable talking and listening devices and my slogan is "Connecting People." I
employ more than 60,000 people, a third of them in research and development.  I
raked in nearly $20 billion in sales in 1999, up 48 percent from 1998. Who am I?

   Know the answer?  Send it to us with Foolish Trivia on the top and you'll be
entered into a drawing for a nifty prize!

   Last week's trivia answer

   I WAS CONCEIVED AT A 1978 gathering of biologists in Switzerland.  These
folks were interested in using genetic engineering to improve human health-care.
Today, based in Cambridge, Mass., I'm one of the world's premier biotech
companies and am the oldest independent one.  I introduced my first proprietary
product, AVONEX, in 1996, to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.
SmithKline Beecham and Merck sell hepatitis B vaccines developed using my
research.  My researchers are focusing on novel products for multiple sclerosis,
inflammatory, respiratory, kidney and cardiovascular diseases, and in
developmental biology and gene therapy.  I have many products in my pipeline.
Who am I?

   (Answer: Biogen)

   The Fool Take

   Eye on Siebel

   SOFTWARE COMPANY SIEBEL SYSTEMS (Nasdaq: SEBL) supports the saying that many
salesmen are entrepreneurs.  The San Mateo company was founded by Tom Siebel, a
former Oracle salesman, who has built a business focused on the customer.  He
also created an archrival in his former boss, Oracle CEO Larry Ellison, since
Oracle's applications compete with Siebel's.

   Siebel offers customer relationship management software, which does pretty
much what it says -- helping companies manage customers with products such as
telephone call management software.  It has become a king in its space,
garnering 53 percent market share in the market for mid-sized companies.  Over
the last year, Siebel's sales grew 119 percent, and its stock advanced 460
percent.  The company is in its fastest growth stage, and investors should
understand, before even thinking about investing in the firm, that growth will
inevitably slow and Siebel will face challenges such as finding new growth
opportunities and improving business efficiency.

   Consider Cisco Systems.  Its growth may look like magic, but Cisco had to
expand its product line from routers to LAN equipment and recently to optics in
order to maintain supremacy in the networking arena.  There's no question that
Siebel is a high-quality company, but high expectations mean high risk.

   Still, it's an opportunity to watch a company blast through its growth cycle
and meet the challenge of rapid expansion, which places strain on managers and
business systems.  Investors might want to keep an eye on Siebel.

   Write to Us! Send questions for Ask the Fool, Dumbest (or Smartest)


LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2000


                             173 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                    OCTOBER 1, 2000, SUNDAY, SUNDAY EDITION

SECTION: SUNDAY CHRONICLE; Pg. 4/Z1

LENGTH: 1494 words

HEADLINE: GENDER VENDORS;

PRO;

The Pluses: More Choice, Fewer Unwanted Children

BYLINE: Joshua Coleman

BODY:
Technology that will allow us to select the sex of our babies is just within
reach. But should it be?

   .

    Pink or blue? Which color to paint the nursery used to be the big decision
parents-to-be had to make regarding their baby's gender. Now, technology not
only allows parents-in-waiting to know their baby's gender, procedures that will
let them select the sex they prefer are on the horizon.

    A Virginia company is currently testing such a method; it plans to wait
until it has produced several hundred gender-selected births before it markets
the procedure. Meanwhile, it has sparked debate among observers of the
reproduction technology field. Advocates hail it as a tool that will broaden
couples' reproductive choices; opponents argue that it's a form of tampering
with nature that should be used sparingly, if at all. We asked psychologist Josh
Coleman and author Patricia Maxwell Malmstrom to weigh in.

   -----------------------------------------------------------

    Susan and Peter attempted to start a family for several years. They would
have been grateful for any child, but they prayed for a girl. Susan's mother
died of breast cancer when Susan was 2 and she was raised by her dad and
brothers. She was denied the experience of being raised by a mother and longed
to give a daughter what she never had.

    They learned about Genetics & IVF Institute, a clinic in Virginia that has
developed a technique to greatly increase the probability of having a girl by
separating the Y chromosome (male) bearing sperm from the X chromosome (female)
bearing sperm before fertilization. They contacted the clinic, which has a
success rate of 90 percent for girls and 73 percent for boys, and are currently
awaiting approval to go through the procedure.

    Sex selection is a reproductive right. It would serve to reduce
overpopulation and unwanted children worldwide. In addition, it would reduce
infanticide, feticide and abandonment of the less-desired gender in those
countries that practice population control.

    As a psychologist who works with infertile couples, I have watched
innovations in the field of reproductive technology bring relief and happiness
to many parents.

    Opponents of sex selection are concerned that allowing couples to determine
the sex of their children will perpetuate gender stereotyping and
discrimination, upset the world ratio of men to women and increase the climate
of genetic intervention for "nonessential" characteristics of children, such as
hair or eye color. Others worry that the balance of nature will be disrupted or
that children will be treated as commodities.

    While these are worthwhile considerations, I don't believe they are
supported by evidence. In addition, the immediate and quantifiable benefits to
society of allowing couples to choose far outweigh the potential dangers.

    We are currently experiencing a world crisis in overpopulation. Studies show
that if couples strongly want a boy or a girl, they are likely to keep having
children until they succeed. In Western societies, this is producing larger
families than people desire or would bear if given more control.
Internationally, preference for a son leads to larger families in Bangladesh,
China, Nepal, Egypt, Calcutta, Sierra Leone and Pakistan. In a survey of
geneticists in India and China, a majority believed that using sex selection in
such cases is a reasonable use of reproductive technology. Thus, an important
benefit of letting couples choose the gender of their children would be a
decrease in unwanted children and a reduction in overpopulation.

    The concern that the new technology would be used to perpetuate
discrimination is often discussed in regards to countries such as India and
China, which have large populations, legal restrictions on family size and
consistent preference for sons. Parents who are desperate to have sons and are
only allowed one child have committed infanticide, had abortions and abandoned
female offspring.

    In both Confucian and Hindu traditions, only sons can pray for and release
the soul of deceased parents. Sons are preferred in India because of the expense
that daughters carry to a poor family for a dowry or wedding feast. They are
valued there, and in many countries, as the parents' only source of security for
old age, especially where women cannot inherit property or have financial
independence. In a recent publication from UNESCO, Dr. T.C. Kumar, of Hope
Infertility Clinic in Bangalore, India, writes: "The ethical choice lies between
the prevention and the perpetuation of feticide, infanticide and homicide of
females. Social change is a long, drawn-out process. Can we afford to wait till
these changes occur?"

    There is little risk that the balance of the sexes will be disrupted in
Western countries, because parents typically want what is less represented in
the family. Sex selection through abortion has produced a slight imbalance of
the sexes in some countries. However, worldwide alterations of the sex ratio are
not uncommon, due to differences in mortality rates between men and women,
catastrophes such as war and epidemics and other demographic factors.

    Dr. Malcolm Potts, a professor of public health at the University of
California at Berkeley, notes: "If there is a prolonged decrease of one sex over
the other, that sex will likely become more valued by society. We now see this
in the case of younger generations of women in Korea and Japan."

    Sex-selection opponents worry about the effects of tampering with nature.
Humans, however, do almost nothing but tamper with nature -- from cesarean
sections to heart transplants, from laser surgery to discovering the individual
molecule that inhibits a protease required for HIV. Our lifesaving innovations
are constantly affecting the gene pool by allowing people to live long enough to
pass on their problematic genes to future generations. We are the most
nature-tampering phenomenon to hit the Earth since an asteroid the size of Mount
Everest slammed into our planet 65 million years ago.

    The issue here is whether or not sex selection will create a greater good or
harm.

    Most people have responded to each breakthrough in the evolution of human
reproduction technology in a balanced manner, contrary to suggestions that the
public or medical community will abuse and misuse sex-selection technology.

    As professors J. Leigh Simpson and Ann Carson at Baylor College of Medicine
state, "There exists barely a scintilla of evidence for untoward application in
prenatal genetic diagnosis, gene therapy, preconception planning and other
reproductive technologies. There is no reason to believe the slope will suddenly
become slippery."

    Finally, there is the issue of whom we empower to make decisions over our
reproductive lives as technology becomes available. Governments? Clerics?
Psychologists? Bioethicists? Some medical organizations have suggested that
doctors or geneticists use "moral persuasion" to discourage couples from
selecting sex.

    However, it is paternalistic to suggest that medical professionals are more
qualified to make moral judgments over couples' reproductive lives than the
people who would raise that child.

    "Society is rightly loath to enquire into people's fitness to parent,"
writes Professor Julian Savulescu, director of the ethics unit at the University
of Melbourne. "Parents know best their own circumstances, and ultimately it is
parents who must live with and make sacrifices for their children. It is
totalitarian of the state to dictate which children parents should have and
rear."

    Although the ability to select the sex of our offspring is a recent
scientific development, the desire has existed for centuries. Aristotle advised
couples that having sex in the south wind would produce a girl. Henry the VIII
tried six wives in an attempt to produce a son. In ancient Greece, men thought a
boy would result from having sex while lying on their right sides.

    As New York Times author and reporter Lisa Belkin writes, "What, then, is
the difference between a dream of children and a dream of a son or a daughter? I
do not dismiss the ethical gray tones, the risks of misuse. Instead, I weigh
them and conclude that for every problem this technology might create, there is
an existing problem that it might solve."

    The immediate dangers to the individual and society from overpopulation,
unwanted children, infanticide, feticide, abandonment of female offspring and
the restrictions of reproductive freedoms are sound reasons to allow couples to
choose.

   -----------------------------------------------------

   HAVE YOUR SAY

   -- Respond to THIS WEEK'S TOPIC at sunday@sfchronicle.com, or join the
discussion at sfgate.com/vent/sunday. For other ways to reach us, see the back
page of this section.


   Joshua Coleman, Ph.D. is a writer and psychologist with a special interest in
family and reproductive issues. He practices in Oakland and San Francisco.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), (1) Photo illustration by Carlos Avila Gonzalez/The
Chronicle, (2) Deanne Fitzmaurice/The Chronicle 1986

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2000


                             174 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     October 1, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 2021 words

HEADLINE: A LOOK AT . . . Patents & Biotech; INNOVATION IS DRIVEN BY the
possibility of profit. But an expanding web of scientific patents, the author
argues, threatens to slow down potentially lifesaving work.; Must Researchers
Pay So Research Pays Off?

BYLINE: Kyla Dunn

BODY:


   Any inventor can talk about building a better mousetrap. But five years ago,
scientists announced that they had built a better mouse--and had patented it.
The new breed, dubbed PDAPP, was genetically engineered to develop signs of
Alzheimer's disease, giving scientists a valuable tool for understanding the
disease and testing new ideas for treatments.

   Not all scientists, however. Athena Neurosciences, now part of Elan
Pharmaceuticals, acquired the patents to the Alzheimer's-prone mouse and chose
to guard them closely for use in its own drug development efforts. As a result,
other researchers in the field found themselves stymied by lack of access to a
valuable research tool. "Nobody could get those mice--they were inaccessible,"
recalls David Borchelt, an Alzheimer's researcher at Johns Hopkins University.

   In frustration, Borchelt bred similar mice, but he couldn't use them to test
drugs or therapies, since that would illegally infringe on Elan's patents. "If a
company came to me with a compound that they thought was promising and would be
worth testing," says Borchelt, "I could not do it. It's happened several times."

   The case of PDAPP (named for the altered gene) is an example of how
dangerously far America's patent system may have strayed from its original
mission--which, according to the Constitution, was to "promote the progress of
science and useful arts." Today, with some 10,000 biotech patents issued a year,
scientific progress is precisely what is threatened. And with biomedicine
promising to address conditions ranging from heart disease to Alzheimer's to
cancer, the effects of this slowdown might someday be measured in lost years and
lost lives.

   But the real story here is one of complexity, not scandal--and we shouldn't
be too quick to denounce Elan or companies like it. In an era when the
pharmaceutical industry estimates the average cost of successfully developing a
new drug to be more than $ 500 million and biotech companies as a group lost $ 5
billion last year, one thing is clear: Companies cannot afford to get involved
in innovative research without the possibility of profit. Patents give companies
a fighting chance of recouping their enormous investment costs, and of making
money for shareholders. Without that protection, they could not raise the funds
necessary to pursue new lifesaving drugs or therapies at all.

   This dilemma is likely to be a factor in an important new field of research.
In August, the National Institutes of Health issued guidelines that will for the
first time allow federal funds to be used for research involving human embryonic
stem cells, thus expanding the pool of scientists who could build on one of the
biggest breakthroughs.

   Human embryonic stem cells, harvested from microscopic embryos created in
vitro and left over after infertility treatments, have the remarkable ability to
grow into any tissue in a human body. They could someday allow doctors to grow
new heart muscle for heart attack survivors, insulin-secreting cells for
diabetics and neurons for sufferers of Parkinson's disease. Coupled with cloning
techniques, these stem cells offer the hope of transplant organs that would
exactly match a patient's body tissues. In theory, a person in need of a new
liver might be "therapeutically" cloned; stem cells from the cloned embryo could
then be grown into a liver. Organ shortages, and fears that the body will reject
a donor organ, would be things of the past.

   However, a very broad patent covers these cells--and as a result, progress
toward this promising future is almost entirely at the mercy of the patent
holders.

   A research foundation at the University of Wisconsin owns the patent and is
giving scientists widespread access for purely academic research. But in the
commercial realm, where new therapies become a reality, the foundation has
licensed the patent to just one company, Geron Corp., which currently has
exclusive rights to develop stem cells for the marketplace.

   The same company controls patents on the cloning technology that created
Dolly the sheep. While several other groups have developed cloning techniques,
Geron's patents are particularly relevant to accomplishing therapeutic cloning.
To quote David Earp, Geron's vice president of intellectual property, these
patents put the company in a "dominant position."

   Make no mistake: Human embryonic stem cells wouldn't be available at all if
Geron, in the face of the long-standing federal funding ban on human embryo
research, hadn't financed that pioneering work. Its stockholders should have a
chance to benefit from a huge gamble that paid off. But what kind of access
Geron chooses to grant other companies to the patented cells may determine
whether or not new lifesaving therapies reach the public. And that, according to
many of the researchers and patent experts I have spoken with, is cause for
concern.

   These concerns are not unprecedented, as events in the field of human gene
therapy have shown.

   In 1990, an NIH team made medical history by successfully using gene therapy
for the first time. The team took deficient white blood cells from two girls
with a rare genetic disorder, introduced a gene that would correct the problem,
then returned the cells to the girls' bodies--where they functioned beautifully.

   The scope of the patent that the team received in 1995, however, was
breathtakingly broad. Known as the "Anderson ex vivo patent" after the team's
leader, W. French Anderson, it covered any procedure, involving any disease, in
which cells are taken from the human body, treated via gene therapy and then
returned to the patient. The NIH then licensed the patent exclusively to a small
biotech company that had helped pay for the research--which was subsequently
bought by the pharmaceutical giant Sandoz. Scientists and physicians watched
dumbfounded as one company received exclusive rights to an entire new field of
medicine.

   A year later, Sandoz sought to merge with Ciba-Geigy--which controlled almost
all of the other key patents in gene therapy. The Federal Trade Commission
stepped in, warning that this gene therapy monopoly could "hinder" the
development of "potentially lifesaving therapies." With competitors excluded
from the marketplace, it said, the result could be less research, slower
progress and higher prices.

   While the FTC allowed the merger to go forward, its ruling required that the
merged company, Novartis, grant access to the Anderson ex vivo patent to anyone
who requested it. Novartis could require a onetime payment of $ 10,000 plus a
royalty of up to 1 percent of revenues made from any gene therapy products.
(This is considered modest; patent holders are known to negotiate fees into the
hundreds of thousands of dollars, or perhaps a percentage of the requesting
company's stock.)

   Geron, however, is under no such obligation to grant other companies access
to the human embryonic stem cell patent. And that is the crux of the concern.
There is nothing illegal about the monopoly foothold that this company may
establish in the marketplace, and Geron would be perfectly within its rights to
exclude competitors.

   The big picture looks rather grim when you consider that the challenges to
this research go far beyond patents controlled by Geron, and involve the much
larger web of patents that now ensnares all of biotechnology. The cost of doing
research now includes the cost of accessing these patents--at whatever price the
market will bear.

   Advanced Cell Technology is a small biotech company headed by Michael West,
one of the co-founders of Geron. ACT thinks it may have found a way to get
involved in therapeutic cloning, and give West's ex-colleagues a run for their
money. The company has patent rights to a cloning technology different from
Geron's and what it says is an alternative method of producing cells just as
powerful as Geron's human embryonic stem cells. "We've filed our own patents,
and we're comfortable with our freedom to operate," says West.

   Even so, says ACT's vice president of medical and scientific development,
Robert Lanza, the challenges to moving forward are considerable. Recently, for
instance, ACT tried to get access to a patent, held by a university scientist,
that would allow it to use its novel technology to create neurons that could be
used to treat Parkinson's disease. Similar treatments have been done for years
using fetal neurons--so this seemed like it might be a realistic, and exciting,
first new therapy to try.

   Initially, the access was offered at a price ACT could afford to pay. But
Lanza says that once it became clear what the patent was worth to the company,
the price went up, far past ACT's limit. In the end, negotiations broke down.

   What this demonstrates, says Lanza, is how a company's research can be
determined not only by what it would most like to accomplish, but by which
patents it is able to access. "Many paths you go down are just minefields," he
says. "As soon as someone knows they have something that you want, they'll try
to hold you hostage for a percentage of your company . . . and that's for just
one piece of the puzzle for one disease!" And that, he says, is before anyone
even knows if the research will pan out.

   Biomedical research has by no means ground to a halt--and it is important to
acknowledge the leeway that exists in the current system. Many patent holders
are willing to waive the upfront cost of access to their patents for academic
scientists--a "de facto research exemption," as some call it--and only seek
compensation if a marketable product is developed. What's more, many companies
give each other access to patented research tools, knowing that progress toward
a royalty-producing product will be accomplished that much faster and they can
profit from licensing fees in the meanwhile.

   Economists who study the issue aren't sure whether patents actually
encourage, or discourage, innovation overall. "There's a consensus to be
ambivalent," says Josh Lerner, an economist at the Harvard Business School. In a
1995 study of more than 400 biotech companies, Lerner found that smaller
companies, fearing lawsuits, shied away from areas already staked out by patent
claims.

   The threat of lawsuits is real. Take the case of the patented Alzheimer's
mice: Last year, Elan Pharmaceuticals sued the Mayo Foundation for patent
infringement after Mayo bred a similar mouse created by a colleague of
Borchelt's, Karen Hsiao Ashe of the University of Minnesota, and distributed it
to about a hundred academic labs and a dozen companies. A judge dismissed the
suit this past June, ruling Elan's patents invalid; Elan has appealed. Out of
fear of such lawsuits, Borchelt is not using his mice to test therapies.

   In 1998, a working group convened by the NIH reported that a "serious threat"
to science was being posed by patent holders making onerous demands on those who
wanted to use their tools for research. The NIH issued guidelines last December
designed to distribute research tools created with federal funding as widely as
possible. But the guidelines do not have the force of law, and do not apply to
technology developed by companies with their own money.

   Many scientists talk about the need to make a "research exemption" official,
allowing them to work freely with patented technology for noncommercial
purposes. But it would be difficult to write such a rule into law: Defining when
research becomes commercial is tricky, given that an experiment done in a
university lab today may be the founding idea for a biotech company tomorrow.

   The challenge for policymakers is clear: balancing the legitimate financial
needs of America's biotech and pharmaceutical industries with the progress of
science. With research tools as powerful as the Alzheimer's mice and human
embryonic stem cells being created, however, our future health may depend on the
outcome.


   Kyla Dunn, a former biotech researcher, is a science journalist and an
associate producer with the PBS investigative documentary series "Frontline."





GRAPHIC: Illustration, adam nicklewicz for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: October 01, 2000


                             175 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                 September 30, 2000 Saturday City final Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 14A

LENGTH: 468 words

HEADLINE: Who owns the future?

BODY:

   A panel of the American Association for the Advancement of Science thinks
some researchers are hurtling down a path as treacherous as it is inviting. It
has urged scientists to adopt a self-imposed ban on human gene-altering
experiments. At the same time, it recommends the federal government establish a
commission to provide oversight of such experimentation and do so as quickly as
possible.

   "We're saying that no clinical trials should be taking place in this area,"
stated Mark S. Frankel, a member of the staff of AAAS, the nation's largest
general science organization.

   The association's advisory, issued after a two-year study, was based on the
recognition that genetic research on animals is a precursor to similar research
on humans. Beyond Dolly in Scotland, cloned mice in Hawaii and cloned cattle in
Japan are their offspring, which are programmed to have the identical genetic
makeup. And beyond them is the scary prospect of "designer children," made to
the specifications of their human parents.

   The ramifications of such a development are morally and socially challenging,
but today's worries are troubling enough. The death last year of an 18-year-old
man in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial spotlighted research that
is largely conducted in secret and too often without conscientious observation
of clinical protocols. Four other volunteers suffered serious side effects in
the same trial. The fatal study was intended to test the safety of altering a
gene that can cause a rare liver disease.

   Food and Drug Administration workers investigating the Penn trials said they
found numerous violations of research regulations and a lack of protections for
the human subjects. In addition, the FDA cited a conflict of interest. A key
figure in the trials had a large monetary stake in their outcome. The university
has since suspended the experiment.

   In today's biotech world, the Penn experiment is considered conventional gene
therapy. What most worries ethicists and the AAAS is the altering of the sperm
and egg cells of patients, thus passing on all changes, their known and unknown
qualities alike, to subsequent generations.

   It may be five to 15 years before such experimentation is commonplace,
suggests the scientific association. But society does not have five to 15 years
to establish the safeguards essential to assure that groundbreaking experiments
don't violate the rights and jeopardize the welfare of volunteers and their
offspring.

   The future does not belong to science alone. The AAAS recognizes that reality
by urging a ban on human gene-altering research and the creation of a federal
oversight commission. The recommendations should be enforced.

   OUR POSITION IS: Ban all human gene-altering research and create a federal
oversight commission.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             176 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                          September 30, 2000 Saturday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Who owns the future?

BODY:

   A panel of the American Association for the Advancement of Science thinks
some researchers are hurtling down a path as treacherous as it is inviting. It
has urged scientists to adopt a self-imposed ban on human gene-altering
experiments. At the same time, it recommends the federal government establish a
commission to provide oversight of such experimentation and do so as quickly as
possible.

   "We're saying that no clinical trials should be taking place in this area,"
stated Mark S. Frankel, a member of the staff of AAAS, the nation's largest
general science organization.

   The association's advisory, issued after a two-year study, was based on the
recognition that genetic research on animals is a precursor to similar research
on humans. Beyond Dolly in Scotland, cloned mice in Hawaii and cloned cattle in
Japan are their offspring, which are programmed to have the identical genetic
makeup. And beyond them is the scary prospect of "designer children," made to
the specifications of their human parents.

   The ramifications of such a development are morally and socially challenging,
but today's worries are troubling enough. The death last year of an 18-year-old
man in a University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial spotlighted research that
is largely conducted in secret and too often without conscientious observation
of clinical protocols. Four other volunteers suffered serious side effects in
the same trial. The fatal study was intended to test the safety of altering a
gene that can cause a rare liver disease.

   Food and Drug Administration workers investigating the Penn trials said they
found numerous violations of research regulations and a lack of protections for
the human subjects. In addition, the FDA cited a conflict of interest. A key
figure in the trials had a large monetary stake in their outcome. The university
has since suspended the experiment.

   In today's biotech world, the Penn experiment is considered conventional gene
therapy. What most worries ethicists and the AAAS is the altering of the sperm
and egg cells of patients, thus passing on all changes, their known and unknown
qualities alike, to subsequent generations.

   It may be five to 15 years before such experimentation is commonplace,
suggests the scientific association. But society does not have five to 15 years
to establish the safeguards essential to assure that groundbreaking experiments
don't violate the rights and jeopardize the welfare of volunteers and their
offspring.

   The future does not belong to science alone. The AAAS recognizes that reality
by urging a ban on human gene-altering research and the creation of a federal
oversight commission. The recommendations should be enforced.

   OUR POSITION IS: Ban all human gene-altering research and create a federal
oversight commission.

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 2009


                             177 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 29, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A3

LENGTH: 868 words

HEADLINE: US RESEARCH ETHICS OVERSEER LISTS GOALS

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   The nation's top cop for research safety and ethics laid out his goals
yesterday for the first time, promising he will not back off from enforcing
rules to protect human reseach subjects but will focus more on prevention than
punishment.

   Dr. Greg Koski, the former Partners Healthcare administrator in Boston who is
now director of the Office for Human Research Protections, said he plans to
professionalize the way research is conducted and policed at a time when science
seems increasingly profit-driven and plagued by ethical lapses.

       The problems became national news last year when a young man died during
a Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment conducted by researchers who stood to
profit if the test was a success.

   "We need to go beyond a culture of compliance to a culture of conscience and
responsible conduct," he said. "And we need to create a climate where the public
is sufficiently educated to be a full partner in the practice of research."

   Koski, 50, of Holliston, is bringing to the nation a philosophy of
collaboration and education he practiced for the last five years as director of
human research affairs at Massachusetts General Hospital and then Partners.

   He started his federal job this month overseeing experiments involving
hundreds of thousands of people at more than 5,000 universities and hospitals
that get federal research funding.

   The political climate will test the patience and diplomacy he is known for in
Boston. Congress is pressing for stronger protections of people who are used as
research subjects amid questions about why Koski's predecessor was pushed aside
after getting tough; he halted research at eight institutions in the last two
years where patients were put at risk.

   Earlier this year, Donna Shalala, secretary of Health and Human Services,
renamed the research protection office, moved it under her control and hired
Koski. Although Koski is respected locally for his balanced handling of human
research issues, he is not well-known nationally and some fear a pullback on
enforcement.

   Yesterday, Koski said, "There will be no backing off on compliance and
enforcement activities." He said the investigative staff had tripled from two to
six and that institutions that harm research subjects would be barred from doing
research.

   But, he added, "I don't believe we will benefit in the long run from simply
stopping research."

   Instead, he said his office is working with other federal agencies to
streamline rules, set minimum education standards for researchers and create
voluntary accreditation for institutional review boards, which apply research
rules at the local level. Those boards have been roundly criticized for paying
more attention to procedure than content.

   Researchers can expect both more federal spot checks and more federal
assistance, and the public will have greater access to help through a hot line
and more educational programs.

   Eventually, Koski said, he believes the local review boards should be
replaced by specialized or regional boards free of institutional biases.

   Some advocates have questioned whether Koski has his own biases.

   "Can someone from the academic community truly be independent in his
evaluation of ethical violations" by other academics, asked Vera Hasner Sharav,
president of Citizens for Responsible Care and Research, which advocates for
research safety.

   Yesterday, Koski dismissed that concern. "I feel absolutely no obligation to
the academic community to do anything other than make the system work for all of
us," he said.

   Koski said he will recuse himself from any case involving Partners and direct
those cases to a superior. The office is currently investigating one case
involving Brigham & Women's Hospital and two involving MGH, both part of
Partners. Yesterday, Koski refused to discuss those cases or others that
occurred on his watch in which patients allegedly were harmed by rogue
investigators.

   Trained as a cardiac anesthesiologist at Harvard Medical School, Koski taught
at Boston University and Harvard and practiced medicine primarily at MGH.  He
also conducted human research himself in anesthesiology.

   In 1991, he was tapped to become a member of MGH's Institutional Review
Board, and, he says, found his "calling." At Partners, he is credited with
streamlining the review process, which has made securing approval of new
experiments quicker for researchers and drug companies. Community
representatives on the review board say that was done without jeopardizing
patient safety.

   "He's been very fair," said the Rev. Colin B. Gracey, Episcopal chaplain at
Northeastern University and a community review board representative. "He's not
one to sacrifice the claims of the human subjects to the needs of science. He
constantly tries to come to some balance."

   David Blumenthal, director of the MGH Institute for Health Policy and a
strong critic of researchers' conflict of interest, said, "I trust Greg Koski's
judgment on issues of values and ethics."

   Koski's former department chairman at MGH, Dr. Warren Zapol, said, "I'm
delighted to see him go forward to clean up a national mess. If anybody has the
political skills to help us do it, Greg Koski does."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, AP FILE PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2000


                             178 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                September 29, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 566 words

HEADLINE: New Voluntary Standards Are Proposed for Experiments on People

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

BODY:

   The new head of the federal office that oversees research on people said
yesterday that the system was flawed and would be revised to increase protection
for human subjects.

   The official, Dr. Greg Koski, said stricter standards were needed because of
the increasing number of experiments involving people.

    Dr. Koski, who became director of the Office of Human Research Protections
this month, said he would ask universities to verify that scientists dealing
with human subjects had formal training in ethics. He also said the review
boards at the universities that approve human experiments must show that they
have sufficient staff members and expertise to conduct proper ethical reviews of
proposed experiments.

   In addition, he is asking the Institute of Medicine at the National Academy
of Sciences to devise a way to measure the performance of the scientists and
boards.

   The moves come after several lapses in experiments that Dr. Koski said had
shaken public confidence.

   Last fall, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died in a gene therapy
experiment. And in the past two years, the federal government has shut down
human research at eight major universities and hospitals for failure to abide by
the nation's ethics rules, and has cited an additional 34 universities and
hospitals for similar violations, according to an agency within the Department
of Health and Human Services.

   Dr. Koski said he hoped that most of the changes could be adopted voluntarily
by research centers. But if they are not, he said, public sentiment will
probably force Congress to mandate such standards.

   "We must move beyond the culture of compliance, to move to a culture of
conscience and responsibility," he said at a news conference at his office in
Washington.

   Until now, there has been no certification or accreditation of scientists or
review boards to make sure they have formal ethics training. Federal officials
do not even know how many review boards there are in the United States, how many
experiments are conducted on humans, or exactly what qualifications researchers
and ethics reviewers have.

   Instead, under the system in place since the mid-1970's, researchers propose
experiments on humans to an ethics review board, usually at their home
university or hospital. That board reviews the proposal to assure that patients
are not likely to be harmed and that the experiment complies with federal ethics
rules. Federal oversight has been minimal.

   Dr. Koski said his office had already increased the number of investigators
to six from two.

   For now, he said, the certification of scientists and supervisory boards by
universities and medical centers will remain voluntary.

   But in the end, he said, his office has the option of suspending any program
that gets federal money to carry out research. Research carried out with private
money is not covered by the system.

   Adil E. Shamoo, vice president of Citizens for Responsible Care and Research,
a nonprofit group that has criticized government supervision of human
experiments, said the moves announced by Dr. Koski were "good first steps."

   "It will now depend on how they are carried out," Mr. Shamoo said, "and
whether they can address the weakest link in the system: that the review boards
themselves are employees of the institutions doing the experiments. That
conflict of interest is the central problem."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2000


                             179 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                           September 29, 2000 Friday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 644 words

HEADLINE: State to purchase 400-acre plantation;
Hainkel calls Rosedown buy 'ridiculous idea'

BYLINE: By Jack Wardlaw; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- After a heated debate, the state Bond Commission on Thursday
approved financing for the state's purchase of the 165-year-old Rosedown
Plantation near St. Francisville as a tourist attraction at a cost of $5.5
million.

   Senate President John Hainkel, R-New Orleans, led the charge against the
purchase, calling it a "ridiculous idea" at a time when the state is closing
health clinics and is unable to fully finance medical insurance for children.

   Commissioner of Administration Mark Drennen and Lt. Gov. Kathleen Blanco
defended the purchase as important to tourism and the quality of life in
Louisiana. "It will make money for the state," Drennen said.

   The $5.5 million expenditure was just one of dozens of items on a list of
$282 million in state construction projects approved by the Legislature this
year. Bond Commission action was needed to provide a line of credit so that work
can begin before the state holds its next bond sale in late November.

   That was the only item that sparked debate, however, as the commission
defeated Hainkel's motion to delete the plantation from the list. Only Sen.
Paulette Irons, D-New Orleans, joined Hainkel in voting no, compared with 11 yes
votes. After that vote, the entire list was approved without objection.

   Irons said the state is spending too much money on parks at a time when
"we're behind on everything else." But Blanco, whose office oversees the
Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism, said parks are an important part
of the effort to draw more tourist dollars to the state.

   Tourism-related jobs "are the lowest-paying on the list," Irons said,
suggesting the state should change its focus to creating jobs in the high-tech
sector.

   Rosedown, now a privately owned bed-and-breakfast inn, is deteriorating and
"will be lost to Louisiana" if the state doesn't take it over," Blanco said. The
structure was built in 1835 and comes with 400 surrounding acres.

   The state operates three other antebellum homes: Kent House in Alexandria;
the Audubon Oakley House, also in St. Francisville; and Winter Quarters in
Newellton.

   Hainkel, normally an administration ally, has in recent days been critical of
a number of projects in the Capitol Complex area, which is undergoing a face
lift with the construction of new office buildings and tourism-related
structures.

   Rep. Jerry Luke LeBlanc, D-Lafayette, said the individual project isn't the
problem; it's the whole construction budgeting procedure. "The Legislature puts
more projects in the capital outlay bill than we can possibly finance, and then
the Division (of Administration) gets to decide which one are funded. But we
voted for all of them."

   Some of the other items included in the lines of credit:
   Improvements to the Garyville Timbermill Museum, $1.3 million; development of
the second stage of Lake D'Arbonne State Park in Union Parish, $6.3 million;
improvements to the sprinkler system at Charity Hospital in New Orleans, $2.8
million; construction of a gene therapy research center at Louisiana State
University School of Medicine in New Orleans, $6 million; continued renovations
to the old Wildlife and Fisheries Building on Royal Street in New Orleans as the
new home of the state Supreme Court, $6 million; planning and construction of a
bike path in West Jefferson Parish, $240,000; renovations at the Algiers Stable
Historical District Museum, $350,000; planning and construction of a Westwego
Arts Center, $800,000; renovation of the Columbia Theater in Hammond as a
regional arts facility, $930,000; land and building acquisition and
infrastructure improvements for "an industrial prospect" in St. Tammany Parish,
$1.8 million; and planning and reconstruction of the Dryades Street YMCA in New
Orleans, which was damaged by fire, $200,000.

GRAPHIC: Sen. John Hainkel Criticizes several Capitol projects

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000


                             180 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    September 28, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 030

LENGTH: 269 words

HEADLINE: Architects honored

BYLINE: By Tom Walsh

BODY:

   They might be small, but their designs are cropping up big around the region.

   The architectural firm Tsoi-Kobus & Associates will be honored today as the
Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce's 2000 Small Business of the Year.

   The Cambridge firm's designs include the Suffolk University Law School,
Millennium Pharmaceuticals and Partners Health Care at MIT's University Park and
the Center for Women and Newborns at Brigham and Womens Hospital.

   Some of the firm's buildings under construction include research labs for
Transkaryotic Therapies on Massachusetts Avenue in Cambridge and a 190-room
hotel at 90 Tremont St. in Boston.

   Like the law school building, one of the challenges in designing the hotel
was to not detract from the nearby Granary Burial Ground, said Rick Kobus, a
founding principal in the company.

   "One of our main concerns was not to throw a lot of shadow on the burial
ground," he said.

   The company has about 100 employees and will do about $ 20 million in
business this year, Kobus said.

   "Tsoi-Kobus is a small business that stands out because of its commitment to
  . . . excellence, professional development and the community," said Paul
Guzzi, the president of the Chamber.

   "We're very excited to be selected by the Chamber," Kobus said. "It's unusual
for architectural firms, which are often thought of as being more art than
business organizations."

   The chamber will also honor Netnumina, of Boston, and TenCorp, of Waltham.
Boston Herald publisher Patrick Purcell will be the keynote speaker for the
event, scheduled to start at 11:30 today in the Park Plaza Hotel.


LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             181 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 27, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E10

LENGTH: 162 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
GENZYME MOLECULAR STARTS CLINICAL TRIALS

BYLINE: By NAOMI AOKI

BODY:

   Genzyme Molecular Oncology said it has initiated early phase clinical trials
to assess the safety, efficacy, and potency of a gene therapy cancer vaccine for
melanoma, the most serious type of skin cancer. The vaccine combines two of the
most widely expressed melanoma tumor antigens, MelanA/MART1 and gp100. The study
will enroll about 36 patients with stage 2, 3, or 4 melanoma who have completed
surgical treatment. Trial sites include Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston
and U.S. Oncology in Dallas. The company said it is currently conducting another
clinical trial for the gene therapy melanoma vaccine in which cells are removed
from the patient, combined with the antigens outside the body, and then
delivered back to the patient once researchers are sure their cells contain the
vaccine. The new study advances the research by directly administering the
vaccine to the patient. Framingham-based Genzyme Molecular's shares rose 75
cents to $14.

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             182 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                  September 27, 2000 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. F14, Medical Research

LENGTH: 1146 words

HEADLINE: GENOME SEQUENCE JUST ONE SMALL STEP, EXPERT SAYS

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary: Sydney Brenner, a pioneer of modern biology, puts today's genetic
advances in perspective

   A founding father of modern biology says it's OK to get excited about the
sequencing of the human genome, but don't expect a quick payoff.

   Sydney Brenner, 73, is director of the Molecular Sciences Institute in
Berkeley, Calif. He pioneered some of the greatest advances in 20th-century
genetics and is noted for his concern for the impact of science on society.

   During the past 50 years, working with other scientists, he has proved the
existence of messenger RNA, which carries the genetic message from DNA to the
cell's protein sites, and helped determine how DNA instructs cells to make
specific proteins. His research of the roundworm, C. elegans, established it as
an experimental system for analysis of complex biological processes.

   Brenner has been a scientific adviser to major biotech venture funds,
multinational companies and start-up biotech firms. He has more than 100
publications and numerous patents to his name.

   Earlier this month, the prestigious Albert and Mary Lasker Foundation,
established in the 1940s to raise awareness of biomedical research, honored
Brenner with its special achievement award. In addition, the foundation honored
him for allaying fears that genetic engineering would lead to monstrous
consequences, and for his wit.

   He was in Portland recently to speak to scientists at Oregon Health Sciences
University's Vollum Institute.

   In an interview, Brenner revealed his wit by chiding scientists and others
who compare the achievement of sequencing the human genome, the body's blueprint
for life, to sending a man to the moon.

   "I've always said that sending a man to the moon is easy. It's getting him
back that is the problem," Brenner said.

   The following excerpts are from that interview:

   Your point is that we've got a long way to go before we can use this new
information?

   It is a very big leap from just having the raw sequence to an interpretation
of it. And, of course, it is an even bigger leap that one is going to be able to
use this information in drug development or in what is called predictive
medicine. In terms of drug development, we just don't know whether having a gene
helps you find the drug.

   Wait a minute, they've been telling us that once we have the gene we can
alleviate or wipe out a lot of diseases.

   Well, I can tell you there is a company which has had most of the [known]
genes for at least 10 years, or eight or nine. And of course, they are working
to try and use this information to help to find drugs, and of course that has
not yet produced one.

   What are some of the genes they've been working with?

   There are a lot of what are called single-gene mutations . . . cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy. In fact there are somewhere around a thousand of
these known in people, some very rare, and some quite abundant, like sickle cell
and all the blood diseases. We have been able to find those genes and, of
course, find out where they are affected, in the absence of knowing the
sequence.

   Your point is?

   Knowing the sequence does help . . . [but] it is an open question whether
knowing that a disease has a genetic cause allows you to do something about it.

   You don't seem very impressed with the sequencing breakthrough.

   It's not a revolution; it is an increment. What I am saying is that
[sequencing] doesn't replace anything. It will, in fact, accelerate, help people
to do these sorts of things. They won't have to sequence the genes again. In
other words, he [ a researcher ] doesn't have to now cook the meal, he can just
get it served and get on with it and eat it. So we must say that is a positive
thing.

   What about the concept that if we knew what the defect was, we could replace
the gene or repair it some way?

   That is gene therapy. I think that is an open situation. We don't know if it
will be effective. We haven't had any success, and we have had some consequences
of this and people want to proceed more cautiously.

   The death of the 18-year-old in the University of Pennsylvania gene therapy
trial?

   Exactly. So we have to try and understand whether that is the right method to
use.

   What are the alternatives?

   I personally think what will be better will be some things that don't come
out of the genes, but come out of our knowledge of cells, especially of stem
cells [the parent cells of all tissues in the body].

   I think we already have a whole technology in clinical practice of
transplantation, and many people's lives have been saved by liver
transplantation, cardiac transplantation, bone marrow transplantation. . . . I
think in the light of that we will have continued development. It may well be
that the best thing to do is not to think of a magic gene bullet, but of someone
taking your cells, changing them and putting them back in your body.

   Earlier you mentioned predictive medicine. What is that?

   That is one of the radical things that has been discussed widely. In other
words, they say we will be able to take a fingerprint of your genes to tell you
what diseases you are going to get. Of course, you now have to ask yourselves --
this is a very serious question -- "Are we going to have a thing where everybody
will be genotyped? To whom will this information be available?"

   Having that information available raises ethical and financial issues, and
affects insurance coverage, jobs and that kind of thing?

   Yes, and I think it should be denied because it says, "Look there are classes
of people that are going to have a different chance in life on account of
genes," and they can't sue their parents for giving them these genes.

   This is a fundamental thing we must not do in our society. We used to do it
when people had a different color skin, or looked different. We discriminated
against people on grounds of biological properties, and this is just another one
of these biological properties.

   When would genotyping be appropriate?

   Let me explain: A patient comes to me and I take his blood, and I see that he
has got these genes and I can tell him that look, if you keep on with the
lifestyle you are doing you are going to have the high probability of having a
heart attack. . . . But if you take these measures -- do more exercise, take an
aspirin every day -- that probability will drop. If they can get their chances
down, they will do it.

   Now, let me tell you one thing that is absolutely no use to the individual.
You find out you've got a 20 percent chance of being a schizophrenic 20 years
from now. That's no use to you, you can't do anything about it.

   I think ordinary people understand these things, and I think that's what you
want to get over to them rather than the idea there will be all these magic
bullets.

   You can reach Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at
ozkoglin@news.oregonian.com 4


GRAPHIC: Photo - Brenner

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             183 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                         September 27, 2000, Wednesday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 869 words

HEADLINE: UCSD gets funding for eye research

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 UCSD Medical Center will receive more than $13 million in private gifts to
build two structures for research in glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy and macular
degeneration, a major boost in its effort to understand diseases of the aging
eye.

   The buildings will join a planned expansion of the 10-year-old Shiley Eye
Center near Thornton Hospital and Abraham Ratner Children's Eye Center in La
Jolla.

   "This expansion will make the Shiley eye complex one of the largest in size
in the country," said Peter Dudley, director of Retinal Diseases Programs at the
National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Md. The institute regularly funds research,
but rarely capital improvement projects.

   "Any time an eye center can get money to expand, it can do more work, see
more patients and recruit more scientists who can submit grant applications to
us that get funded," he said.

   One of the two new buildings will be the Jacobs Retinal Center, said its
director, Dr. William Freeman, UCSD professor of ophthalmology.

   The center will specialize in age-related macular degeneration, which causes
progressive blindness starting from the center point of vision, and diabetic
retinopathy, in which small blood vessels in the retina cease to function,
causing progressive blindness.  Freeman also studies ocular cancers, especially
melanoma.

   Dr. Robert Weinreb, chief of the new UCSD Glaucoma Center, will expand his
work in finding ways to regulate subtle changes in the optic nerve that lead to
glaucoma.  "In glaucoma, there is nothing in the world even close in size to
what we have planned," he said.

   UCSD officials said the funding comes in four main gifts from San Diegans:

   [] Qualcomm chief executive Irwin Jacobs, his wife, Joan, and their children
will give $5 million for the retina project, a 13,000-square-foot building.

   [] The Hamilton-White Foundation will give $4 million and an anonymous donor
will give $1.5 million to the 11,500-square-foot glaucoma structure.

   [] Long-time UCSD benefactors Donald and Darlene Shiley, whose $1 million
gift 10 years ago allowed construction of the Shiley Eye Center, will give $2
million to add 5,700-square-feet for clinical care to the existing
34,000-square-foot building.

   [] Several other unnamed donors have pledged gifts ranging from $50,000 to
$500,000.

   The new structures will be built just south of the Shiley and the Ratner
Center, a separate 3,200-square-foot building devoted to treating and
researching eye disease in children.

   Weinreb and Freeman said they need space to expand research projects and
launch new ones.

   "Some of our equipment won't even fit in our current space and has been
placed in the halls," Weinreb said.

   The expansion, he said, "will give us laboratory space for new programs in
optic nerve transplantation and rescue, molecular genetics of glaucoma and
molecular biology of the fluid transport pathways within the eye."

   UCSD's eye research faculty receives approximately $4.3 million a year in
federal support, plus additional funds from private sources.

   Forty clinical and basic research projects in ophthalmology are under way,
some funded by pharmaceutical companies hoping to test drugs or engineering
companies with proposed diagnostic machinery.

   In glaucoma, said Weinreb, the primary effort will be to better detect the
earliest signs of optic nerve pathway destruction that causes glaucoma, which
leads to progressive loss of peripheral vision.

   Unfortunately, he said, "By the time a glaucoma patient notices blurred
vision, you've lost 90 percent of the nerve fibers."

   Another major difficulty has been determining who has glaucoma and diagnosing
from among 100 varieties of the disease.

   "Glaucoma has always been thought to be a disease of high pressure (in the
eye), but as many as half those who suffer from glaucoma don't have high
pressure symptoms," Weinreb said.  Better diagnostic machines and techniques can
make diagnoses more specific.

   The expanded campus also will cooperate with UCSD's new School of Pharmacy to
develop better types of eye drops because existing medications have many side
effects.

   The goal is to get pressure-lowering fluids into the eye where they can be
effective, without getting them into the bloodstream where they might cause side
effects, such as slowing down the heart.

   At the new retina center, Freeman will continue developing scanning
techniques such as lasers that can noninvasively detect earlier stages of
macular degeneration.

   Another area of research is how the perception of color changes in people
with retinal disease.

   Collaborating with Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who directs UCSD's gene therapy
program, Freeman hopes to explore ways to use growth factors to restore or
maintain vision in people with diabetic retinopathy.

   He also will continue to focus on research in cytomegalovirus retinopathy, a
common cause of blindness in people with AIDS.

   The expanded eye campus will be just northwest of UCSD's new cancer center,
soon to be under construction.

   "We are deeply grateful to the Jacobs, Whites, Shileys and all of our
supporters for their commitment to this project," said UCSD Chancellor Robert C.
Dynes.


CORRECTION-DATE: September 28, 2000

CORRECTION:

   FOR THE RECORD | Dr. William Freeman's surname was misspelled "Freedman"
yesterday in a photo caption with a story on funding UCSD Medical Center has
received for eye research. The Union-Tribune regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC | 1 GRAPHIC; 1. Don Kohlbauer / Union-Tribune 2. SOURCE: UCSD
Medical Center and Merck Manual of Medical Information / PETE CHENARD /
Union-Tribune; 1. Drs. William Freedman (left) and Robert Weinreb will be able
to expand their eye research. 2. Targets for research (B-4:7,2; B-6:1)

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2000


                             184 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 27, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 853 words

HEADLINE: UCSD gets funding for eye research

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD Medical Center will receive more than $13 million in private gifts to
build two structures for research in glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy and macular
degeneration, a major boost in its effort to understand diseases of the aging
eye. The buildings will join a planned expansion of the 10-year-old Shiley Eye
Center near Thornton Hospital and Abraham Ratner Children's Eye Center in La
Jolla. "This expansion will make the Shiley eye complex one of the largest in
size in the country," said Peter Dudley, director of Retinal Diseases Programs
at the National Eye Institute in Bethesda, Md. The institute regularly funds
research, but rarely capital improvement projects. "Any time an eye center can
get money to expand, it can do more work, see more patients and recruit more
scientists who can submit grant applications to us that get funded," he said.
One of the two new buildings will be the Jacobs Retinal Center, said its
director, Dr. William Freeman, UCSD professor of ophthalmology. The center will
specialize in age-related macular degeneration, which causes progressive
blindness starting from the center point of vision, and diabetic retinopathy, in
which small blood vessels in the retina cease to function, causing progressive
blindness.

   Freeman also studies ocular cancers, especially melanoma. Dr. Robert Weinreb,
chief of the new UCSD Glaucoma Center, will expand his work in finding ways to
regulate subtle changes in the optic nerve that lead to glaucoma.

   "In glaucoma, there is nothing in the world even close in size to what we
have planned," he said. UCSD officials said the funding comes in four main gifts
from San Diegans: [] Qualcomm chief executive Irwin Jacobs, his wife, Joan, and
their children will give $5 million for the retina project, a 13,000-square-foot
building. [] The Hamilton-White Foundation will give $4 million and an anonymous
donor will give $1.5 million to the 11,500-square-foot glaucoma structure. []
Long-time UCSD benefactors Donald and Darlene Shiley, whose $1 million gift 10
years ago allowed construction of the Shiley Eye Center, will give $2 million to
add 5,700-square-feet for clinical care to the existing 34,000-square-foot
building. [] Several other unnamed donors have pledged gifts ranging from
$50,000 to $500,000. The new structures will be built just south of the Shiley
and the Ratner Center, a separate 3,200-square-foot building devoted to treating
and researching eye disease in children. Weinreb and Freeman said they need
space to expand research projects and launch new ones. "Some of our equipment
won't even fit in our current space and has been placed in the halls," Weinreb
said. The expansion, he said, "will give us laboratory space for new programs in
optic nerve transplantation and rescue, molecular genetics of glaucoma and
molecular biology of the fluid transport pathways within the eye." UCSD's eye
research faculty receives approximately $4.3 million a year in federal support,
plus additional funds from private sources. Forty clinical and basic research
projects in ophthalmology are under way, some funded by pharmaceutical companies
hoping to test drugs or engineering companies with proposed diagnostic
machinery. In glaucoma, said Weinreb, the primary effort will be to better
detect the earliest signs of optic nerve pathway destruction that causes
glaucoma, which leads to progressive loss of peripheral vision. Unfortunately,
he said, "By the time a glaucoma patient notices blurred vision, you've lost 90
percent of the nerve fibers." Another major difficulty has been determining who
has glaucoma and diagnosing from among 100 varieties of the disease. "Glaucoma
has always been thought to be a disease of high pressure (in the eye), but as
many as half those who suffer from glaucoma don't have high pressure symptoms,"
Weinreb said.

   Better diagnostic machines and techniques can make diagnoses more specific.
The expanded campus also will cooperate with UCSD's new School of Pharmacy to
develop better types of eye drops because existing medications have many side
effects. The goal is to get pressure-lowering fluids into the eye where they can
be effective, without getting them into the bloodstream where they might cause
side effects, such as slowing down the heart. At the new retina center, Freeman
will continue developing scanning techniques such as lasers that can
noninvasively detect earlier stages of macular degeneration. Another area of
research is how the perception of color changes in people with retinal disease.
Collaborating with Dr. Theodore Friedmann, who directs UCSD's gene therapy
program, Freeman hopes to explore ways to use growth factors to restore or
maintain vision in people with diabetic retinopathy. He also will continue to
focus on research in cytomegalovirus retinopathy, a common cause of blindness in
people with AIDS. The expanded eye campus will be just northwest of UCSD's new
cancer center, soon to be under construction. "We are deeply grateful to the
Jacobs, Whites, Shileys and all of our supporters for their commitment to this
project," said UCSD Chancellor Robert C. Dynes.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; 1 GRAPHIC; CAPTIONS: 1. Drs. William Freedman (left) and Robert
Weinreb will be able to expand their eye research. 2. Targets for research
(B-4:7,2; B-6:1); PHOTOBY: 1. Don Kohlbauer / Union-Tribune 2. SOURCE: UCSD
Medical Center and Merck Manual of Medical Information / PETE CHENARD /
Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             185 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   September 25, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F09

LENGTH: 1165 words

HEADLINE: Around the Region

BODY:


   ROCKVILLE

   BioReliance, OvaVax To Make Smallpox Vaccine

   BioReliance Corp. in Rockville last week teamed up with OraVax Inc., a
biopharmaceutical firm in Cambridge, Mass., to make a stockpile of 40 million
doses of smallpox vaccine for civilians.

   The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta awarded the $ 343
million, 20-year deal last week to the two firms. The vaccine has not been
produced since the disease was eradicated in the mid-1970s, but making it has
become a priority in recent years amid growing fears of a bioterrorism attack
using the deadly virus.

   BioReliance, a biological testing and manufacturing company that has
specialized mostly in gene therapies, was chosen last month by an outside
contractor to make the vaccine for the military. OraVex will design the
formulation of the vaccine and BioReliance will make it and test it.

   The smallpox vaccine is made not from smallpox virus, but from a related
virus known as cowpox virus. The first batch of the vaccine for civilians is
expected to be made in mid-2004.


   BALTIMORE

   British Software Firm Buys Hunter Group

   Cedar Group PLC, a Britain-based data-mining software company, bought
Baltimore-based Hunter Group Inc. for $ 72 million.

   Hunter, an information management consultant that also provides data-mining
services, was owned by Massachusetts-based Renaissance Worldwide.

   Hunter Group has about 700 employees and had 1999 revenue of $ 159 million.
Tom Rump, chief executive of Cedar Group US, will be leading the combined
business operations of Cedar and Hunter.


   BALTIMORE

   Brown Investment Advisory Plans Office in Virginia

   Brown Investment Advisory & Trust Co., the money management firm that spun
off from Alex. Brown & Sons a few years ago, said it plans to open a Northern
Virginia office early next year to cash in on the wealth being created in the
region's high-tech community.

   Brown, with headquarters in Baltimore, serves wealthy individuals and
institutional clients.

   John E. "Buck" Chapoton, a well-known tax expert, will head the office and
become a partner of Brown in January 2001. Chapoton currently is a partner of
Vinson & Elkins, a Houston-based law firm whose Washington office he has managed
for 16 years.

   Finally, Brown said it would buy the asset management business of Dunnan
Securities Advisors Inc. in Washington. Dunnan Securities was founded by Bruce
B. Dunnan, a former executive of Alex. Brown and a well-known regional venture
capital player.


   FAIRFAX

   Step 9 Software Gets Venture Capital Funds

   Step 9 Software Corp. completed a second round of venture capital financing
totaling $ 15 million.

   Signal Equity Partners led the investment with participation by NewSpring
Ventures and the Washington Dinner Club. Rowny Capital and The eMedia Club also
added to their investments from the prior funding round. Representatives of
Signal and NewSpring will join Step 9 Software's board.

   Step 9 makes software that helps telecommunications companies run their
networks. It will use the money to continue developing and deploying its core
product, iCustomer.


   McLEAN

   Va. Biotech Firm to Offer Online Research Services

   LabBook Inc., a Northern Virginia biotech software company, teamed up with an
Atlanta e-commerce software firm to provide an online marketplace for the life
sciences research industry.

   Atlanta-based Clarus will take an equity position in LabBook, which makes Web
browser software that aids genomics research. Terms were not disclosed.

   Under the deal, LabBook will offer its life science customers a marketplace
of online research services.


   FAIRFAX

   Eko Systems Hires New Chief Executive

   Eko Systems Inc., a privately held medical information software company,
hired Scott Mason as its new chief executive officer. Mason was previously
executive vice president at another medical information software company, Apache
Medical Systems Inc. of McLean.

   "It is indeed rare to find someone who has such a broad background in health
care, especially with such a clear understanding of both the realities of
clinical medicine and the potential for point-of-care technology," said Jim
Edmiston, founder and chief technology officer of Eko.


   LETTER FROM . . . ROCKVILLE

   Towering Demand on I-270

   Drive along the Interstate 270 corridor and the two high-rises under
construction near the Montrose Road exit in Rockville loom against the sky. What
was once a grove of trees and a stream bed has become a symbol of a booming
economy that has left companies scrambling for space to expand their businesses.

   Tower Oaks Office Park, a 192-acre tract on Tower Oaks Boulevard, is to hold
up to 2.2 million square feet of offices, restaurants, extended-stay hotels and
small conference centers. It is one of the largest commercial projects
undertaken recently along the I-270 corridor, and some developers and brokers
say the office park is a sign of how Montgomery County is trying to overcome its
long-standing reputation of being a difficult place to do commercial
construction.

   The land "has been there since the beginning of time," said Art Greenberg,
senior managing director at Julien J. Studley Inc. in the District, which
represented tenants in some of the buildings in the office park. "In the '80s,
it wasn't ready for prime time. Now it's hit. The market is so tight. There's
more demand than there is supply."

   The two major office buildings under construction at Tower Oaks are the
Preserve at Tower Oaks, a 178,000-square-foot complex being built by Boston
Properties, and the Tower Building, a 265,000-square-foot office space that
Tower Cos. is constructing.

   OTG Software, a technology development company with about 250 employees that
is now in Bethesda, will take 93,000 square feet among the seven stories of the
Preserve. American Express's financial services division will use an additional
33,000 square feet when it moves its office from Rockledge Drive in North
Bethesda. Smaller tenants are expected to take the remaining space in the
building, which is to be completed in April.

   The 10-story Tower Building is to cost from $ 55 million to $ 60 million and
does not yet have any tenants signed. However, leasing agents say they have
received significant interest from firms in the telecommunications, high-tech
and professional services fields. The building is to be completed in May 2001
and will offer hiking and biking trails, a health club and a shuttle bus to and
from the nearest Metro stops, depending on demand.

   Richard Kay, president and chief executive of OTG Software, said the location
of Tower Oaks was key in his decision to relocate his headquarters there.

   "We needed more space to expand because we're bursting at the seams," Kay
said. He said the number of employees in his company is growing by 40 percent to
50 percent each year. "We're really cramped where we are. We've got people
sharing cubicles."

   -- Dana Hedgpeth



LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2000


                             186 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 24, 2000, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: FOCUS; Pg. F3

LENGTH: 1414 words

HEADLINE: MEDICINE David A. Shaywitz is a medical intern at the Massachusetts
General Hospital and a clinical fellow at Harvard Medical School; Dennis A.
Ausiello is the physician-in-chief of MGH, and the Jackson Professor of Clinical
Medicine at Harvard Medical School.;
A BOOMING PARTNERSHIP: UNIVERSITY AND INDUSTRY PATIENTS BENEFIT, TOO, THOUGH WE
ALL SHOULD BE VIGILANT

BYLINE: By David A. Shaywitz, and Dennis A. Ausiello

BODY:

   University medical researchers are cultivating corporate ties like never
before, prompting many academics (and non-academics) to wonder if universities
are selling out, exchanging public trust for industry cash.

   "Is academic medicine for sale?" asks the New England Journal of Medicine in
a recent editorial. Boston University's newly-announced plan to sell results
from its landmark Framingham Heart Study to a for-profit company was only one of
the many examples on the minds of participants at a National Institutes of
Health conference last month on conflicts of interest in medical research,
attended by 700 physicians, advocates, and government officials.

       For many critics, the answer is simple: Industry should disappear from
the university research scene, and allow academic investigators to return to the
idealized purity of a bygone era. Yet, the inconvenient truth is that our
patients are much better off than they were even a generation ago, and, like it
or not, industry has played a large role in this progress.

   The development of the promising anti-leukemia drug STI-571 by Ciba-Geigy
(now Novartis) in collaboration with Harvard's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
the Oregon Health Sciences University highlights the enormous value of such
partnerships.

   The challenge for universities is to learn how these partnerships should be
defined. Make no mistake, industry and universities are animated by drastically
different goals - the pursuit of profit versus the pursuit of knowledge.
However, there are many instances in medical science where the immediate goals
of the university researcher and industry investigator are essentially
indistinguishable.

   Molecular medicine has further muddled what has always been a fairly hazy
distinction between "pure" research (typically associated with universities) and
"applied" research (generally associated with industry), as today's most
fundamental investigations - in organisms such as yeast and fruit flies - can
rapidly lead to candidate drug targets for human disease.

   The current era of industry-university collaboration began in 1980 with the
passage of the bipartisan Bayh-Dole Act, a law that gave universities the right
to patent federally financed research. This legislation, intended to stimulate
the rapid commercialization of university-based knowledge, has resulted in an
explosion of university patents and the formation of hundreds of life-science
start-up companies based upon ideas that originated in universities.

   In fiscal 1998 alone, such technology transfer activity is estimated to have
generated $34 billion, as well as 280,000 jobs. Moreover, about 15 percent of
all university medical research is now financed by industry, with most of the
balance provided by the federal government.

   This picture of collaborative progress stands in marked contrast to the
frustration of the 1970s, when the transfer of scientific discovery to
improvement in patient care was disappointingly slow.

   The benefits of working with industry are not simply financial; it turns out
that some of the best and most important medical research is now produced by
industry labs (especially biotech labs), studies often done in collaboration
with university researchers.

   The value of such collaboration is underscored by recent research indicating
that the most productive university investigators are those who receive some
(but not all) of their financing from industry. Other research has demonstrated
that the biotechnology companies most likely to succeed are those that partner
and publish with leading academic investigators. And other evidence suggests
that the most efficient way for university discoveries to be commercialized is
from close industry-university collaborations.

   At the same time, the increasingly close connections between universities and
industry has raised a number of important concerns, generally revolving around
the worry that such a "cozy relationship" (as the New England Journal put it)
will threaten the objectivity, independence, and texture of university research.

   Unfortunately, these concerns are real. There are several well-publicized
examples of companies suppressing (or attempting to suppress) publication of
sponsored research that produced results not favorable to the company. There is
also a concern that the extensive reliance on pharmaceutical dollars, in
particular, has encouraged many university researchers to minimize the potential
risks of new drugs, and to overstate the benefits.

   The increased emphasis on industry partnerships has also led many academics
to worry that as universities eagerly cultivate research that offers immediate
commercial potential, they are neg lecting other research that might ultimately
be more important, but for which an application is not immediately apparent.

   The challenge for academic medical centers is to determine how to structure
relationships with industry that enable universities to benefit from industry's
resources (both scientific and financial), but which preserve the normative
values of the university. The late A. Bartlett Giamatti, onetime president of
Yale, clearly articulated these values, which include fostering an environment
"conducive to free inquiry, the advancement of knowledge, and the free exchange
of ideas."

   The pursuit of this ideal is now complicated by the fact that almost every
university has its own individualized policy for relationships with industry.
This inconsistency has decreased the overall value of university research, since
it is usually difficult to determine the extent of industry control over a
particular study.

   For example, some universities (including ours) insist on complete editorial
control over all research, while other universities may be more willing to yield
to industry-imposed contraints. To help ensure the integrity, the nation's
leading academic centers must develop, adopt, and - most important -
consistently adhere to a uniform standard for university-industry relationships,
with membership in this consortium open to any university willing to abide by
this consensus.

   For starters, participating universities should strive to minimize the
encumbrances on industry-sponsored research, and should employ a uniform
standard for all research, regardless of who is the ultimate sponsor. This means
that university investigators must retain unrestricted rights to their data, and
complete editorial control of research publications.

   Universities should also internally review all sponsored research, to ensure
the work is of significant scientific value. This requirement is important to
safeguard the intellectual quality of both industry-sponsored and
foundation-sponsored research, which typically do not receive the same level of
intense scientific peer review afforded to government-sponsored research
proposals.

   Since clinical research requires an intimate trust between patient and
investigator, universities should prohibit researchers with financial ties to a
company from conducting human studies in which the company is a stakeholder.
Much of the recent controversy surrounding the deaths of patients in gene
therapy trials at the University of Pennsylvania and at St. Elizabeth's Hospital
stems from this type of concern.

   The integrity of informed consent of patients for participation in research
must be preserved and improved. Promises to patients regarding the use of
private data and tissue samples must be kept, and permission for additional use
conscientiously obtained.

   Universities must also be willing to exchange information and research
reagents with minimal preconditions. And they should adopt explicit safeguards -
including full disclosure of industry sponsorship and diligent external
monitoring - to ensure that students and research fellows (typically the most
vulnerable and dependent members of the university hierarchy) are able to
publish their results freely and expeditiously.

   Above all, universities must continue to do what they do best: cultivating
researchers who are excited by the pursuit of knowledge - whether in the
laboratory or at the bedside - independent of the commercial potential this
knowledge might have.

   By rigorously enforcing a universal standard for industry and university
relationships, academic medical centers can ensure their integrity while
engaging in increasingly productive partnerships - ones that can help translate
innovative ideas into clinical benefit.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, ILLUSTRATION / JOHN OVERMYER

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2000


                             187 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 24, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-5

LENGTH: 1436 words

HEADLINE: PERSONAL FINANCE; The Motley Fool

BYLINE: (C) Copyright 2000 The Motley Fool / Dist. by Universal Press Syndicate

BODY:
 Ask the Fool

   Split Dates

   Q: When a company announces a stock split, there's a "date of record." If you
buy shares after that date but before the split, do you get the additional
shares?

   -- P.P., via e-mail

   A: You still get them if you buy between the two dates.  The record date is
mainly for accounting purposes and has no direct effect on the individual
investor.  The person who gets the benefit of the split shares is one who owns
those shares on the day of the actual split, the pay date.  As long as you're
holding the stock when it splits, you'll get your due.

   Q: I rent an apartment.  Should I bother with renter's insurance?

   -- F.R., Wyandotte, Mich.

   A: You betcha.  Here's what it can do for you:

   [] Protect you against theft of or damage to your personal property.

   [] Cover some or all of your personal liability.

   [] Sometimes pay for temporary housing, if your rented home is damaged.

   With renter's insurance, you decide how much total dollar value of property
you want to insure.  Note that some policies will pay you enough to cover the
value of various items at time of loss, while others will cover replacement
costs.  This can be a big deal.  Let's say you bought a computer for $2,500 a
few years ago, it's now worth $250 (this happens!), and it's suddenly ruined by
water dripping onto it from an apartment above you.  One policy might pay you
just the $250 that it's worth, while another policy may pay you enough to buy a
new computer with similar capabilities.

   Renter's insurance can cost as little as $100 or less per year.  Compared
with the losses you might incur, it can be well worth it.

   Got a question for the Fool? Send it in -- see Write to Us

   My Dumbest Investment

   War is Hell... on Investors Sometimes

   WHEN I WAS 22 and had never owned a stock before, I bought 200 shares of
Intel at $30 each.  My dad's broker had recommended it to me.  Then the Gulf War
began, Intel's price dropped to $25, and I got spooked.  The broker advised me
not to sell, but that $6,000 investment represented 60 percent of my
post-college savings.  I sold at $29. Had I hung on for many years, those shares
would be worth about a million dollars today.  To this day, the broker uses this
as an example in my never-ending lessons.

   -- D.S., via e-mail

   The Fool Responds: It sounds like you've got a good broker there, if he's
giving you good advice and teaching you lessons.  We often warn people to not
trust that every full-service broker is looking out for their best interest, but
it's good to remember that there are some good full-service brokers out there.
Anyone can assess his or her broker's performance by asking for a comparison of
portfolio performance compared to the market average.

   Do you have an embarrassing lesson learned the hard way?  Boil it down to 100
words (or less) and send it to The Motley Fool c/o My Dumbest Investment.  Got
one that worked?  Submit to My Smartest Investment.  If we print yours, you'll
win a Fool's cap!

   The Fool School

   Basic vs.  Diluted

   IF YOU READ A COMPANY'S income statement, you'll likely see references to
"diluted" and "basic" earnings per share.  This differentiation is there thanks
to a rule instituted by the Financial Accounting Standards Board that went into
effect in 1997. It requires companies to report their quarterly earnings per
share in two ways: basic and diluted.

   This is important stuff for investors to understand, as corporate per-share
profits are in many ways at the core of all things financial.  Per-share profits
show an investor her share of a company's total profits.  Fools should pay
attention to the diluted, not basic, numbers.

   Basic EPS is net income less any preferred stock dividends, divided by the
weighted average number of common stock shares outstanding during the reporting
period.  Diluted EPS takes into account in-the-money stock options, warrants,
preferred stock and convertible debt securities, all of which can be converted
into common stock. ("In-the-money" options are those exercisable below the
current market price.) These common stock equivalents represent the potential
claims of other owners on earnings and show the investor how much of the
company's earnings she's entitled to, at a minimum.

   Any increase in the number of shares of stock dilutes the earnings attributed
to each share.  The difference can be dramatic.  For example, eBay reported
$0.10 per share in basic earnings for its fiscal year 1999, while fully diluted
earnings were 20 percent lower, at $0.08 per share.  Options and other
securities would have added 27.7 million shares to the 108.2 million shares
outstanding.  Options are not all bad, though.  Employee compensation in the
form of options permits companies to attract and keep talented employees and
also to reduce current salary expenses, leaving more money to help the firm
grow.

   These days, many firms are issuing gobs of stock options.  Focusing on the
diluted earnings will help investors more accurately determine how much of
company earnings they're entitled to and will convey a sense of what stock
options actually cost a shareholder.  The switch to reporting both basic and
diluted numbers will also align U.S. accounting standards with international
standards being developed, ultimately helping investors compare companies around
the globe.

   The Fool Take

   Intel and AMD Toe to Toe

   INVESTORS CAN LEARN a lot watching heavyweights fight.  Check out the battle
between personal computer microprocessor giants Intel and Advanced Micro
Devices.  Intel has long held the edge in manufacturing, financial strength and
market share, but AMD's gritty performance this year has exacerbated the
rivalry.

   AMD's Athlon chip has performed very well.  The company moved quickly to roll
out upgrades and new designs, and has even captured valuable new customers such
as Gateway, which used to buy its chips exclusively from Intel.

   Investors shouldn't automatically rush out to buy AMD shares, though.  The
company has a long way to go to prove it can consistently create value for
shareholders.  But watching the fight gives investors a chance to see how the
rivals punch.

   For example, watch to see which company will ramp up capacity to better meet
demand as the market grows, yet not expand so quickly that the tires fall off at
the end of the cycle.  That will be a test of management.  See which company's
state-of-the-art 64-bit chip takes market share as companies deploy millions of
servers.  That's a design and marketing test.  Note which company is better
prepared if the center of computing moves away from the PC. The answer to this
question will say a lot about the companies' vision and execution.

   You don't always have to buy tickets to get a great seat at a heavyweight
fight.

   Name That Company

   I WAS CONCEIVED at a 1978 gathering of biologists in Switzerland.  These
folks were interested in using genetic engineering to improve human healthcare.
Today, based in Cambridge, Mass., I'm one of the world's premier biotech
companies and am the oldest independent one.  I introduced my first proprietary
product, AVONEX, in 1996, to treat relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis.
SmithKline Beecham and Merck sell Hepatitis B vaccines developed using my
research.  My researchers are focusing on novel products for multiple sclerosis,
inflammatory, respiratory, kidney and cardiovascular diseases and in
developmental biology and gene therapy.  I have many products in my pipeline.
Who am I?

   Know the answer?  Send it to us with Foolish Trivia on the top and you'll be
entered into a drawing for a nifty prize!

   Last week's trivia answer

   I WAS FOUNDED IN 1892 in Philadelphia, as a ticket agency to bring family
members of immigrants to America via steamship.  Few people know me, but I
employ more than 4,500 people worldwide, and my annual revenues top $4.5
billion.  I'm a longtime pioneer in travel, and was the first to consolidate a
corporate travel account.  I put my employees first, and my CEO has penned a
book titled "The Customer Comes Second and Other Secrets of Exceptional
Service." My company mascot is the salmon, because it swims against the current,
as I do. You can't invest in me, though -- I'm a private company.  Who am I?

   (Answer: Rosenbluth International)

   Write to Us! Send questions for Ask the Fool, Dumbest (or Smartest)
Investments (up to 100 words), and your Trivia entries to Fool@fool.com or via
regular mail to Motley Fool, 123 N. Pitt St., 4th Floor, Alexandria, VA 22314.
Sorry, we can't provide individual financial advice.


LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2000


                             188 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               September 24, 2000, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. F3

LENGTH: 788 words

HEADLINE: INDIGENOUS PEOPLE SHOULD CONTROL RESEARCH THAT COULD AFFECT THEM

BYLINE: Debra HarryGENES; DNA SEQUENCE; SCIENCE; GENETIC; EXPERIMENTS; HUMAN
GENOME PROJECT; BIOTECHNOLOGY; BIOENGINEERING; PATENTS HUMANE GENES; GENE MAP;
DNA MAP

BODY:


THE HUMAN GENOME

   NOW that the sequencing of the human genome project is virtually complete,
more scientists will turn to human genetic diversity, which includes the
collection and study of the DNA of indigenous peoples. This is likely to result
in patents on the genetic inheritance of indigenous peoples, and possible
manipulations of their DNA, which violate the natural genetic integrity of their
ancestry.

   According to one of my colleagues, Brett Shelton, a Lakota and an attorney,
"Indigenous peoples need to first obtain information about genetic research
likely to be done in their communities. And indigenous peoples need to assert
their sovereign right to control genetic research activities that affect them."
The Indigenous Peoples Council on Biocolonialism has developed a model ordinance
for tribal governments that can be used to govern scientific research in tribal
jurisdictions.

   The public is led to believe genetic research will lead to cures of human
diseases. However, cures are not going to be realized anytime soon, since most
human illnesses are a result of complex interactions between genes and the
environment.

   Genetic research of this scale hurts indigenous peoples because it diverts
public funds from direct health care and prevention programs. The same amount of
attention to ensure we have access to basic health care, clean water, safe foods
and a healthy environment is an effort from which we would see real benefits.

   Critics of the current emphasis on genomic research have noted that economic
oppression, not genetics, is a major cause of illness in minority or ethnic
communities. Jonathan King, professor of biology at MIT and a member of the
board of the Council for Responsible Genetics, says, "We are concerned that the
emphasis on gene sequences will be used to imply that genes are at the basis of
a variety of human disease and conditions, when in fact the great body of
evidence establishes that the majority of human ill health is not inherited but
is due to external insult including pollution, infection, inadequate or
inappropriate diet, physical accident, excess stress or social disruption such
as wars. Preventing damage to human genes from carcinogens is a far more
effective public health strategy than allowing the disease to develop and then
attempting gene therapy."

   HUMAN genetic research brings us closer to a future where the human genome
can be privatized, not to benefit people's health but to fatten corporate
profits. Already, patents have been filed, and then later abandoned, on the DNA
of indigenous peoples from the Solomon Islands and Panama. The U.S. Patent and
Trademarks Office approved a patent on the cell lines of a Hagahai man from
Papua New Guinea. The patent was granted to the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services and the National Institutes of Health in March 1994. In late 1996
the NIH abandoned the patent. However, the Hagahai cell line is now available to
the public at the American Type Culture Collection for $ 216 a sample. This
trend is likely to continue as potentially profitable genes are found in
indigenous populations.

   Celera has applied for 6,500 gene patents, while Incyte has filed patent
applications covering 50,000 individual human genes. To stop the privatization
and commodification of the human genome, several citizens groups are calling for
national legislation to forbid the granting of patents on human genes, and to
exclude living creatures, their genes or components from the patent system.

   Genetic engineering also poses risks for humanity because human biology can
be manipulated in a manner that redefines what it is to be human. Maori
activists have already had to take a very active stance on this concern. Donna
Gardiner, a Maori researcher, has written on the movement of Selbourne
Biological Services and PPL Theraputics in the Tauranga area of Aotearoa-New
Zealand. Selbourne Biological Services imported human DNA for insertion into
sheep bred in Tauranga. Gardiner found that the company asserted by letter to
the Ministry of Environment that five members of the Ngati He/Ngai Te Ahi tribes
had formalized approval of the company's application. Four of the five tribal
members identified in the letter stated that they had not given any such
approval. The fifth person had indeed signed a letter composed by the company,
after being convinced the research was for the "greater good of mankind."
Gardiner states, "The thought of human and animal genes being mixed was totally
abhorrent and offensive both culturally and morally." This incident highlights
the potential for human genetic manipulation when mechanisms for oversight,
control and accountability are lacking.

NOTES:
Debra Harry is a Northern Paiute and executive director of the Indigenous
Peoples Council on Biocolonialism, Nixon, Nev. Information on the IPCB can be
found at www.ipcb.org.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000


                             189 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 23, 2000, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: SPECTER OVER SYDNEY

BODY:

   ASHADOW IS BEING cast over the Sydney Olympics far more serious than NBC's
disappointing audience ratings:  Athletes persist in using performance-enhancing
drugs, and officials lag in their ability to catch them. It is a threat to these
games, future Olympics, and all of sport.

   The International Olympic Committee has done a better job this time than in
the past at testing and disqualifying violators - a total of almost 50 so far,
if 27 left at home by China for drug use are included. Still, no one believes
that officials are catching more than a fraction of those breaking the rules.

      A US-government funded study estimated that as many as 90 percent of
Olympic athletes use performance-enhancing drugs. The result is that virtually
every performance by an athlete that greatly eclipses his or her previous
personal best is met with the nagging suspicion that the gain comes not through
relentless practice but through use of a prohibited substance.

   As articles in yesterday's Globe by Larry Tye and John Powers make clear,
these are usually prescription pharmaceuticals that, while originally developed
to heal the sick or injured, give healthy athletes an advantage in stamina,
strength, or even fluid loss to help them stay within weight categories. And no
one knows what to do about the looming possibility of athletes using genetic
therapies to enhance muscle groups, which would leave even less trace than the
drugs.

   If the Olympics are not to become a test of pharmaceutical inventiveness more
than of physical prowess, something has to be done. And that will require more
than the $25 million that the IOC is committing to a new World Anti-Doping
Agency. Charles Yesalis, an expert on sports drug use at Pennsylvania State
University, believes $100 million is needed to develop effective tests. In
addition, the battle should be joined in a more organized way by other sports,
from professional cycling to soccer.

   Medical professional organizations also have a role to play. Clearly, doctors
and biochemical scientists are helping the athletes misuse these substances.
Their willingness to do so might waver if a few were to lose their licenses or
their university appointments and be identified publicly as sports-drug pushers.
Doctors also have to get the word out more strongly that habitual use of many of
these substances could have harmful and unpredictable long-term effects.

   Only with this kind of concerted action will the specter of drug misuse be
lifted from the Olympics and other highly competitive sports.

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2000


                             190 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          September 23, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 454 words

HEADLINE: State may buy old plantation;
Site would become tourist spot, park

BYLINE: By Ed Anderson; Capital bureau

BODY:

   BATON ROUGE -- If the State Bond Commission blesses the deal, the state will
soon buy the 165-year-old Rosedown Plantation and its 400 acres near St.
Francisville for a tourist attraction and state park, officials said Friday.

   "It is a very legitimate acquisition," said Department of Culture, Recreation
and Tourism Secretary Phillip Jones, who helped get the item placed in the
state's annual capital acquisition and construction budget. "This is no
different than insuring money for the D-Day Museum in New Orleans."

   The plantation purchase will cost the state about $1 million this fiscal year
and another $4.4 million next year, said Commissioner of Administration Mark
Drennen. Rosedown, now a private bed-and-breakfast inn, is one of dozens of
construction and purchase projects Drennen will ask the commission to approve
for lines of credit at Thursday's Bond Commission meeting.

   The panel is being asked by the administration to authorize $104.5 million in
lines of credit for projects to be done this year, and another $177.5 million
for projects to be done next year or to complete ones already started.

   Bonds to finance the lines of credit are expected to be sold Nov. 30, Drennen
said. He said he anticipates the state's taking possession of the Greek Revival
mansion and grounds, built by Daniel and Martha Turnbull in 1835, when the first
$1 million check is cut to the present owner, who lives in New York.

   If the deal proceeds, Rosedown, listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, should be open for tourists by early summer, and the bed-and-breakfast
rooms will probably close, Drennen said.

   Some of the other items to be included in the request for lines of credit
include improvements to the Garyville Timbermill Museum, $1.3 million;
improvements to the sprinkler system at Charity Hospital in New Orleans, $2.8
million; construction of a gene therapy research center at Louisiana State
University School of Medicine in New Orleans, $6 million; continued renovations
to the old Wildlife and Fisheries Building on Royal Street in New Orleans as the
new home of the state Supreme Court, $6 million; planning and construction of a
bike path in West Jefferson, $240,000; Algiers Stable Historical District Museum
renovations, $350,000; planning and construction of a Westwego Arts Center,
$800,000; renovation of the Columbia Theater in Hammond as a regional arts
facility, $930,000; land and building acquisition and infrastructure
improvements for "an industrial prospect" in St. Tammany Parish, $1.8 million;
and planning and reconstruction of the Dryades Street YMCA in New Orleans that
was damaged by fire, $200,000.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000


                             191 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

             Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Company
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          September 23, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 619 words

HEADLINE: Recovery detected after N.O. loses jobs

BYLINE: By Stewart Yerton; Business writer

BODY:

   Consolidation of the oil and gas industry and divestment by retailers
battered the local economy in 1999, but the area remains anchored by a thriving
tourist industry and a nascent technology sector offers growth opportunities, a
New Orleans economist said Friday.

   Declines in oil and gas jobs, which hurt the New Orleans economy, appear to
be leveling, Tim Ryan, dean of the University of New Orleans College of Business
Administration, said Friday at an economic development meeting sponsored by
Mayor Marc Morial. The daylong meeting was held at Gallier Hall and included
presentations on community development, real estate projects, work-force
development and financial incentives for budding companies.

   The New Orleans area lost 2,000 energy sector jobs in 1999 and early 2000,
Ryan said in the opening address. But the tide seems to have turned, as some
companies have added jobs, Ryan said.

   "It's not anything major, but at least the bleeding has stopped," he said.

   The loss of oil and gas jobs was coupled with job losses in retail. Retail
companies invested heavily in the New Orleans area from 1994 to 1997, Ryan said.
At the same time population growth was stagnant, leaving merchants without a
growing customer base to justify the new stores, many of which ultimately
closed.

   "That's a tough time to go through because we lost a lot of jobs," Ryan said.

   At the same time, Ryan said, the city's economy has a strong foundation in
what he called "the two 'T's': tourism and technology."

   While tourism industry jobs often are perceived as low-paying, Ryan said that
gratuities often make the jobs more lucrative "than they look on paper," and are
particularly important for young and untrained workers.

   Furthermore, Ryan said, the city's major tourist events and the Ernest N.
Morial Convention Center have spawned a hotel construction boom, which has
increased the area's room inventory from 25,000 in 1995 to about 30,000 now,
with plans for another 6,000 to 7,000, some of which already are being built.

   Despite the new rooms, occupancy levels remain strong and room rates continue
to rise, and as long as that's the case, Ryan said, "people are going to
continue to build hotels."

   Beyond tourism is technology, whose main asset is the Navy's Information
Technology Center at the University of New Orleans, Ryan said. Workers at the
center are creating software for a mammoth Defense Department personnel records
center.

   But the "real potential value of that is, we hope, we can develop new
business out of that," Ryan said.

   More opportunities lie with Tulane University and Louisiana State University
medical centers, which have teamed on a gene therapy initiative in the first
major research collaboration between the previously rival institutions.

   "We have an opportunity," Ryan said of the medical research sector. But he
said, "That's still a fledgling operation."

   Julio Guichard, director of the mayor's office of business retention and
attraction and an organizer of the event, added another "T" to the equation:
trade.

   Once the primary U.S. gateway to Latin America, New Orleans in the late 20th
century slipped behind Miami as a center for international trade, Guichard said
in a speech following Ryan. But the city's port and location on the Gulf of
Mexico give it opportunities to come back.

   The meeting of the Inter-American Development Bank, held earlier this year,
brought financiers from around the world to the Crescent City, and New Orleans
has a chance to build on contacts made at the meeting, Guichard said.

   The overriding element for a successful future is education.

   "We have to prepare people to become workers for the industries of the
future," he said.

GRAPHIC: Tim Ryan 'At least the bleeding has stopped,' UNO dean says

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000


                             192 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       September 22, 2000, Friday ,FINAL

SECTION: LOCAL ,1C

LENGTH: 557 words

HEADLINE: Hopkins opening research facility
 Center aims to create genetic therapies, cancer vaccines

BYLINE: Jonathan Bor

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   A new center for the development of cancer vaccines, gene therapies and other
biological treatments opens today at the Johns Hopkins Oncology Center.

    Scientists plan to begin work next month on a breast cancer vaccine designed
to stimulate the immune system to fight the disease. Other plans call for the
preparation of vaccines against cervical cancer and lymphomas.

    Equipped with filtration systems and scrubbers that make it the most sterile
environment on the East Baltimore campus, the center will be used to manufacture
and test biological products before they are marketed to pharmaceutical firms.

    "It will enable us to get therapies developed here at Hopkins to patients at
a faster rate," said Dr. Elizabeth Jaffee, associate director of the new Cell
and Gene Therapy Laboratory. "It's going to speed up the process by several
years."

    In theory, Hopkins will hold patents on products developed at the center and
then license them to drug companies for wider-scale testing and manufacture. The
university would derive royalties from the sale of the products.

    Though most of the projects will involve the manipulation of genes to fight
disease, others fall outside the genomics field but require the highly sterile
conditions and quality control available there.

    These, according to Jaffee, will include the harvesting of insulin-
producing cells from donated pancreases. These cells, when transplanted into
patients, have been shown to be an effective treatment for diabetes.

    The center, located in the new cancer research building off North Broadway,
is a joint project of the Johns Hopkins Oncology Center and the School of
Medicine.  It will be available to faculty members across all disciplines.

    Among the six full-time employees are two specialists in quality control and
government regulation who are charged with making sure the facility complies
with the array of requirements aimed at patient safety.

    Jaffee acknowledged that centers engaged in gene therapy research have come
under intense scrutiny in the wake of a young man's death in a clinical trial at
the University of Pennsylvania last year.

    With its $2.1 million price tag, the center will cost $500,000 a year to
run. Much of this is the cost of keeping the rooms sterile. Twice a year, for
instance, the facility will have to shut down for replacement of filters, light
bulbs and other equipment.

    This must be done, Jaffee said, so nothing breaks down or requires changing
during a project - a disruption that could compromise the sterility of a product
under development.

    The Hopkins facility is one of only 12 university-based centers in the
United States devoted to the development of gene therapies.

    Scientists will begin work on a product once they have developed working
models in their own laboratories and, in many cases, tested them on animals. To
be tried on humans, products must be made under more stringent requirements.

    Dr. Curt Civin, director of pediatric oncology, said drug companies are
equipped to do this but often aren't interested in investing large sums of money
until the products have proved themselves in early experiments.

    "You want to have a small facility to do small-scale trials that might prove
a principle - and reduce the risk so that a drug company might take it on,"
Civin said.


LOAD-DATE: September 25, 2000


                             193 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 22, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1497 words

HEADLINE: SYDNEY 2000;
ATHLETES' DOPING OUTPACES TESTING

BYLINE: By Larry Tye, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Olympic organizers in Sydney are waging an all-out war of words against
doping, but trying to catch athletes using performance-enhancing drugs is a
cat-and-mouse game that the mice seem destined to win.

   It's partly a matter of technology and partly of greed, say sports medicine
specialists. Each time the International Olympic Committee develops a new test,
the iron-willed athlete-users counter with a designer drug that the test can't
recognize, or a co-treatment that covers the drug's tracks. And there is an
underground network of unscrupulous doctors, chemists, and other professionals
willing to act as their enablers - for an extortionate fee - that lets the
athletes stay a step or more ahead of the testers, physicians say.

      If the playing field is tilted today, it is sure to become even more
unbalanced tomorrow, as athletes desperate for an edge gain access to gene
therapies that can target an enhancement agent to a particular muscle. Those
treatments would not show up in urine or blood, making them all but impossible
to detect.

   "They're already eight to 10 steps ahead, and unless something spectacular
happens in the next decade, athletes who use drugs will continue by far to best
the testers. There's just too much money involved," warns Charles Yesalis, an
epidemiologist at Pennsylvania State University who has been studying and
writing about athletic doping for 22 years. "And any tests will be a moot point
when we have genetic therapies 10 to 12 years from now. I can't even
conceptualize a test to detect that."

   Dr. Gary I. Wadler, medical adviser to the Office of National Drug Control
Policy, is equally concerned. "Once the human genome project is completed,
there's no question that we'll see an explosion of technologies that will help
mankind," he says. "But you can bet your bottom dollar on the fact that some of
that will fall off the back of the truck and some athletes will try to use it to
gain an unfair advantage."

   "We have a brave new world of fabulous breakthroughs in modern medicine, but
unfortunately there are those who use those benefits for perverse purposes."

   Young athletes' inclination to look to science to pump up their performance
probably is to be expected, in a day when home run king Mark McGwire has taken
the over-the-counter muscle-booster androstenedione and when a 10th of a second
improvement in performance can spell the difference between a gold medal and a
bronze. And every biotechnical and medical breakthrough seems to offer a
tempting new way to get that boost.

   That is what happened with erythropoietin, or EPO, a synthetic hormone that
boosts red blood cell production, increases the blood's oxygen-carrying
capacity, and lets muscles work longer and harder. It was developed to treat
people suffering from severe anemia, but athletes are using it to raise their
aerobic performance by as much as 15 percent.

   The switchover typically happens with lightning speed, with a drug introduced
for a legitimate medical purpose picked up by athletes within months. Once
testers get wind of it and program their high-tech equipment to recognize the
new substance, the athletes switch to a version where a single element has been
shifted or an agent has been introduced to throw the detectors off course. And
where doping solutions used to be injected via an oil-based solution that
ensured traces would remain long enough for testers to find them, up-to-date
dopers use water or other mixes that quickly vanish.

   The result of such evasion, says Dr. Robert Leach, editor of the American
Journal of Sports Medicine, is that today "it is only the stupid athletes who
get caught."

   Athletes are not capable of carrying out such concealment on their own, of
course. They need help getting the drugs and learning to make them work - but
aid is easily available for the right price.

   "I've interviewed face to face over 1,000 performance-enhancing drug users,
from fifth-graders to multiple world champions," says Yesalis. "They're always
assisted by doctors. They secure the services of chemists and medical scientists
to make sure they get good, pharmaceutical-grade drugs. They don't have to go
into dark alleys and buy it from junkies. These experts make themselves
available for substantial amounts of money; they don't advertise."

   As for the athletes, "they will fess up to marijuana use and cocaine use,
even to striking their wife or girlfriend, before they will acknowledge their
drug use. It's kind of an unwritten rule: You do what it takes to win but you
keep your mouth shut."

   Rather than diminishing over time, that inclination to cheat appears to be
growing as competition becomes more intense. "The bar is being raised and raised
and raised in sports competition so there's more and more temptation to do
performance-enhancing drugs, particularly for elite athletes," says Dr. Lyle
Micheli, head of sports medicine at Children's Hospital in Boston, who recently
returned from Sydney, where he acts as academic adviser to the IOC.

   Micheli and others worry that the drugs haven't been tested for uses athletes
are putting them to, and could be dangerous or even deadly. "We don't know, for
example, what growth hormones do long-term," he says. "They stimulate muscle
cells but do they stimulate the pancreas to become tumerous?"

   The IOC, meanwhile, is more concerned than ever that doping gives users an
unfair edge and gives the Games a black eye. So in preparation for Sydney it
upgraded its drug testing procedures and stepped up its public relations battle
against athlete-users.

   Are those highly touted efforts paying off?

   Early reports from Sydney indicate they may be. China removed 27 of its
athletes before the Games even began, supposedly because they tested positive
for EPO, although the Chinese may have had an ulterior motive: to show they are
model participants as part of their bid to bring the Olympics to Beijing. Seven
athletes from other nations didn't come because of positive drug tests, nine
were removed once they arrived based on pre-game testing, and two more - a
hammer thrower from Belarus and a Bulgarian weightlifting medalist - were
ejected after the former tested positive for a steroid and the latter for a
diuretic.

   But it is highly likely that considerably more doping is going undetected in
Sydney, doctors and athletes say. And suspensions like those are nothing new,
with seven athletes having been ejected after competing in Munich in 1972, 11
from Montreal in 1976, and 10 from Seoul in 1988.

   Still, Dick Pound, an IOC vice president and head of the neophyte World
Anti-Doping Agency, is optimistic about the renewed determination to beat back
the dopers. "There's some initiative that the perpetrators have," he said in a
telephone interview from Sydney, "but I think science will catch up."

   "I think that for the first time it's really out there on the table, and
we're starting to get the means to really combat it," he said.

   "I regard every positive sample as a success. One more person who would have
adversely affected competition and wrecked other people's lives has been taken
out," adds Pound, a tax lawyer. "The World Anti-Doping Agency's mission is to
eradicate the use of drugs in sports by a combination of scientific work and
education. Whatever it takes we'll do it. Our initial commitment from the IOC is
$25 million, a number meant to show we are serious about it, and starting in
2002 governments will begin putting in their shares."

   But Yesalis, the Penn State researcher, says IOC's and the anti-doping
group's efforts amount to "chump change."

   "It's smoke and mirrors," Yesalis said. "I've yet to see a sincere effort by
the IOC to deal with this." Analyses by him and others, he adds, suggest that a
minimum of $100 million is needed to develop "tests that will stand up in a
court of law."

   Wadler, who advises the White House on drug issues, says it is unrealistic to
think the IOC or any other sports police can keep pace with the billions the
industry is spending on new drugs and therapies which, however unintentioned,
quickly make the old detection systems outmoded. And the problem is sure to get
worse, he adds, as new gene therapies become available.

   Researchers in Pennsylvania already have shown in rodents that they can
inject a gene directly into a target muscle and increase its performance by 25
percent. Wadler says such procedures could produce enormous benefits, such as
letting doctors genetically toughen the hip muscles of nursing home residents
who are prone to fractures. But athletes are sure to pick up on the new
therapies, too, with weightlifters anxious to beef up muscles they use to lift
and swimmers enchanted by the prospect of getting a pepped-up pull or zestier
kick.

   All of which will probably go undetected if not unnoticed by the IOC. "If you
can limit the effect to the muscle in which the gene is injected," Wadler said,
"you can make it opaque to any testing."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The use of banned drugs by athletes has cast a cloud over the
Sydney Games. Among those suspended is Bulgarian weightlifter Ivan Ivanov
(above), who lost his silver medal after testing positive for a banned diuretic.
Olympic section, E1. / AP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2000


                             194 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 22, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 749 words

HEADLINE: SMITHKLINE TO BACK PENN'S GENE PROGRAM THE PHARMACEUTICAL GIANT'S
FUNDING WILL BE FOR BASIC RESEARCH, BUT NOT HUMAN TRIALS, BOTH PARTIES SAID.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy program, which has been under
fire following last year's death of a teenager undergoing an experimental
treatment, has found a new and important backer for its research.

   Global pharmaceutical company SmithKline Beecham P.L.C. has agreed to provide
a "substantial" - although undisclosed - sum of money to support basic research
at Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, the university and company confirmed
yesterday.

   Without revealing details, the parties said the amount will be large but less
than $4 million a year.

   The support appears to represent continued faith in Penn's program and its
leader, James M. Wilson, who has been criticized by federal regulators for lax
procedures in last fall's death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz.

   The SmithKline deal, finalized in August, "reinforces our commitment to
developing the scientific foundation of gene therapy that will be required to
realize its true clinical potential," Wilson said yesterday.

   SmithKline spokesman Rick Koenig and Penn emphasized that the support will be
for basic research in gene therapy methods, including animal tests, but not
human trials. One goal will be a better understanding of gene function that
could help in developing conventional drugs, Koenig said.

   Gene therapy, which has yet to result in proven cures, is an attempt to
correct the underlying cause of disease by replacing damaged or missing genes.

   Until last year's death, Wilson's lab was regarded as a world leader in the
field. An investigation following the death prompted the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to suspend the lab's human trials until procedural deficiencies
were corrected.

   The lab suffered another blow last month when it lost the financial support
of Genovo Inc., a private Sharon Hill company founded by Wilson, which had
provided $21 million over five years.

   The SmithKline support will be less than what Genovo provided, Penn
spokeswoman Phyllis Holtzman said.

   SmithKline, which declined to disclose terms of the deal, said it is a
routine academic collaboration that will give the company rights to research
results "of the type that are standard" in such arrangements, Koenig said.

   The alliance with a prestigious company such as SmithKline is the first
positive news in more than a year for Penn's gene therapy program.

   In a statement, Penn officials said the new funding would support research
that could lead not only to better conventional drugs, but also to new ways of
delivering genes to human cells.

   The trial in which Gelsinger was enrolled used disarmed cold viruses as
delivery vehicles to get genes into human cells. Penn scientists believe
Gelsinger's death resulted from an unusual immune reaction to those viruses.

   In addition to coming up with new ways to deliver genes to cells, the
SmithKline funds will be used to evaluate novel approaches to treating cancer,
heart disease and autoimmune disorders, Penn officials said.

   On Monday, Gelsinger's family sued Penn and Wilson in Philadelphia Common
Pleas Court, alleging that Gelsinger was exposed to unnecessary and undisclosed
risks when he volunteered to take part in an experiment to test a possible cure
for an inherited liver disease.

   Penn said the allegations presented only one side of a complex story.

   A key issue in the Gelsinger controversy was that Wilson stood to benefit
financially from any successes because of his 30 percent ownership of Genovo.

   Penn officials said yesterday that Wilson has no financial ties to
SmithKline. He is not a consultant or a stock owner, officials said.

   Wilson and SmithKline are no strangers. Wilson served on the company's
genetics advisory board in the mid-1990s, and he has long-standing personal
connections with two of the company's top researchers, Tadakata Yamada and Peter
G. Traber.

   All three men were faculty colleagues at the University of Michigan Medical
School, and both Traber and Wilson were recruited to Penn by a fourth Michigan
colleague, William N. Kelley, when Kelley was dean of the Penn medical school.

   Traber, who briefly succeeded Kelley, left Penn in July to become head of
clinical pharmacology and experimental medicine at SmithKline. Yamada is
SmithKline's chairman of research and development.

   Koenig said Yamada was involved in approving the new research collaboration
with Wilson's lab, but Traber was not.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             195 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   September 22, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: STATE, Pg. C-6, NORTH/ALLEGHENY COUNTY

LENGTH: 983 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   NORTH

   BUTLER

   Deputy shot in foot

   A sheriff's deputy from Kansas was injured yesterday morning in a mishap at
the Butler County Prison.

   Lt. Ernest L. Popovich of Geary County, Kan., was attempting to secure his
weapon when it accidentally went off. The bullet struck his right ankle. He was
taken to Butler Memorial Hospital for treatment.

Butler City Police investigated the incident, which happened at at 8:53 a.m.

   ERIE

   Judge won't reduce bail

   A judge has refused to lower bail for a man who is accused of raping a woman
in an Erie movie theater in July.

   Common Pleas Judge Shad Connelly on Wednesday kept cash bail at $ 50,000 for
Gomer Robert Williams Jr. Williams' lawyer, John Carlson, wanted the bail
reduced to $ 5,000, 10 percent of the total.

   Williams, 18, of Washington Township, was accused of raping a 17-year-old
girl at the Tinseltown complex on July 27.

   State police said after the attack, Williams threw his underwear into a
convenience store trash can, where they recovered it as evidence.

   Gene therapy fails

   Doctors have taken a state representative off gene therapy, saying that it
has failed to stem the politician's brain cancer.

   State Rep. Italo Cappabianca, an Erie Democrat, suffers from a particularly
aggressive form of the disease.

   In July 1999, surgeons removed a malignant cyst the size of a golf ball. A
cancerous tumor had grown to nearly the same size by March. Recent MRI results
after the gene therapy showed the tumor is now about the size of a lemon.

   The gene therapy was a series of vaccines containing Cappabianca's own tumor
cells, skin cells and an immune system-enhancing gene called Interleuken-4.

Dr. Marc Flitter, an Erie neurosurgeon who has been a consulting physician for
Cappabianca, said it was too early to call the gene therapy a failure.

   CRAWFORD COUNTY

   Man allegedly slept in bar

   An Ohio man faces charges after allegedly tunneling his way into a Crawford
County tavern after hours to eat, drink and sleep there.

   Security cameras caught David A. Isenberg, 42, of Andover, Ohio, eating and
drinking at the Penn Line Lounge on the Pennsylvania-Ohio border.

   Isenberg was jailed on $ 25,000 bond on charges of burglary, criminal
trespass, theft by unlawful taking and criminal mischief.

   Karen Andrews, the manager of the lounge, discovered Isenberg talking on a
pay phone when she opened the lounge at 12:30 p.m. Monday. Police arrived to
find Isenberg asleep under a tree.

Police found six concrete blocks removed from the building's foundation and
later replaced.

   GROVE CITY

   Outstanding principal

   Richard L. Bonnar, principal of Hillview Intermediate Center in Grove City,
has been named an outstanding principal by a national organization.

Sixty-six elementary and middle school principals from across the nation, as
well as U.S. schools abroad, were named as 2000 National Distinguished
Principals by the U.S. Department of Education and the National Association of
Elementary School Principals.

   ALLEGHENY COUNTY

   AROUND THE REGION

   Armed robber sentenced

   A Hill District man was sentenced yesterday to three consecutive terms of
five to 10 years in prison for armed robberies he committed at convenience
stores citywide.

   Assistant District Attorney Debra Barnisin said Omari Hudson, 22, did not
deserve leniency.

   Hudson had been charged with committing 18 robberies. His sentencing was for
three of them.

   Barnisin pointed out that Hudson said he committed the robberies to support
his crack cocaine habit. She also got Hudson to testify yesterday that he never
stole from his family. That fact, she said, showed that Hudson had a bent for
greed and terrorizing the store clerks as he fired shots into the air during the
robberies.

   Hudson had said that he was depressed over the death of his 2 1/2 month-old
son, Omari Jr., who died in his sleep. The robberies occurred between Oct. 3 and
Nov. 10, 1999, about a year after his son's death.

Hudson he pleaded guilty Aug. 9 before Common Pleas Administrative Judge Gerard
M. Bigley.

   CRIMINAL COURT

   Playroom to open

   When parents or caregivers have to appear in Allegheny County criminal court,
the children who come with them have two places to go: the hallways, where they
have nothing to do, or the courtrooms, where they may be traumatized by
witnessing court proceedings involving the adults in their lives.

   That will change on Oct. 4, when the National Council of Jewish Women
officially opens the Children's Playroom in room 409A of the Allegheny County
Courthouse.

   Dedication ceremonies will be held at 5:30 p.m. in the Gold Room foyer,
followed by a program and ribbon cutting. Speakers will include county Chief
Executive Roddey, county Councilman Rich Fitzgerald, Pittsburgh Foundation
President Alfred Wishart Jr. and NJCW/Pittsburgh Section President Lynne
Jacobson.

The playroom will be the organization's third children's facility in the county
court system. In 1979, the group opened the Jane B. Lobl Children's Waiting Room
in Family Court on the sixth floor of the City-County Building. In 1990, it
opened a similar room at juvenile court.

   AREAWIDE

   Golf chain putts out

   The parent company of Golf Day is closing all of the chain's 78 stores,
including three in the Pittsburgh area.

   Stanley D. Black, chief executive officer of Trend-Lines Inc., the parent
company of Golf Day, said the stores would begin selling off inventory today.

The firm has stores on Perry Highway, Pine; at The Pointe at North Fayette; and
in Greensburg.

   HEART ASSOCIATION

   Grant presented

   Aetna U.S. Healthcare presented a $ 25,000 grant yesterday to the Allegheny
County division of the American Heart Association to support programs that
educate women and minorities about risk factors associated with cardiac disease
and encourage heart-healthy lifestyle changes.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2000


                             196 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 21, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C11

LENGTH: 91 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF / FOR THE RECORD;
CORRECTION

BODY:

   Because of an editing error, the charts depicting the biggest gainers and
losers among biotechnology stocks in Massachusetts on yesterday's Biotechnology
page was incorrect. Transkaryotic Therapies posted the biggest percent gain from
Sept. 12 to Sept. 19, closing at $48 a share; Charles River Laboratories posted
the biggest loss, closing at $21.50. Incorrect stock prices were listed for
Immunogen Inc. and Alkermes Inc. as well. Immunogen finished trading that day at
$25.88 a share; Alkermes' closing price was $41.44.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2000


                             197 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  September 21, 2000, Thursday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: MISCELLANEOUS, Pg. X-1

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   PITTSBURGH

   State representative removed from gene therapy trial

   erialmcr

   PITTSBURGH -- Doctors have taken a state representative off gene therapy,
saying that it has failed to stem the politician s brain cancer.

   State Rep. Italo Cappabianca, an Erie Democrat, suffers from a particularly
aggressive form of the disease.

   In July 1999, surgeons removed a malignant cyst the size of a golf ball. A
cancerous tumor had grown to nearly the same size by March 2000. Recent MRI
results after the gene therapy showed the tumor is now about the size of a
lemon.

   Unfortunately, the vaccine did not work, Dr. Frank Lieberman of University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center said Wednesday.  For all practical purposes, it did
not stop the tumor from recurring.

   The gene therapy was a series of vaccines containing Cappabianca s own tumor
cells, skin cells and an immune system-enhancing gene called Interleuken-4.

   In tests performed on laboratory animals, the vaccine stimulated the host s
immune system into attacking and killing the injected tumor cells, then any
other tumor cells found in the body.

   Dr. Marc Flitter, an Erie neurosurgeon who has been a consulting physician
for Cappabianca, said it was too early to call the gene therapy a failure.

   Tests showed part of the growth is malignant and part is just dead tissue.

   The malignancy is confined to the bed of the previous surgery, instead of
being scattered throughout the growth, Flitter said.  That represents an even
higher probability that the gene therapy has had some effect.

   Doctors now say that perhaps as early as Friday, the 63-year-old politician
will be given temolozide, a chemotherapy drug, and thalidomide, a drug that does
not allow tumors to create blood vessels.

   Cappabianca remains upbeat.

   I think the gene therapy has helped, but this other therapy will help reduce
the tumor s size, he said.  As soon as they give me the pills, I ll take them.

   Lieberman continues to be amazed at the politician s approach to combatting
the disease.

   In my mind, he is quite a heroic figure, Lieberman said.  He has pioneered a
very new therapy and accepted the risk that goes with that. He has met every new
challenge in a strong way. He always fights for more life.

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 2000


                             198 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                      September 21, 2000, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. 4B

LENGTH: 1300 words

HEADLINE: Your Turn


BODY: Seek stem-cell alternatives

    Re: the article "Actors back cell research" on Friday:

    Lifting the ban on federal funding for embryonic stem cell research would be
unconscionable. The human embryo has all the characteristics and components
needed to become an individual. This is true even of those produced in a
laboratory.

    For those who believe destroying an embryo is wrong, accepting this bill
would mean a 180-degree change of conviction.

    Many who oppose use of embryonic cells believe other treatment may be
equally effective. Adult stem cells may produce excellent results and are
available without controversy. Gene therapy shows promise in efforts to grow
tissue.

    - H.E. Mills,

    Floresville



    Knight no 'teacher'

    During Bobby Knight's ESPN interview he referred to himself more than once
as a teacher and coach.

    I invite any school to name a teacher and non-sports coach - debate,
academic decathlon, band, drama, choir - who verbally and physically abuses
students, uses foul language and gestures at public events, throws chairs when
he or she doesn't like the judging, punches a person who refuses to allow him or
her unauthorized entrance to a practice facility and abuses and humiliates other
teachers and staff, yet manages to achieve a 29-year tenure.

    We know that would never be allowed for a coach in any field other than
sports, no matter how many honors his students won.

    If Knight is the brilliant basketball tactician and teacher his supporters
claim, why did he find it necessary to resort to anger and physical aggression?
The bigger question is why should any sports coach be exempt from the civil
behavior expected of all other teachers?

    If the Knight method is so acceptable, why do we question the escalating
level of violence in sports?

    - Marla K. Rose



    One way to upgrade sports

    I have a great idea! Why don't we put Bobby Knight, Mike Tyson and John
Rocker in a locked room and see what happens? If we are lucky, none of these
charming guys would come out in one piece and the U.S. sports scene would be
better off.

    - Inez Macias Jr.



    It's a fact, not a 'race card'

    Since letter writer Gene Barta ("Drop the race card," Sept. 14) thinks
columnist Leonard Pitts was "way off the line when he insinuated blacks get
treated differently" by police, I must assume he lives in the white world. If he
socialized with blacks, he wouldn't feel that way.

    Just one example is a lunch date with a friend who is black. I arrive at the
restaurant a good 10 minutes after her. While she was seated at a table, she had
not been approached by our waitress. Within three minutes of my arrival, our
waitress shows up with water, asks for my drink order, then turns to my friend
and says, "You."

    This treatment continued throughout our meal. I wanted to leave, but my
friend said she was used to it and if she gave in, there would be a limited
number of places she could patronize with white friends.

    Mr. Barta, your son was treated the way he was by police because of what he
was doing. Black people don't have to do anything but be themselves to get
similar treatment.

    - Sherri Whatley



    Night falls on the slip

    Re: the Sept. 12 article "The death of the slip," in S.A. Life:

    I have a drawer full of beautiful slips that I saved from my days at Frost
Bros. I now wear one to sleep in and I find it very comfortable. Please, no more
nightgowns or pajamas for my birthday or Christmas.

    - Lorraine Chanel



    Rollovers, blowouts return

    I received my driver's license in the 1930s. Cars were tall, and tires were
poor. The word "blowout" was common, and the result was many times a rollover.



    As engineering improved, cars lowered, track widened and tires improved. The
words "tire failure" and "rollover" became redundant.

    For some reason, all of these lessons are being ignored. Excessively heavy
vehicles are again being made tall with a high center of gravity, and the
attempt to make these trucks ride like passengers cars by using soft tires puts
the tires in jeopardy.

    Conditions of the '30s are being duplicated. Results: tire failures and
rollovers.

    - James R. Kolb Jr.

    Would he bash or be civil?

    One question for Christian Coalition columnist Cal Thomas after he trashed
President Clinton to taint Al Gore ("Bush needs a course in campaign warfare,"
Sept. 13):

    When Bush "takes off the gloves" and agrees that "civility is for losers,"
Mr. Thomas, what would Jesus do?

    - William E. Larson,

    Universal City



    Opposition a mere trickle

    A "Defender of the Magisterium" claimed recently to have received 50 e-mails
and more than 200 phone calls opposing the San Fernando Cathedral renovation.

    These numbers are not impressive. They are but a mere ripple in the steady
stream of faithful San Antonians who flow into those hallowed walls daily for
Mass or just to let God know they love and need him.

    Can anyone really believe that a few configuration and rearrangements will
change its sacredness or the love exchanged between God and an individual there?



    A shallow rapid makes more noise than a deep river, and indeed a river of
silent but faithful will continue to flow through "the Mother Church of the
Archdiocese."

    - Lupe Stinnett,

    Maurice Peterson



    Cathedral changes wrong

    I am deeply concerned and upset by what is happening to San Fernando
Cathedral. For 2,000 years we have been taught that a Catholic church is indeed
the house of God, and its appearance should reflect that fact.

    Padded chairs, rearranged seating and a Jacuzzi-style baptismal pool are not
mandated, and these modern trends only strip our cathedral of its beauty.

    What is even more upsetting is the fact that the people are being forced
into paying for it, as individual parishes are assessed large percentages of
their donations.

    I believe that the Holy Mother Church is the one true church instituted by
Christ; however, that does not mean it is free from individual human error. What
our church leaders are doing is an atrocity.

    I hope they reconsider not only plans to modernize the cathedral but also
their methods. I am reconsidering my parish contributions as well as my support
of the annual archbishop's appeal.

    - Jeanette Ammari

    Everyone owes children

    Re: the Sept. 7 letter "Let parents pay" by Guy D. Pucci:

    It is hard to believe anyone could be this ignorant. We are responsible for
the future of our country, and children are our future - mine, yours and even
Mr. Pucci's.

    I cannot believe so many tax-funded programs that would benefit children
have failed since I've been in San Antonio. I have lived in quite a few states
and pride myself on voting for any program that would benefit children.

    Children need all the help, love and education we can give them, and if some
parents need our help, why not give up a few movies, hamburgers or nights on the
town to pay for the tax increases?

    Remember, Mr. Pucci, some day you will be old and gray and you may need
something from one of the very children you regret having to help.

    - Patricia L. Burkham,

    Boerne





    Tax (information) cuts

    "Doonesbury" cartoonist Garry Trudeau conveniently left out some facts in
his Sept. 8 strip on the Reagan tax cuts of the 1980s.

    Federal revenues went way up because of these tax cuts; people had more to
spend and save. This stimulated the economy and raised revenues. The large
deficits came as a result of a Democrat-led Congress that couldn't put the
brakes on spending.

    - Jimmie D. Jones,

    New Braunfels

GRAPHIC: KNIGHT

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000


                             199 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              September 21, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. C16

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: ALTERING MAN: WHO DECIDES?

BODY:


SCIENCE

   A panel of 22 experts from the fields of science, ethics and theology has
recommended that experiments should not take place altering a human's heritable
genetic makeup until a wide-ranging public dialogue has taken place and
government oversight established. After studying the issues for two and a half
years, the panel, convened by the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, objected on grounds of readiness in both safety and ethics.

   It is sound judgment, and all sides should voluntarily heed the advice.

   With the human genome project now laying out the complete, complex blueprint
of man, the potential to eliminate deadly inherited diseases becomes visible on
the distant horizon. Surely, we must strive to get there. But our steps must be
small and careful.

   First we must ponder where we want to go -- and not go. And it must be safe
-- meaning we must be sure we are going exactly where we set out to go and
preparing ourselves, if at all possible, for the unforeseen consequences of our
actions. Based on animal experimentation and cloning, which have produced many
more failures than successes, the process of altering or replacing a gene that
would remain altered in future generations is not yet proven safe. Cloned sheep
have had serious health problems. Current therapeutic experiments on humans add
material to genes or alter faulty ones in sick patients, but are not intended to
alter genes of that patient's future generations. Even so, there is not even
oversight to ensure that these experiments are not already modifying genes of
the patients' future offspring. If such "germ lines" are altered, by accident or
purposely, unforeseen side effects that could be irreversible might be worse
than the ailment the genetic therapy was designed to eliminate.

   Even if such alterations are proven safe for humans, the most compelling
aspect of the report is the view that the decisions of whether to re-create our
species, and in what ways, should not be made privately by scientists.
Currently, much of the research in the area of genetics is controversial and
privately funded, conducted far from public view. Private entities tend to be
profit driven -- which should be the last consideration in how we alter the
human race. Much of the controversy surrounding genetic issues has involved
whether or not government should fund these efforts -- but the more critical
question is whether government should set rules for both public and private
genetic manipulation of the species. If there continues to be no public
oversight of the private entities, there will be nothing to stop fertility
clinics from offering whatever genetic manipulation becomes possible and
marketable. The panel rightly worries about a slippery slope of changing genetic
makeup, even for the best reasons.

   Unless the public and its government discusses and regulates these issues
before the procedures become possible, what may begin as an effort to cure and
prevent inherited cancers could briskly move to "enhancing" health in ways such
as increasing height or athletic ability. If we genetically eliminate Down
Syndrome, would it also be ethical to add 50 IQ points to a prospective
offspring of average intelligence, to create a genius? If increasing
intelligence is permissible, what about eliminating freckles or baldness or
twiddling with eye and skin color? Will genetic alteration be available only to
the wealthy? There are staggering social ramifications of engineering "perfect"
children for those who can afford them.

   It will be difficult to create mechanisms to discuss and oversee these
complex issues. But government, guided by science, ethics and uncommon sense,
must take the lead and move the process forward. The potential for both good and
harm is too great, and the science advancing too quickly, to put the issue on
the back burner.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000


                             200 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 20, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E12

LENGTH: 136 words

HEADLINE: REGIONAL BUSINESS IN BRIEF;
TKT SEEKS TO END GENZYME LAWSUIT

BYLINE: By RONALD ROSENBERG

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. said it is seeking a declaratory judgment
against Genzyme Corp. in the US District Court in Boston to dismiss a patent
infringement suit. The firms are racing to be the first to develop an enzyme
replacement therapy to treat Fabry disease, a debilitating genetic disorder that
affects 2,000 to 3,000 men. The winner would also gain seven years of market
exclusivity under the US Orphan Drug Act that rewards companies who are first to
develop drugs to treat rare diseases. In July, Genzyme sued TKT in US District
Court in Wilmington, Del., claiming TKT was violating a key patent. However, the
suit has not commenced because Genzyme has refused to serve notice on TKT that
would allow the case to proceed. Genzyme officials say they have until
mid-November to serve notice.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000
