
                             201 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 20, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 1632 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY;
GENZYME TO RAISE PROFILE, STAKES COMPANY FACING GROWTH CHALLENGES; WORK SET TO
START ON NEW HEADQUARTERS GENZYME WILL RAISE STAKES, PROFILE

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   CAMBRIDGE - Genzyme Corp. chief Henri Termeer will make another architectural
statement along the Charles River next month when the company breaks ground for
its Kendall Square headquarters.

   Having a signature building with views of Beacon Hill, just down the river
from the company's cathedral-like manufacturing site in Allston, will give
Genzyme a higher profile as it seeks to expand and diversify its pipeline.

      The construction comes just as Genzyme, the second-largest biotechnology
company in New England, prepares to celebrate its 20th anniversary.

   Termeer said he looks forward to moving, especially since his current
neighbors barely half a mile away from the new site are construction crews
building research centers for rivals Biogen Inc. and Amgen Inc.

   "You look around here and there is so much brick," said Termeer, 54, the
Dutch-born chief executive. "We want to open it up with lots of glass."

   Building the 12-story, 285,000-square-foot headquarters caps a decade for
Genzyme as one of the nation's largest, most diversified and profitable biotech
companies. It also marks a transition.

   With a variety of early-stage drug, medical device and genetic testing
programs, Genzyme is still too dependent on a single drug to treat one rare
disease. In the coming years, it plans to expand its rare-disease programs and
move into medical areas with bigger patient populations, such as the treatment
of cancer and cardiovascular diseases.

   Both tracks will result in Genzyme facing significant challenges from new
competitors.

   Genzyme also must turn some of its smaller drug, device and medical testing
products into financial winners. And it must come up with a second act to
Cerezyme, its successful enzyme replacement therapy for about 3,000 patients
with Gaucher's disease, a rare inherited disorder, who pay an average of
$170,000 a year for the drug. Cerezyme and its predecessor Ceredase have been
Genzyme's money-maker, accounting for 75.3 percent of its revenue last year.

   "What Genzyme faces is not that different from the big boys in the
pharmaceutical and biotech industry in trying to find the next blockbuster
drugs," said William Tanner, vice president of equity research at SG Cowen & Co.
in Boston. "To more than incrementally grow a company's revenue is a very tough
feat."

   With Cerezyme, Genzyme saw an opportunity to become a leader in creating
lifelong medications to treat rare genetic disorders. It is developing four more
drugs, including Fabrazyme, a enzyme replacement drug for Fabry disease, which
affects more than 2,000 males.

   But while Cerezyme still has no rivals, Fabrazyme faces head-to-head
competition with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., also of Cambridge, which is
developing a comparable product called Replagal. Termeer maintains TKT is
violating one of Genzyme's licensed patents and has sued its rival for patent
infringement - a charge TKT rejects as groundless.

   TKT is far from the only new competitor Genzyme faces. By the middle of next
year, Genzyme plans to launch a protein-based oral medication to treat multiple
sclerosis, an arena dominated by injectable drugs such as Avonex from Biogen
Inc. and Betaseron from Schering A.G. of Germany.

   "We want to significantly change the effect of the progression of multiple
sclerosis disease," said Termeer.

   In pursuing new areas, Genzyme still faces hurdles with some once-promising
products and services. Among them:

   - Carticel, a minimally invasive cellular therapy to repair damaged knees
using a patient's own cartilage, has taken longer than expected to win over
orthopedic surgeons.

   - Seprafilm, a plastic coating to prevent abdominal adhesions after surgery,
has taken longer than expected to gain adoption by physicians.

   - Genetic testing services accounted for about $60 million in sales last year
but are not expected to turn a profit until this year.

   Termeer said Genzyme takes a 10-year view for most of its medical
investments. Like all such biotechnology investments, some have produced few, if
any, results.

   By far its biggest is the more than $200 million the company has spent to
finance seven early-stage cystic fibrosis gene therapy programs. All have
failed, although Genzyme has developed a sophisticated genetic test for couples
planning a family. Still, the company has not given up on developing a treatment
for cystic fibrosis, licensing research from Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital.

   One area that has been more successful is developing drugs on the farm. Next
year, the company expects to seek FDA approval for a drug to treat patients who
are resistant to heparin. Genzyme's alternative is a human protein found in
plasma that helps regulate blood clotting, which is made in the milk of goats.

   And just last week, in one of the biggest biotech deals this year, Genzyme
announced plans to acquire GelTex Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Waltham. Its goal: to
transform GelTex's Renagel, an oral drug for the estimated 1 million people
worldwide on kidney dialysis, into a billion-dollar blockbuster within 10 years.
Renagel's sales are expected to reach $45 million this year, up from nearly $20
million in 1999.

   "Renagel has the potential to be a standard of care in kidney dialysis
patients the way Epogen is now," said Peter Drake, biotechnology analyst for
Prudential Securities, referring to Amgen's anemia-fighting drug that is the
world's best-selling biotech product. "With Renagel, Henri Termeer just brought
in the crown jewel into the Genzyme fold."

   Not everyone, however, is as bullish that Genzyme will be able to transform
Renagel quickly. Some question whether the ambitious sales target of $1 billion
in sales will be reached.

   Termeer points to a dramatic rise in new prescriptions since a recent spate
of scientific studies, including one from the New England Journal of Medicine,
showed that taking some competing medications can lead to high levels of calcium
and cause cardiac problems for kidney dialysis patients. Nationwide, of the
280,000 dialysis patients with late-stage disease, 22 percent die annually from
cardiac and other medical problems.

   So to prove that Renagel is superior by reducing the mortality rate, Genzyme
plans to launch a 2,000-patient comparison study.  SIDEBAR: 20 years of Genzyme
highs, lows 1981: Over a store on Kneeland Street near Boston's Combat Zone,
scientist Henry Blair forms Genzyme. Within a few months the company buys
Whatman Biochemicals Ltd., a manufacturer of bulk pharmaceuticals. The next year
Genzyme acquires Koch Light Laboratories. Together they provide Genzyme's first
revenues.

   1983: Henri Termeer is named Genzyme president, after 10 years at Baxter
Travenol. He would become CEO in 1985 and chairman in 1987.

   1984: Work begins on Ceredase, a treatment for Gaucher's disease, a rare,
inherited disorder of the spleen, liver, and joints.

   1985: Genzyme's scientific advisory board recommends against developing
Ceredase. Termeer disagrees and takes a big gamble.

   1986: Genzyme launches an IPO at $10 a share, raising $28.3 million.

   1989: Genzyme acquires majority ownership of Integrated Genetics of
Framingham - an early developer of genetic testing and Termeer's first major
move toward diversification.

   1990: Headquarters move to Kendall Square, Cambridge.

   1991: Ceredase is approved by the FDA and designated under the Orphan Drug
Act. First patients pay over $300,000 for the first year of treatment, making it
one of the most expensive medications in the world.

   1992: Genzyme begins construction of Allston plant to produce Ceredase and
its successor, Cerezyme. It also forms Neozyme II Corp. to finance research,
development, and testing of proposed cystic fibrosis medications. Over the next
nine years, Genzyme spends over $200 million and conducts seven clinical trials,
but fails to develop an effective medication.

   1993: Genzyme Transgenics, a publicly traded company, is formed to develop
and produce human protein-based drugs and monoclonal antibodies in animals.

   1994: Genzyme raises the price of Ceredase by $10,000 after its French
supplier of the key material, taken from the placentas of newborns in Europe and
Africa, says it will charge the company an additional $22 million. The company
also forms Genzyme Tissue Repair, focused on Carticel, a treatment for damaged
knee cartilage.

   1995: Genzyme gains FDA approval to market Carticel.

   1996: Genzyme gains approval to market Cerezyme, the genetically engineered
successor to Ceredase. It acquires Deknatel Snowden Pencer Inc. of Taunton, a
maker of surgical instruments and cardiovascular devices, for $250 million.
Genzyme gains FDA approval for Seprafilm, a bioabsorbable membrane that prevents
adhesions after abdominal surgeries.

   1997: PharmaGenics Inc. of Allendale, N.J., a developer of cancer treatments
using genomics research, is acquired by Genzyme for $28 million.

   1999: Genzyme Surgical Products is formed. Genzyme also announces a
collaboration with researchers at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center to
develop a new type of cystic fibrosis treatment.

   March 6, 2000: Genzyme agrees to buy Biomatrix Inc. of Ridgefield, N.J., a
leader in viscoelastic biomaterials known for its three-injection treatment for
knee arthritis.

   June 23, 2000: Genzyme seeks FDA approval of Fabrazyme, its enzyme
replacement therapy for patients with Fabry disease - seven days after rival
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge files its application for a similar
drug called Replagal. On July 26, Genzyme sues TKT for patent infringement.

   Sept. 11, 2000: Genzyme agrees to acquire GelTex Pharmaceuticals Inc. of
Waltham. The deal stems from a Genzyme and GelTex 1997 joint venture to market
Renagel. Source: Genzyme Corp.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Genzyme chief Henri Termeer, at his Cambridge office Monday,
said he looks forward to moving into the company's new headquarters. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO/DAVID L. RYAN 2.  Henri Termeer, Genzyme chief executive, stood
Monday in front of the site of the company's future headquarters, with its view
of Boston in the background. Genzyme is raising its profile with the Kendall
Square building as it faces other challenges. / GLOBE STAFF PHOTO/DAVID L. RYAN

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000


                             202 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                   September 20, 2000 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 042

LENGTH: 279 words

HEADLINE: Biotech firm fights back; Calls Amgen lawsuit a publicity stunt

BYLINE: By TOM KIRCHOFER

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a Cambridge biotech company accused of
violating a competitor's patent, fired back yesterday at Genzyme Corp., saying
it was sued in July by its Cambridge neighbor in a public relations ploy.

   TKT said it hasn't been served with any papers yet by Genzyme.

   In a federal lawsuit brought in Wilmington, Del., Genzyme accused TKT of
violating the patent on a drug used to treat a rare genetic disorder called
Fabry disease.

   "We believe Genzyme resorted to this tactic in order to persuade opinion
leaders, patients and potential partners not to work with TKT," said Dr. Richard
F. Selden, TKT's president and CEO.

   Selden also ripped the Genzyme suit as "groundless" and "frivolous" as TKT
asked the U.S. District Court in Boston to declare that its drug, Replagal, does
not violate the Genzyme patent.

   Genzyme's spokesman, Bo Piela, said his company has 120 days to serve TKT,
and still intends to pursue its lawsuit.

   "The lawsuit is about defending our patent rights that need to be enforced,"
he said. TKT has previously maintained that it has not violated the patent, and
that the patent is not valid.

   It also faces an ongoing patent infringement battle with giant biotech firm
Amgen Inc. over a therapy used on patients undergoing kidney dialysis or
chemotherapy.

   New York University's Mount Sinai School of Medicine is also named as a
defendant in TKT's court filing yesterday. Some of the medical school's
scientific discoveries were licensed to Genzyme and covered by the disputed
patents.

   A Mount Sinai spokeswoman said she couldn't comment on TKT's complaint, filed
yesterday in federal court, because she hadn't read it.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2000


                             203 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                   September 19, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: From our news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Alaskan plane crash kills 4
A small plane crashed Monday while landing at the Nuiqsut airport on Alaska's
North Slope, killing four of the 10 people aboard, authorities said.

   The plane crashed about 3 p.m. near the runway at Nuiqsut, north of the
Arctic Circle. It went into the tundra and did not hit any buildings, said Paul
Carr, chief of the North Slope Borough Police Department.

   The six survivors were taken by helicopter to hospitals in Barrow, Fairbanks
and Anchorage, Carr said. The identities of those killed were being withheld
pending notification of kin.

   The twin-engine aircraft belonged to Cape Smythe Air in Barrow. Company
President Grant Thompson said there were nine passengers and a pilot aboard the
Piper 1040.

   Several Cape Smythe airplanes have had mishaps this year, none resulting in
fatalities.

20 tons of chicken, turkey franks recalled
Lykes Meat Group Inc. recalled 40,000 pounds of chicken franks and turkey hot
dogs because the products may have been undercooked. The products involved are
16-ounce packages of chicken franks and turkey hot dogs. All packages were
produced on Aug. 14 and bear "P-2653" on the label. They were distributed in
California, Florida, Georgia, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. The products include Fairgrounds Jumbo Franks
made with chicken and pork, code dated 227002A, use by Oct. 23; Smithfield Grill
Ready Chicken Franks, code dated 227002A, use by Oct. 13; and Smithfield Premium
Hot Dogs made with turkey, pork and beef, code dated 227002B, use by Oct. 13 or
Oct. 23.


   Blood supply shortage critical nationwide
A severe blood shortage is hitting the nation, especially Northeastern cities
and weather-weary Florida and Texas, at a time of year when blood banks usually
have some of their biggest supplies. The American Red Cross is calling it one of
the worst blood shortages in recorded history and is saying surgeries in several
big cities are being canceled. The problem is so acute in Philadelphia, New
Jersey, Boston, Baltimore and Washington that hospitals' blood banks are
practically empty and officials are pleading for hundreds of units of type O
blood, the type everyone can receive.

Judge clears courtroom
in Edwards jury selection Former Louisiana Gov. Edwin Edwards' second corruption
trial this year began in secrecy as a federal judge cleared a Baton Rouge
courtroom of spectators and reporters. U.S. District Judge Edith Brown Clement
later denied motions by media lawyers to either let the public back in or delay
jury selection pending a hearing. The only hint at her reasoning was one
sentence accompanying her denial of the motion for a delay: "Follow-up
questioning deals with potential bias, which is conducted outside the presence
of the public."

Gene therapy victim's family sues university
The family of Jesse Gelsinger, the 18-year-old whose death in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania started a national debate about
medical research, filed a wrongful death lawsuit against the university and five
doctors. The suit was filed in state court in Philadelphia, one year and one day
after Gelsinger died. It accuses the doctors of failing to follow federal rules
governing medical experiments and failing to properly inform Gelsinger of the
risks.

Impeachment trial of state jurist begins
The New Hampshire Senate opened the state's first-ever impeachment trial,
sitting as a jury to hear charges against State Supreme Court Chief Justice
David Brock. The House voted in July to impeach the 64-year-old Brock, a high
court justice since 1981 and chief justice since 1986. The House accused Brock
of lying to its investigators, making an improper call to a lower-court judge in
1987, soliciting comments from then-Justice Stephen Thayer about Thayer's own
divorce case in February and routinely allowing judges to comment on cases from
which they were disqualified for conflicts of interest.

COMING UP

   With momentum growing in Congress to ease the Cuba embargo, advocates on both
sides will make their cases today in one of the biggest debates on the
38-year-old sanctions. The hearing is part of an International Trade Commission
study that some Cuba experts describe as the most comprehensive effort by a
federal agency to determine how the embargo has affected the Cuban and U.S.
economies. The commission is an independent, nonpartisan agency.

GRAPHIC: Photo
Commuters wait for the Los Angeles-operated DASH bus at Union Station in
downtown on Monday. Many of them would use the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority, but bus drivers and rail operators went on strike Saturday, stranding
nearly a half-million riders. Sides agreed to meet today to set up negotiations.
/ NICK UT / Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             204 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                   September 19, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 16; National Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTIFIC PANEL CALLS FOR VOLUNTARY BAN ON GENE-ALTERING RESEARCH;
 MEDICINE: GROUP URGES GOVERNMENT OVERSIGHT AND A WIDE-RANGING PUBLIC DEBATE ON
ETHICS OF PROCEDURES THAT COULD SHAPE FUTURE GENERATIONS.

BYLINE: AARON ZITNER, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Lucy the Mouse sported an "artificial chromosome," inserted by scientists,
which she passed on to her children. Ucp, a mouse with a less elegant name, was
programmed genetically to pass his underweight condition to countless
generations of offspring. And Dolly, the world-famous sheep, raised the prospect
that parents might live forever, in a fashion, by producing cloned children
identical to themselves.

   For years, scientists have been tinkering with animal genes and cells to
produce changes that are passed through generations. Now, with the specter of
human experiments on the horizon, scientists and ethicists are raising a red
flag.

   On Monday, after more than two years of study, a panel of the American Assn.
for the Advancement of Science called for researchers to adopt a self-imposed
ban on gene-altering work and for the government to establish an oversight panel
as soon as possible.

   "We're saying that no clinical trials should be taking place in this area,"
said Mark S. Frankel, a staff member at the nation's largest general science
organization and coauthor of the report. "None."

   Genetic Diseases Could Be Targeted

   The techniques that created Ucp and Lucy might one day help doctors cure
human patients of such terrifying genetic illnesses as Huntington's disease or
cystic fibrosis--not only in themselves but in generations to come.

   But the same technology could be used by parents in attempts to create
"perfect children," possibly taller, smarter or more athletic than their
classmates. While fertility clinics would find it irresistible to offer these
services, the panel said, none should be available before there is a
wide-ranging public discussion about the implications.

   Currently, scientists are testing gene therapies in dozens of clinical trials
across the country, which drew headlines after the death of an 18-year-old man
in a Pennsylvania experiment last year. Those trials are aimed at giving
patients healthy, new genes to supplement faulty genes in the heart, blood
vessels or elsewhere. Doctors want to help patients, not affect future children.

   But the new research, which raises even thornier ethical questions, would
alter genes in the sperm and egg cells of patients, which is why the effect
would pass to their children. It is known as "inheritable genetic modification"
or "germ-line modification," a reference to sperm and egg, which are sometimes
called germ cells.

   Little or none of this research is being conducted today and one panel member
predicted that it would be five to 15 years before human trials would become
commonplace.

   But the panel is worried that even trials of conventional gene therapy may
have an effect on future generations. In some animal experiments, they said,
gene therapy has shown signs of affecting sex cells, raising the prospect that
the genes of offspring could be altered.

   The panel also said that existing government oversight, tightened in the wake
of last year's gene therapy death, have not adequately investigated the
possibility that current experiments are already modifying the genes of
patients' future children.

   "We're not saying it's happening, but we're not looking for it," Frankel
said. "It's not part of the protocol to look for it and we're saying it needs to
be."

   The panel identified only one type of this research that is being conducted
today. Known as "cytoplasmic transfer," it is used rarely in fertility clinics
to help women whose egg cells do not seem to be producing embryos that grow
properly. The procedure attempts to "rejuvenate" the cells by inserting material
from a donor's egg.

   The resulting baby would inherit not only its parents' genes but a tiny
amount of so-called mitochondrial genes from the donor. Cells use these genes to
metabolize food into energy. Because the technique passes these new genes to the
baby and all its future offspring, the panel said that fertility clinics should
stop the procedure until the federal oversight board can study it.

   But one fertility doctor rejected that idea. Jacques Cohen, who pioneered the
technique at a New Jersey clinic, said the intent is to help couples have
children, not to alter a patient's genes. In fact, he said, in some cases his
team looked for mitochondrial genes in babies born through cytoplasmic transfer
and found none.

   "The argument that this is a form of genetic modification is an extremely far
stretch," said Cohen, of the Institute for Reproductive Medicine and Science of
St. Barnabas in Livingston, N.J. "We have not modified any individual genes."

   Cohen said that he had used the technique on 30 patients in four years,
producing 15 births.

   The scientific panel, which has 22 members and includes scientists, ethicists
and theologians, said that technology would have to advance significantly before
other types of gene-modification experiments could begin.

   One member, Dr. Theodore Friedmann, director of the Program in Human Gene
Therapy at UC San Diego, said that only "several percent" of attempts at
producing gene-modified animals succeed. In most cases, the animal dies before
or after birth or the modification does not have the desired effect.

   Public Debate Is Demanded

   But the panel also said that, even if the research were safe, it should not
be conducted without a public debate on its ethics and merits. Parents who can
modify their genes to produce healthier children will also be tempted to enhance
other traits, they said.

   "To be a parent, you don't set out with your catalog and order form and check
off boxes," said Sondra Wheeler, a professor at Wesley Theological Seminary in
Washington. "There is something distorted in that. We have the capacity to make
children more like commodities and less like gifts, and that worries me a lot."

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             205 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    September 19, 2000 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 06A

LENGTH: 382 words

HEADLINE: Treatments that modify genes questioned;
More study needed, experts say, about method to limit or prevent some diseases

BYLINE: LEE BOWMAN Scripps Howard News Service

BODY:

   Washington -- Medical treatments that modify human genes that can be
transmitted to future generations are not sufficiently safe to be done now,
according to a report released Monday by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science.

   "We need compelling scientific evidence that this is safe and effective, and
we need to make sure we have the wisdom to apply this technology in a way that
is equitable, just and respects human dignity," said Mark Frankel, director of
the association's Scientific Freedom, Responsibility and Law Program and a
co-author of the report.

   Scientists working with animals -- mainly mice and rats -- already have
demonstrated that it's possible to manipulate genetic material in an embryo for
transmission to future generations.

   But keeping a trait alive through transgenic mice has required selective
breeding of mice that best express the target gene in the desired tissue or
organs -- something that would hardly be workable among humans.

   A number of other techniques using various cloning and embryonic stem cell
methods are under development in animals, although none is close to being tried
in humans.

   Scientists working in gene therapy so far have been adding DNA to cells to
take over the work of a defective gene, rather than correcting or replacing the
defective DNA.

   Theoretically, modifying genes that are passed along to offspring could
prevent and possibly decrease the incidence of certain inherited diseases, said
the report, the product of 2 1/2 years of study by a group of scientists,
ethicists and theologians called by the association, the world's largest
scientific federation.

   But the panel noted "we do not have sufficient biological knowledge and
understanding of the human genome to predict the long-term risks from
genetically engineering human cells." An inadvertent coding mistake "might in
some circumstances become a permanent part of a child's genetic legacy."

   Even the elimination of some disease-linked genes might " also remove some
beneficial effects of having those genes," the report notes.

   Generations not yet conceived can't possibly consent to a treatment that will
change their makeup, noted Sondra Wheeler, a professor at Wesley Theological
Seminary in Washington who studies bioethical issues.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             206 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



               September 19, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

HEADLINE: National News Briefs;
Suit Filed Over Death In Gene Therapy Test

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18

BODY:

   The family of the 18-year-old whose death in a gene therapy experiment at the
University of Pennsylvania started a debate about medical research filed a
wrongful death lawsuit today against the university and five doctors, including
a prominent medical ethicist.

   The suit was filed in state court in Philadelphia, one year and one day after
the young man, Jesse Gelsinger, died. It accuses the doctors of failing to
follow federal rules governing medical experiments and failing to properly
inform Mr. Gelsinger of the risks.

    The suit named not only the three doctors involved in the study -- James M.
Wilson, Steven Raper and Mark Batshaw -- but also Dr. William M. Kelley, the
former dean of the university's medical school, and Dr. Arthur L. Caplan,
director of the university's Center for Bioethics.

   Dr. Kelley is a gene therapy expert who, the lawsuit said, would have gained
financially through patent royalties if the experiment had succeeded. Dr. Caplan
advised the researchers on the ethics of the study.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             207 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 19, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 997 words

HEADLINE: PENN HIT WITH SUIT OVER GENE THERAPY THE FAMILY OF JESSE GELSINGER
ARGUED THAT RISKS WERE NOT DISCLOSED. HE DIED LAST FALL DURING THE PROGRAM.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The family of an Arizona teenager who died last fall during a gene-therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania yesterday sued Penn and others
involved in the controversial procedure, which aimed to correct an inherited
liver disorder.

   The suit, filed in Philadelphia Common Pleas Court, follows the first
anniversary of the death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., who died here
Sept. 17, 1999, four days after getting an experimental gene drug in a trial for
which he had volunteered.

   But in their complaint, Gelsinger's father, Paul Gelsinger, of Tucson, and
his uncle, John Gelsinger, of Medford, N.J., allege that the patient consent
form signed by Gelsinger and other trial volunteers deliberately underplayed the
risks of the procedure, which shot trillions of disarmed cold viruses directly
into patients' livers.

   Penn officials yesterday described the Gelsinger family's complaint as "only
one version of a very complicated and painful story." They said they would
respond to the specific allegations "in due course," declining to do so
yesterday.

   The suit also contends that the three doctors who conducted the trial should
never have enrolled Gelsinger because his ammonia levels were higher than those
specified in the trial protocol.

   It also alleges that Penn's experiment was fraught with conflicts of interest
- including was the financial stake of James M. Wilson, the Penn doctor in
charge of the experiment - which were not sufficiently explained to Gelsinger
and other patients.

   Arthur Caplan, the Penn ethicist who advised Wilson's team to conduct the
experiment on relatively healthy adults rather than sick babies, is also named
as a defendant.

   Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken lawyer representing the Gelsinger family, said he
would seek maximum monetary damages allowable under the law. He said the timing
of the suit was not coincidental.

   "Paul thought it was appropriate that we file action at the anniversary of
his son's death," Milstein said. "This is something that still affects him. He
wants to get to the truth, and he wants those accountable to be held
responsible."

   In a statement, Penn officials said the first anniversary of Gelsinger's
death - which they believe was a tragic accident - was "a sobering moment" for
the university.

   "Our deepest sympathy is with the Gelsinger family at this very difficult
time," university officials said.

   Penn officials said they were trying to correct weaknesses at the school's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy but argued that those weaknesses - which
prompted federal regulators to shut down the program's human trials - did not
contribute to Gelsinger's death.

   Penn also said it "categorically rejects" the complaint's charge that
financial gain "played any part in any aspect" of the trial.

   Gelsinger was the 17th patient to get the experimental gene drug, which used
modified adenoviruses - a type of cold virus - to deliver corrective genes to
people suffering from a liver disorder known as ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC)
deficiency.

   He is believed to be the first person to die as a direct result of gene
therapy, a highly experimental field that holds out the promise of correcting
underlying genetic disorders, not just treating the disorders.

   Although the precise cause of Gelsinger's death is not yet known, Penn
doctors believe he had a massive immune response to the adenoviruses used to
deliver the corrective genes, prompting his natural defense system to attack his
own organs.

   Gelsinger's death has prompted widespread internal reviews of gene-therapy
programs at universities and in private industry, led to intensified monitoring
by federal agencies, and stirred Congress to call for even more stringent
regulations.

   Penn's gene-therapy program has been put on hold by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, which found numerous violations of federal guidelines during an
on-site investigation conducted there after Gelsinger's death.

   Besides Wilson and Caplan, the other individuals named in the suit are Steven
Raper, the Penn physician in charge of Gelsinger's daily care; Mark Batshaw, a
physician at Children's National Medical Center in Washington and an OTC expert
who also oversaw the trial; and William Kelley, former dean of Penn's medical
school.

   Besides Penn, the suit names two other institutions as defendants -
Children's National Medical Center and Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.
Batshaw, now at the Washington hospital, used to work at Children's Hospital in
Philadelphia, which reviewed the consent forms for the OTC trial.

   Although Gelsinger freely signed such a form, the plaintiffs allege that the
risk of toxic effects from the viral vectors were understated; that the form did
not mention that monkeys injected with a similar vector got sick or died; and
that several patients treated before Gelsinger suffered serious side effects.

   The suit also alleges that Penn may have given the green light for human
trials of the OTC therapy based on a "defective product" used in testing the
approach on animals. The viral vectors given to the animals had been sitting on
lab shelves for 25 months before they were administered to animals, likely
making them less potent than the freshly grown viruses used in the human trial,
the suit says.

   Milstein declined comment yesterday on whether he was involved in efforts to
reach an out-of-court settlement with Penn. But in its statement, Penn said
representatives of the Gelsinger family "had initiated discussions with the
university and the other institutional defendants, and we will respond." The
statement did not elaborate.

   Gelsinger family members could not be reached for comment yesterday.
Officials at the children's hospitals here and in Washington declined comment.
Caplan said his lawyers would not allow him to comment. Wilson, Raper and
Batshaw did not return calls seeking comment.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             208 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                  September 19, 2000, Tuesday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 577 words

HEADLINE: BAN URGED ON THERAPY ON GENES IN HUMANS

BYLINE: REUTERS NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:


   The modification of human genes that can be passed to future generations is
not safe at this time and should not be undertaken, the world's largest
federation of scientists reported yesterday.

   In a long-awaited report on human inheritable genetic modifications, known as
IGM, the American Association for the Advancement of Science said no human
trials of this kind of gene therapy should occur until standards and stringent
oversight are in place.

   The idea behind such research would be to free families of inherited genetic
disorders, but by modifying inheritable genes -- those in a patient's sperm or
eggs -- the therapy could introduce new genetic problems that would in turn be
passed along to new generations.

   The report noted that researchers have been successful in some cases with
somatic gene therapy, which deals only with genes that cannot be inherited. But
what works in somatic gene therapy will not now work to treat inherited genetic
ills.

   "IGM utilizing current methods for somatic gene transfer cannot presently be
carried out responsibly to humans," Dr. Mark Frankel, the report's co-author,
said in a statement.

   The Rev. Ronald Cole-Turner, an ethicist at Pittsburgh Theological Seminary,
said he and other members of the AAAS committee agreed that modification of
inheritable genes is probably inevitable and might even prove welcome. But they
agreed that no compelling reason to do so exists for the foreseeable future.

   "If you're going to cross a raging river, you'd better see something on the
other side worth crossing it for," Cole-Turner said.

   Eventually, some modification of inheritable genes might be necessary to
treat some medical condition, he said.

   Should that situation arise, society needs to weigh the advantages and
disadvantages and proceed carefully, if at all, the group agreed.

   What concerns the committee members, he added, is the idea that some people
would make those decisions unilaterally.

   "I worry about what it is that motivates people to do that," said
Cole-Turner, who specializes in ethical and theological issues related to
science and technology. Presumably, they will seek to give their offspring some
competitive advantage, whether intellectual, athletic or otherwise.

   One fear is that other people will feel compelled to take similar steps, not
because they think it's a good idea, but because they fear their children will
be at a disadvantage if they don't. It's the same fear that underlies the use of
performance-enhancing drugs by athletes -- once some athletes start using them,
others feel they have to use them.

   Opposition to inheritable gene modification is particularly strong in Europe,
where altering another person's genetic inheritance is regarded as a violation
of human rights.

   "Nobody in our group wanted to use that language," Cole-Turner said.
"Everybody recognized that there might someday be a medically compelling case"
for this type of genetic manipulation.

   Aside from strictly medical questions, the issues of ethics and religion come
into play on this matter, the report said.

   If there is ultimately "a societal decision" to go ahead with IGM research,
"The ethical and social issues are sufficiently compelling to justify government
oversight in this case," Frankel said.

   There should also be "a meaningful dialogue" with the American public, the
scientists reported.

   Post-Gazette Science Editor Byron Spice contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             209 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                    September 19, 2000 Tuesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 7A

LENGTH: 205 words

HEADLINE: DEAD GENE PATIENT'S FAMILY SUES DOCTORS, UNIVERSITY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL RUBINKAM; ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


BODY:

   The family of a teenager who died during a gene therapy experiment last year
filed a wrongful death lawsuit yesterday against his doctors and the University
of Pennsylvania.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died Sept. 17, 1999, four days after
starting the experiment. Gelsinger's death is the first known to have been
caused by gene therapy.

   The lawsuit filed in city court accuses doctors of being "careless, negligent
and reckless" in their treatment of Gelsinger. It does not specify an exact
amount of damages being sought.

   The university expressed sorrow over Gelsinger's death but said his medical
care "met the highest standards" and he was fully aware of the risks involved
with the therapy.

   Gelsinger had an inherited disorder that inhibits nitrogen processing in the
body. The disorder usually kills boys at a young age, but Gelsinger controlled
his condition with drugs and a low-protein diet.

   Researchers hoped to correct the problem by injecting into his liver a cold
virus that had been modified to carry a gene that would control the condition.

   But 24 hours after the therapy began, his condition went downhill. After two
days, he slipped into a coma. He eventually was taken off life support.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2000


                             210 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 19, 2000, TUESDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 1765 words

HEADLINE: ONLINE INVESTING;

Investors Hearing About Cancer Drugs;

S.F. conference indicates biotech creating interest

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
At a time when biotechnology is a hot ticket on Wall Street, the development of
drugs to fight cancer is one of the most promising niches in the industry.

    Several hundred institutional investors have been in San Francisco the past
two days to hear detailed presentations from about 50 biotech firms with
anti-cancer drugs on the market or in the development stage.

    The conference, hosted by Stephens Inc., an investment bank from Little
Rock, Ark., is unusual insofar as most biotech conferences involve companies
with drugs for every condition from heart disease to infertility. But Jason
Zhang, the analyst who organized this event, said financial and scientific
reasons persuaded him to make this conference cancer-centric.

    While the Nasdaq composite index and the S&P 500 are both in negative
territory on a year-to-date basis, the American Stock Exchange's biotech index
has soared 77 percent since January. Cancer is one of the most promising areas
inside biotech because the market for treatments is about $36 billion a year,
Zhang said.

    "The (biotech) companies are getting products on the market," Zhang said.
"If this (anti-cancer) sector doesn't get your money back, I don't know what
will."

    The second reason for the focus is the complexity of the science that can
spell success or failure for anti-cancer drugs. Zhang put together a 250-page
book outlining the mechanics of cancer and the theories behind the various
experimental remedies).

    To help investors better understand the cancer niche, Zhang divided biotech
companies into five broad areas, based on the way they try to fight the disease.
Those cancer-fighting strategies are antibodies, vaccines, chemotherapy, gene
therapy and anti-angiogenesis.

   -- Antibodies. These are natural proteins that circulate in the blood system.
They are part of the immune system that fights disease. The role of the antibody
is to find diseased cells or disease-causing agents. The antibody then attaches
itself to the diseased tissue and sends out signals to other parts of the immune
system to come in and destroy the defect.

   When the immune system is working, antibodies help kill cells that would
otherwise grow uncontrollably and become cancerous.

    Sometimes, however, the immune system fails to nip cancer in the bud. This
is where bioengineered antibodies can play a cancer-fighting role, Zhang said.

    The process of creating an antibody drug starts by studying the cancer cell
itself. The surface of every cell, whether healthy or cancerous, is studded with
molecular bumps and hooks that are called antigens.

    To create an antibody drug, scientists look for an antigen unique to the
cancer cell. They then design an antibody that latches on to that particular
antigen. When the antibody is introduced into the bloodstream through an
injection, it roams around until it latches onto the antigen on the cancer cell.
Then it sends out the "kill me" signal to the immune system, Zhang said.

    Simple as this might appear, it took a decade for biotech firms to prove
that this theory is both sound and effective. When the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration approved Rituxan, the first anti-cancer antibody, in 1998, it
helped rekindle investor interest in biotechnology.

    Now, investors are excited about the prospects for other experimental
antibodies being developed by firms like IDEC Pharmaceutical, which created
Rituxan.

    "This is one of the hottest areas in biotechnology," said Zhang, who is
hosting 12 antibody companies at the conference, including Bay Area stalwarts
Coulter Pharmaceuticals and Protein Design Labs (see chart for a complete list).

    Having established the basic usefulness of antibody drugs, biotech firms are
pushing the concept further. Current antibodies are like the homing beacon James
Bond might attach to a helicopter to track it. The next generation of
anti-cancer antibodies will be more like guided missiles, capable of destroying
the cancer cells themselves, Zhang said.

    To do this, next-generation antibodies will carry a destructive payload.
Once the drug is injected into the bloodstream, the tracking feature will zero
in on the antigen unique to the cancer cell before triggering the payload to
destroy the cancer cell.

   Zhang is particularly impressed with the payload being developed by the
Massachusetts biotech firm ImmunoGen Inc. "They have a chemical that isn't toxic
outside the (cancer) cell," Zhang said.

    In experiments, when the antibody binds to the surface of a cancer cell, the
payload chemical burrows into the cell, where it becomes "armed." ImmunoGen is
pairing up with other first-generation antibody firms to deliver this payload to
a variety of cancers.

   -- Vaccines. Many people think of vaccines as shots that help ward off a
disease by making our immune system prepared to repel an invader, like the flu
bug.

    But the cancer vaccines being developed by the eight biotech firms
presenting at this conference have a slightly different purpose. They are
intended to teach our immune system how to fight a cancer that has already
established itself, Zhang said.

    To grow in the first place, the cancer had to evade normal immune
mechanisms. The strategy behind the vaccine technology is to look for some
antigen on the surface of a cancer cell that evaded detection by the immune
system, Zhang said.

    One basic idea behind anti-cancer vaccines is to isolate an antigen -- that
is, a unique feature on the surface of the cancer cell -- and then to
mass-produce this antigen and inject it back into the cancer patient.

    In theory, once the immune system "recognizes" the antigen, it should
trigger the policing mechanisms to target the tumor for destruction, Zhang said.

    Anti-cancer vaccines are still a largely unproven technology and the various
companies in this niche face years of safety and efficacy experiments.

    But there is reason for hope. Avax Technologies Inc. of Kansas City, Mo.,
recently began selling an anti-cancer vaccine for melanoma in Australia and is
close to selling the same product in Germany and the Netherlands.

    Avax CEO Jeffrey Jonas said it may be three or four years before his company
completes the experiments needed to win approval to sell the vaccine in the
United States.

   -- Chemotherapy. For more than 40 years, doctors have been giving patients
small doses of poisons designed to kill fast-growing cancer cells. But such
chemotherapy agents have unpleasant side effects because they also kill healthy
hair and skin cells.

    Zhang said the experimental chemotherapy agents being discussed at the
conference try to target cancers more precisely and minimize collateral damage
to healthy cells. Several companies, such as Sunnyvale's Pharmacyclics, have new
chemo agents in late-stage clinical trials.

   -- Gene Therapy. Many cancers are influenced by genetic defects. A cancer
cell might have too much of a gene that causes runaway growth or too little of a
gene that is supposed to kill abnormal cells.

    "If you want to go after the root cause of cancer, you have to go back to
the genes," Zhang said.

    For more than a decade, researchers have been experimenting with ways to
switch off bad genes and turn on good genes. While the idea sounds simple, gene
therapy has been difficult to put into effect.

    A few years ago, however, the same could have been said for antibody
researchers. Zhang said companies like Isis Pharmaceuticals and Targeted
Genetics continue to test gene therapy strategies in hopes of finding a way to
switch cancer off.

   -- Anti-angiogenesis. Many cancers create large growths inside the body, and
like any normal growth, these tumors need to be nourished by blood vessels. The
process of forming blood vessels in called angiogenesis, and for several years,
a variety of biotech firms have been trying to choke off tumor growth by
restricting blood vessel formation.

    This cancer-fighting strategy, called anti-angiogenesis, has received
tremendous publicity in recent years. One of the best-known firms in this niche,
Maryland's EntreMed Inc., will be talking about its approach at this conference.

    Zhang said other companies at the conference, including Toronto's Aeterna
Laboratories and Magainin Pharmaceuticals of Massachusetts are further along in
the development process.

   --------------------------------------------------------

   CHART:


   BIOTECH FIRMS FOLLOW FIVE BROAD STRATEGIES TO FIGHT CANCER
  To help investors understand the many companies that are trying to create
cancer drugs, analyst Jason Zhang with Stephens Inc. broke them into broad
areas based on their basic approach to combatting the disease. His list,
though not exhaustive, is a good start for researching investment
opportunities in anti-cancer biopharmaceuticals. The entire 250-page
investment guide, from which this chart is extracted, is available online at
www.stephens.com/research/industries.asp. Click on  Life Sciences,'' then
go to the next page and under  Reports'' look for  Cancer: Revolutionary
Therapies/Innovative Investment Opportunities Industry Report.'' A
registration box will pop up, but the information is free. The report is so
large it is divided into three files, so be sure to download all sections.
.
CHEMOTHERAPY COMPANIES
Cell Pathways Inc.
MGI Pharma Inc.
Osi Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Pharmacyclics Inc.
QLT PhotoTherapeutics Inc.
SuperGen Inc.
.
ANTIBODY COMPANIES
Coulter Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Cytogen Corp.
Idec Pharmaceuticals Corp.
Ilex Oncology Inc.
ImClone Systems Inc.
ImmunoGen Inc.
Immunomedics Inc.
Medarex Inc.
MedImmune Inc.
NeoRx Corp.
Protein Design Labs Inc.
Techniclone Corp.
.
VACCINE COMPANIES
Antigenics Inc.
Aphton Corp.
Avax Technologies Inc.
AVI BioPharma Inc.
Biomira Inc.
Corixa Corp.
Progenics Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Titan Pharmaceuticals Inc.
.
ANTI-ANGIOGENESIS COMPANIES
Aeterna Laboratories Inc.
Celgene Corp.
EntreMed Inc.
Magainin Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Oxigene Inc.
Ribozyme Pharmaceuticals Inc.
.
GENE THERAPY COMPANIES
Avigen Inc.
Cell Genesys Inc.
Genta Inc.
Isis Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc.
Targeted Genetics Corp.
Valentis Inc.
Vical Inc.
Source: Stephens Inc. Investment Bankers

    E-mail Tom Abate at tabate@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, CHART: SEE END OF TEXT, Graphic: BILL RUSSELL / Chronicle
Graphic

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             211 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   September 19, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 994 words

HEADLINE: 100% guarantee: No drug-free Olympics now, tomorrow

BYLINE: Charles E. Yesalis

BODY:

   The 2000 Olympic Games will be "100% clean."

   The resolute statement by International Olympic Committee (IOC)
chairman Juan Antonio Samaranch followed the unveiling this summer
of its miracle cure for drug use at the Sydney Games in the form
of not one, but two tests for the previously undetectable erythropoietin
(EPO) -- a drug that boosts the production of oxygen-carrying
red blood cells, thereby improving endurance.

   News in recent days might suggest that the IOC's hard-line stance
against drugs is having some impact:

   Over the weekend, two members of the Romanian weightlifting team
were removed from the Games after they failed drug tests.

   Earlier, China dumped 40 athletes and officials from its Olympic
team, some of them for failing blood tests for the banned EPO.
And an Uzbekistan Olympic team official was caught bringing into
Sydney what custom agents believe was a human growth hormone,
which helps build muscles.

   Unfortunately, this isn't the first time the IOC has claimed that
the problem was fixed. In 1996, before the Atlanta Games, the
IOC wheeled out the "new and amazing" high-resolution mass spectrometer,
a device touted as being so sensitive it would catch anyone who
dared to use drugs. It didn't work.

   The use of performance-enhancing drugs by Olympic athletes has
continued at epidemic levels for more than four decades. Today,
doping is pandemic among male and female athletes in endurance,
sprint and strength sports.

   Rightfully, the press is giving illegal drug use the scrutiny
it deserves. From the 1960s to the late 1980s, media coverage
of doping was limited, for the most part, to the rumored drug
use among East German and Soviet athletes. It wasn't until Canadian
Ben Johnson tested positive for anabolic steroids in the 1988
Seoul Games that the news media's approach to doping became visibly
more aggressive.

   The saga continued in the early 1990s, when unearthed Stasi files
provided a clear picture of systematic doping by East Germany,
yet only one of its athletes ever tested positive. During the
late 1990s, the picture of elite sports, beset by rampant doping,
came further into focus with a series of widely publicized drug-related
scandals. The most damaging of these was the extensive involvement
in systematic doping by cyclists, coaches, physicians and trainers
participating in the 1998 Tour de France.

   The sordidness of these unceasing doping scandals is at great
odds with the image of purity and fair play used to market the
Olympic Games. Consequently, the IOC was compelled to respond.

   First, it created the World Anti-Doping Agency -- an organization
reputedly independent of the IOC, but headed by the current vice
president of marketing for the IOC. Second, the IOC unveiled the
two new tests for EPO use. But does this mean that, with cheaters
already caught, the rest of the 2000 Olympics will be "100% clean"?

   Not only is the answer no, but the Games are at least as drug
laden as any of the preceding Games. Consider:

   * Large sums of money are at stake.

   * Competition is extremely close; a hundredth of a second
or a millimeter can be the margin of victory.

   * Many of the drugs used by elite athletes do indeed enhance
performance.

   * There are no tests currently for either human growth
hormone or IGF-1, a related hormone. Both of these are used by
athletes desiring to improve muscle mass and strength and decrease
body fat.

   * Athletes who self-administer testosterone via skin gels
and creams are unlikely to test positive.

   To have an EPO test in time for the Sydney Games, the scientific
review process established over the past three centuries was,
at best, accelerated and, at worst, short-circuited. Proving an
athlete has used EPO isn't easy, and certainly will be open to
legal action, because:

   * An athlete has to flunk both tests before he or
she is declared positive. Because one of the tests is only sensitive
to EPO taken during the past three or four days -- and because
optimal use of EPO requires injection several weeks prior to competition
-- chances are slim anyone will be caught. If the IOC uses a positive
on only one test to accuse an athlete, a legal challenge certainly
will follow.

   * It has been rumored that athletes have turned to EPO-substitutes
such as Hemopure, a new ultra-purified hemoglobin-like substance
from cattle, with a strong oxygen affinity.

   * If an athlete is nervous about these new tests or the
potential health effects of substitute drugs, he simply could
revert to an equally effective procedure for which there is no
test: blood doping. That's the re-infusion of an athlete's own
packed red blood cells (or the infusion of a type-matched donor's)
shortly before competition begins.

   So what does the future hold for Olympic sport? There is good
news and bad.

   The good news is that in 10 years or so doping as we know it may
no longer exist. The bad news is that athletes with assistance
from scientists likely will use genetic therapy rather than drugs
to re-engineer their bodies. "Brave New World" technology will
probably use a virus to deliver modified genes to specific cell
types of an athlete, resulting in improved strength, endurance,
reaction time or who knows what else.

   Beyond the high-tech horizon, an important question is often overlooked:
Does anyone really care about the epidemic of doping in sport?

   After 22 years studying this topic, I have concluded that at the
elite level average fans don't really care. They simply wish to
be entertained. Oh, they might say they disapprove of drug use
in sport. No doubt, many do. The real question: Do they disapprove
enough to turn off their television?

   Charles E. Yesalis, is a professor of health and human development
at Penn State University. He is the author of a new book, Anabolic
Steroids in Sport and Exercise.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, b/w, Web Bryant, USA TODAY(Illustration)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             212 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   September 19, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 865 words

HEADLINE: Penn Researchers Sued In Gene Therapy Death; Teen's Parents Also Name
Ethicist as Defendant

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   The family of Tucson teenager Jesse Gelsinger, the first person to die from
gene therapy, yesterday sued the research team involved in the deadly experiment
and, in an unusual move, the ethicist who offered moral advice on the
controversial project.

   The complaint, filed a year and a day after the 18-year-old's death at the
University of Pennsylvania, was based on revelations over the past year of
serious scientific and regulatory lapses in the experiment, which attempted to
give corrective genes to people with a rare liver disorder.

   But the inclusion of the ethicist as a defendant alongside the scientists and
school was a surprising legal move that puts this relatively new specialty on
notice that its members could be vulnerable to litigation over the philosophical
guidance they provide to researchers. Other ethicists said they could not recall
an instance in which one of their colleagues had been named individually in a
lawsuit alleging, in effect, moral negligence.

   The lawsuit, filed in state court in Philadelphia, also names the firm of
Genovo Inc., a biotech firm founded by lead scientist James Wilson, which had a
stake in the successful outcome of the experiment. It seeks unspecified
compensatory and punitive damages and contends the defendants acted negligently,
recklessly or fraudulently in their recruitment and treatment of Gelsinger.

   The ethicist, Arthur Caplan, is the director of bioethics at Penn and a
well-known, often-quoted leader in his field. He declined to comment on the
complaint. He became involved early in the planning stages for the experiment.
Wilson and his investigators approached him about their plans to test the safety
of a genetically engineered virus on babies with a deadly form of the liver
disorder, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. The disorder allows poisonous
levels of ammonia to build up in the blood system.

   Caplan steered the researchers away from sick infants, arguing that desperate
parents could not provide true informed consent. He said it would be better to
experiment on adults with a less lethal form of the disease who were relatively
healthy. Gelsinger fell into that category. Although he had suffered serious
bouts of ammonia buildup, he was doing well on a special drug and diet regimen.

   The decision to use relatively healthy adults was controversial because
risky, unproven experiments generally use desperately ill people who have
exhausted more traditional treatments, so have little to lose. In this case, the
virus used to deliver the genes was known to cause liver damage, so some
scientists were concerned it might trigger an ammonia crisis in the adults.

   The Gelsingers' attorney, Alan Milstein, said Caplan also helped the
researchers write the informed-consent form, which is supposed to detail the
risks to participants. The lawsuit contends that the consent form given to
Gelsinger underestimated the risk of the experiment, left out crucial
information about liver damage suffered by earlier volunteers in the experiment
and failed to mention the deaths of monkeys given a similar treatment during
pre-clinical studies.

   "The informed-consent document in no way informed Jesse and his family as to
the true nature of the risks," Milstein said.

   A Food and Drug Administration investigation after Gelsinger's death found
numerous regulatory violations by Wilson's team, including the failure to stop
the experiment and inform the FDA after four successive volunteers suffered
serious liver damage prior to the teen's treatment.

   In addition, the FDA said Gelsinger didn't qualify for the experiment,
because his blood ammonia levels were too high just before he underwent the
infusion of genetic material. His condition quickly and dramatically
deteriorated over four days until his death on Sept. 17, 1999. The FDA suspended
all human gene experiments by Wilson earlier this year, and Penn subsequently
restricted him to animal studies. A follow-up FDA investigation now alleges he
improperly tested the experimental treatment on animals.

   The lawsuit also details business entanglements that Milstein said clouded
the judgments of the university, the medical dean and Wilson. Both the
university and Wilson had equity stakes in Genovo, which in turn had a financial
interest in the genetically altered virus being tested in the experiment. Wilson
and the former medical dean, William Kelley, also a defendant, had patents on
some aspects of the procedure, the suit says.

   Other defendants are co-investigator Steven Raper of Penn and co-investigator
Mark Batshaw of the Children's National Medical Center in the District. The suit
also names Children's National Medical Center, as an institution involved in the
experiment, and the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   In a written statement released late yesterday, Penn acknowledged
"weaknesses" in its research program but said "the University continues to
believe that these weaknesses did not contribute to Jesse's death." It also said
the university is negotiating with the Gelsinger family about a possible
settlement.

   A spokeswoman for the Children's National Medical Center declined to comment.


LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000


                             213 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    September 18, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words

HEADLINE: OLYMPICS AGAIN PUT OFT-ABUSED AMGEN DRUG UNDER SCRUTINY;
 PHARMACEUTICALS: EPOGEN, CREATED TO TREAT CHRONIC ANEMIA, IS HARD TO TRACE AND
IS USED ILLEGALLY BY ATHLETES TO BOOST PERFORMANCE.

BYLINE: ASHLEY DUNN, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   The start of the Summer Olympics in Australia has recast the spotlight on
biotech giant Amgen Inc., the discoverer, producer and licenser of what has
become one of the most abused sports-performance drugs in history: Epogen.

   In the 11-year history of Epogen--the brand name for a drug that mimics the
natural hormone known as erythropoietin (EPO)--Thousand Oaks-based Amgen has
faced sporadic complaints over its refusal to make the drug traceable through
drug testing.

   Because Epogen is so similar to natural EPO, it has been an extremely
effective drug, but also one that is difficult to identify, making it hugely
popular among athletes.

   "Drug use on the elite level is rampant," said Charles Yesalis, a professor
at Penn State University and an expert on the International Olympic Committee
anti-doping efforts. "EPO can give a 5% to 15% enhancement. You can't afford not
to do this."

   Athletes have been suspected of illegally using EPO to enhance their
performance in everything from the Tour de France to the Olympics.

   Amgen developed the drug to treat chronic anemia in patients suffering from
kidney disease.

   Before Epogen, many kidney dialysis patients had to undergo repeated blood
transfusions to increase their level of red blood cells, which transport oxygen
throughout the body. Epogen became a wonder drug, allowing bedridden patients to
lead normal lives and turning Amgen into a biotechnology giant.

   Amgen has been confronted many times with the use of EPO as a black-market
sports drug. But the company maintains that its priority is in producing an
effective medical drug--one that has proven to be a breakthrough in the
treatment of anemia. The drug is manufactured only by Amgen and its licensees.

   Amgen spokesman David Kaye said the company has had sporadic contact with
sports organizations in the past and is aware of the occasional calls for Amgen
to add a chemical marker to Epogen so it can be easily identified.

   But he said that idea has been rejected because it would be costly to
develop, possibly requiring new government approval.

   "It would essentially be a new drug," Kaye said. "Changing the drug would
change what is put into the human body . . . . We're not in the drug-testing
business. We develop human therapeutics for sick people."

   The Food and Drug Administration said any significant change to a drug
typically requires proof that the product is still safe and effective. But the
agency added that it had no way of determining at this point whether adding a
marker would be a significant alteration.

   Kaye said Amgen, the world's biggest biotechnology company, has spent
significant effort educating doctors and patients on the use of Epogen, but
policing the abuse of EPO by athletes is beyond the company's responsibilities.
"Anybody can abuse any drug," he said.

   EPO accounted for $ 1.8 billion in Amgen's sales last year--more than half of
the company's annual sales.

   When Amgen was formed, its research team quickly took aim at erythropoietin.
It had long been known that the hormone, which is naturally produced in the
kidneys, stimulated the production of red blood cells by bone marrow.

   Amgen researchers, using genetic engineering techniques, located the gene
responsible for EPO production and then developed a method using hamster ovary
cells to produce the hormone.

   The drug won the approval of the FDA in 1989 and was soon discovered by
athletes as a way to improve their performance.

   The idea is that a higher concentration of red blood cells allows the blood
to carry more oxygen and thus improve endurance.

   Before EPO, athletes used to extract their own blood and freeze it so they
could infuse themselves with extra blood just before a competition. This process
of "blood doping" was banned by the Olympic Committee in the mid-1980s.

   EPO provided an easy way around the ban, although it came with a risk.

   High concentrations of red blood cells can cause the blood to thicken,
leading to the possibility of heart attacks and strokes, particularly during
hard exercise.

   EPO use has been sporadically blamed for the deaths of some athletes,
although there has been no conclusive proof.

   The potential risks have not stopped athletes from using the drug. Its use
has become widespread in some sports.

   The most sordid example came in the 1998 Tour de France, the grueling
three-week bicycle race that is considered the most trying endurance competition
in the world.

   That year, the top-rated Festina team from France was expelled from the race
after French customs agents discovered hundreds of vials of EPO and other
performance-boosting drugs in a team car. Seven out of the 20 teams entered in
the Tour eventually dropped out of the race.

   After a decade, the IOC has begun to crack down on EPO use, saying last month
that it will test for the drug at the Summer Olympics using two recently
developed methods.

   The IOC is the first major sports enterprise to begin widespread EPO testing.

   The committee said it will test at least 300--and perhaps as many as 700
athletes--during the Sydney Olympics for EPO.

   But experts say the IOC's testing will probably do little to blunt the use of
EPO because it will reach less than 10% of the athletes involved in the
Olympics.

   In addition, the two-part test used by the IOC--one for blood and another for
urine--almost guarantees that few athletes will be caught.

   The committee is requiring positive results in both tests for an athlete to
be banned.

   The blood test can detect EPO weeks after the drug was used, but the urine
test goes back only three days.

   "Only the silliest of athletes are going to get caught," professor Yesalis
said. "Unless you are exceedingly careless or stupid, this won't have a
deterrent effect."

   Yesalis said he did not believe it was Amgen's responsibility to police the
use of EPO. His position was echoed by John Hoberman, a sport historian and
doping expert who is a professor at the University of Texas in Austin.

   "It's the responsibility of the sports world to clean up its own mess,"
Hoberman said.

   But Hoberman said the sports organizations have so far shown little will to
eradicate the problem.

   "After 15 years of watching this, I don't see a cast of sports bureaucrats
with the effectiveness or ambition to take this on," he said. "Those people are
not up to the job."

   Hoberman said that EPO and other performance-enhancing drugs that have become
widespread because of genetic engineering are only the beginning.

   Breakthroughs in gene therapy may soon make it possible to alter the genetic
makeup of athletes to enhance such abilities as reaction time, muscle bulk and
strength.

   "We have a choice now," he said. "It's a choice between sports for human
athletes or creatures."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (2 photos), EPO can boost performances by 5% to 15%. Lab
technician Stephen Cork, right, tests urine samples at the Australian Sports
Drug Testing Laboratory.  PHOTOGRAPHER: Reuters PHOTO: (2 photos), EPO can boost
performances by 5% to 15%. Lab technician Stephen Cork, right, tests urine
samples at the Australian Sports Drug Testing Laboratory.  PHOTOGRAPHER:
Associated Press PHOTO: Cyclists use EPO because it increases the amount of
oxygen in the bloodstream. An EPO scandal marred the 1998 Tour de France.
PHOTOGRAPHER: Reuters

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2000


                             214 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 18, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: GERMAN SCIENTISTS FIND OPPORTUNITY HERE

BYLINE: Peter Riesbeck, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Biologist Roland Herzog left Germany at age 22. Now, eight years later - at
an age when most of his German colleagues have yet to get their doctoral degrees
- he holds a doctorate, is an assistant professor at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, and has published articles in major scientific journals.

   Herzog, who grew up in a small village in the southwestern part of the
country, knew even as a child that he wanted to be a scientist. But the road to
a university teaching job in Germany is long and frustrating - many years beyond
what is required in the United States - and the opportunities are limited.

   So the young scientist came to the United States, where a quarter of all
doctoral students are from abroad. The reasons vary from country to country,
although the good training offered by American universities is a draw for many.

   At the University of Pennsylvania, for example, 4,529 students are pursuing
doctoral or postdoctoral degrees. Of those, 1,763, including 813 Asians, come
from foreign countries. Seventy-four are from Germany.

   Rainer Wiewrodt is one of them. "In the U.S., labs have many talented
researchers from everywhere," says Wiewrodt, a physician who is studying
possible gene therapy for lung cancer. "Here, there is always someone with whom
you can discuss your scientific problems."

   Wiewrodt, 33, hopes to return to Germany next year to set up a lab to try
novel approaches for treating lung cancer, including gene therapy, at the
University of Mainz Medical School. Studying in the United States can speed up
the careers of scientists when they return home. "Coming back, you are well
regarded in Germany," said Angelika Eggert, 33, who returned to Essen, near
Cologne, in May after three years at Children's Hospital.

   "Most physicians in Germany regard research as a private hobby after your
daily work in the hospital," says Eggert. "That's different in the U.S. You are
encouraged to do research work."

   Also different is the hierarchy of German universities, especially medical
schools. "As a student, your point of view about scientific questions is not
really accepted," Eggert says. But "American professors want you to say what you
think about a scientific problem and encourage you to find a solution."

   Eggert is just starting a lab in Essen, near Cologne, to research pediatric
cancer - her field of study at Children's Hospital - and is on track to become a
medical professor.

   Christian Peters despaired of the German hierarchy, too. After finishing
medical school in Berlin in 1992, he trained at the National Institutes of
Health in Bethesda, Md., and returned to Germany. But his boss in Berlin didn't
encourage him in his research work and his contract was not renewed.

   Two years ago, Peters came back here with his American wife. Now a research
assistant at Penn, he is hopeful that a cancer vaccine that he and his
colleagues developed will be approved for a clinical trial.

   Sitting in a third-floor meeting room in the Leonard Abramson research
building at Children's Hospital, overlooking the Schuylkill, Herzog talks
excitedly about his research.

   He is working in a lab run by Katherine A. High, who earlier this year
published results that may turn out to be one of the first successes in the
still-experimental field of gene therapy. Her team succeeded in treating
hemophilia B by delivering corrected genes into the body so that patients can
produce the lacking blood-clotting protein on their own.

   Herzog takes pens and stands in front of a magnet-board. In red, green and
blue, he draws genes and DNA sequences, speaking of "promoters" and
"terminators" and the strategy of the research team's daily research work.

   He started his studies in biology in Germany in 1989. Three years later, he
came to the United States on a scholarship and was surprised to be quickly
accepted for graduate studies at Auburn University in Alabama. "They told me I
could start directly with the Ph.D. program," he recalls.

   It was his first experience with genetics, and after getting his Ph.D. in
1996, he started post-doctoral studies at Children's Hospital. He was named an
assistant professor in July.

   Herzog's career could not have progressed so quickly in Germany, where there
is no such thing as an assistant professor, and he most likely would not have
been able to teach for years. German professors on average are 42 years old when
they get their first appointment, though the government has drafted legislation
that is expected to reform the system of higher education. As in America, there
would be positions for junior faculty.

   Herzog welcomes the reforms, but wants them to go further. He wishes
scientific research were valued more highly as well. America, the land of the
free, in his experience is also the land of science and research.

   He loves the American way of living, too. He is driving his third Pontiac
Firebird.

   Will he return to Germany? "I wouldn't know why," he says. He got his green
card, allowing permanent residency, earlier this year ("after a long fight," he
says).

   Peter Riesbeck, a reporter for the Berliner Zeitung, is completing an Arthur
Burns Fellowship at The Inquirer. His e-mail address is
priesbeck@berlinonline.de

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             215 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     September 15, 2000 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 13A

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: OHIO TEENS ARE SENSATION AT CANCER RESEARCH MEETING

BYLINE: By SABRINA EATON; PLAIN DEALER BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Northeast Ohio teenagers Ashanthi DeSilva and Cindy Cutshall prefer chatting
about their favorite rock stars to discussing why the nation's foremost medical
researchers flock to see them every September.

   As the world's first patients to successfully undergo gene therapy, the pair
have become poster children for a sometimes controversial treatment method that
doctors hope might eventually cure cancer.

   Each year, the girls are headline attractions at a National Foundation for
Cancer Research get-together on the anniversary of the day DeSilva, 14, of North
Olmsted began her gene therapy treatment at the National Institutes for Health:
Sept. 14, 1990.

   DeSilva and Cutshall, 19, of Canton, who entered the experimental program
four months later, suffered from a rare, often fatal, genetic condition called
ADA disorder that crippled their immune systems and limited their social
interactions.

   For years, the pair traveled to the NIH in Bethesda, Md., so scientists could
draw their blood, insert healthy genes into their white blood cells, and return
the altered cells to their bodies. The opportunistic infections that plagued
them stopped as the healthy white blood cells spread through their bodies. They
still receive weekly injections of an enzyme they lack, but they are otherwise
cured.

   "It was very scary," recalled Cutshall, a Kent State University sophomore who
has written two unpublished mystery novels. "We were so young. They told us what
was going on, but we didn't know what the final verdict was going to be at the
end."

   They say they hardly think of their illness anymore. DeSilva said she was too
young to even remember it. They have become typical teens who hash out the
merits of Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync in between greeting top scientists by
their first names. Cutshall, who hopes to make a career profiling serial killers
for the FBI, regularly exchanges gossipy e-mail with the researchers.

   "These girls and their families are national treasures for being the first
when there were so many unknowns," said her e-mail buddy, Dr. Kenneth Culver,
who assisted in their treatment and now heads genetic medicine efforts at
Novartis pharmaceuticals in New Jersey.

   "Without their courage, we would be making no progress at all," added another
doctor who treated them, Michael Blaese, who is now chief scientific officer of
Pennsylvania's ValiGen. "Because of their willingness to get the world started,
we will be able to generate a lot of really important therapy."

   As the girls discussed AC/DC and Jimi Hendrix, the scientists commiserated
over possible new applications for gene therapy.

   Scientists suggested that conducting research might become more difficult
after an 18-year-old boy died in a controversial University of Pennsylvania
genetic therapy experiment. They remain optimistic that gene therapy will be
widely used in coming decades to cure a variety of diseases.

   "People must realize that we are trying something experimental," said Danny
Welsh, a cancer researcher at Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine.

   Blaese said the first breakthroughs were likely to be in blood diseases such
as hemophilia, because, unlike other body parts, blood can easily be removed
from the body, altered and reinserted.

   "If you have someone with brain disease, you have to deliver treatment to the
brain," Blaese said. "The major challenge is how we get it there." Scientists
must also address the fact that some genes, like those affected by hemophilia
that produce blood clotting factors, can be in production full time, while
others, like those that produce insulin, must be turned on and off. Researchers
haven't yet figured out how to make the "on-off" genes regulate themselves as
they do in the body.

   Harvard Medical School professor Harold F. Dvorak said DeSilva and Cutshall's
ailment was easier than most to attack because it involved a single genetic
error the pair were born with. He said cancer cures were trickier because they
involve multiple genetic errors that can be caused by behavioral factors such as
smoking and an improper diet.

   "Now that mapping of the human genome is complete, it will be possible to do
a lot more research," Dvorak predicted.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2000


                             216 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 15, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 728 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Corvas drug looks promising

   Corvas International, Inc. yesterday announced positive results from a Phase
II clinical trial with its anticoagulant drug, rNAPc2. The San Diego
biotechnology company designed the drug to prevent deep vein thrombosis and
related blood-clotting complications in patients undergoing total knee
replacement surgery.  It was shown to reduce the risk of developing the
condition by greater than 50 percent vs. the current standard of care.  Corvas'
stock, which trades under the symbol CVAS, rose 20 percent to close at $17.13.

   Founder takes over as CEO

   American Technology named founder Elwood G. Norris as chairman and chief
executive officer.  The San Diego company, one of several local companies Norris
has founded, had been led since July 1998 by Cornelius Brosnan as president and
CEO. The company said Brosnan was resigning both from management and from the
board but did not disclose the reason.

   Maxim trial gets good results

   Maxim Pharmaceuticals yesterday announced positive results from a Phase II
study of its lead drug, Maxamine, in a combination therapy to treat hepatitis C.
The San Diego biotechnology company said it plans to launch two final, Phase III
clinical trials in collaboration with partners with F. Hoffmann-La Roche.
Maxim's stock, which trades under the symbol MAXM, fell 8 percent to close at
$61.25.

   Collateral to fund research

   Collateral Therapeutics, Inc. said that it plans to support the establishment
of a research chair at the recently formed UCSD Cardiovascular Center.  The
research chair, funded out of a contribution of up to 50,000 shares of
Collateral stock to the UC San Diego Foundation, will focus on research in
non-surgical cardiovascular gene therapy.  Based on the biotechnology company's
closing price of $23.38 yesterday, the stock earmarked for the UCSD chair is
worth more than $1.1 million.

   Conexant plan excites investors

   Shares of Conexant Systems Inc. surged yesterday after it said it will spin
off its business that makes software and semiconductors used to operate the
Internet into a new, fully independent company.  The split, announced Wednesday
by the Newport Beach-based firm, will allow the remaining company to focus on
developing chips and software for the rapidly growing market for Internet-ready
mobile phones and broadband devices for the home.  Such devices include cable
and satellite set-top boxes and high-speed Internet modems.  Conexant shares
rose $15.56 to $52.63 on the Nasdaq Stock Market.

   Invitrogen completes deal

   Invitrogen said yesterday that it has completed its previously announced
acquisition of Dexter Corporation and Life Technologies Inc. The Carlsbad
biotechnology company also announced that International Specialty Products,
Inc., the holder of approximately 3.5 million shares of Life Technologies stock,
has demanded an appraisal by the Delaware Chancery Court of the fair value of
its Life Technologies shares.  The merger ends a seven-month takeover battle for
Dexter.  Invitrogen's stock, which trades under the symbol IVGN, rose 8 percent
to close at $57.31.

   Teradyne acquires Herco Tech

   Boston-based Teradyne has acquired San Diego-based Herco Technology, which
makes printed circuit boards, in a previously announced deal.  Teradyne also
bought Synthane Taylor, a La Verne supplier of printed circuit board laminates
that is a major supplier to Herco.

   WORLD AND NATION

   2 firms target beauty products

   Intimate Brands, which operates Victoria's Secret and Bath & Body Works
stores, and Shiseido Co. Ltd., a leading Japanese cosmetic manufacturer, have
formed a joint venture to develop, market and sell new lines of beauty products.
The concept, product lines and store design will be finalized in the next 12
months.  The first store is expected to open in the United States in fall of
2001.

   Mortgage rates edge down

   Mortgage rates edged down this week, with rates on 30-year mortgages below
the 8 percent mark for the fifth week in a row.  The average interest rate on
30-year fixed-rate mortgages slipped to 7.88 percent from 7.94 percent last
week.  Fifteen-year mortgages dipped to an average 7.60 percent from 7.65
percent.  On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average
initial rate of 7.26 percent, down from 7.33 percent.


LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2001


                             217 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 15, 2000 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Corvas drug looks promising Corvas International,
Inc. yesterday announced positive results from a Phase II clinical trial with
its anticoagulant drug, rNAPc2. The San Diego biotechnology company designed the
drug to prevent deep vein thrombosis and related blood-clotting complications in
patients undergoing total knee replacement surgery.

   It was shown to reduce the risk of developing the condition by greater than
50 percent vs. the current standard of care. Corvas' stock, which trades under
the symbol CVAS, rose 20 percent to close at $17.13. Founder takes over as CEO
American Technology named founder Elwood G. Norris as chairman and chief
executive officer.

   The San Diego company, one of several local companies Norris has founded, had
been led since July 1998 by Cornelius Brosnan as president and CEO. The company
said Brosnan was resigning both from management and from the board but did not
disclose the reason. Maxim trial gets good results Maxim Pharmaceuticals
yesterday announced positive results from a Phase II study of its lead drug,
Maxamine, in a combination therapy to treat hepatitis C. The San Diego
biotechnology company said it plans to launch two final, Phase III clinical
trials in collaboration with partners with F. Hoffmann-La Roche.

   Maxim's stock, which trades under the symbol MAXM, fell 8 percent to close at
$61.25. Collateral to fund research Collateral Therapeutics, Inc. said that it
plans to support the establishment of a research chair at the recently formed
UCSD Cardiovascular Center.

   The research chair, funded out of a contribution of up to 50,000 shares of
Collateral stock to the UC San Diego Foundation, will focus on research in
non-surgical cardiovascular gene therapy.

   Based on the biotechnology company's closing price of $23.38 yesterday, the
stock earmarked for the UCSD chair is worth more than $1.1 million. Conexant
plan excites investors Shares of Conexant Systems Inc. surged yesterday after it
said it will spin off its business that makes software and semiconductors used
to operate the Internet into a new, fully independent company.

   The split, announced Wednesday by the Newport Beach-based firm, will allow
the remaining company to focus on developing chips and software for the rapidly
growing market for Internet-ready mobile phones and broadband devices for the
home.

   Such devices include cable and satellite set-top boxes and high-speed
Internet modems.

   Conexant shares rose $15.56 to $52.63 on the Nasdaq Stock Market. Invitrogen
completes deal Invitrogen said yesterday that it has completed its previously
announced acquisition of Dexter Corporation and Life Technologies Inc. The
Carlsbad biotechnology company also announced that International Specialty
Products, Inc., the holder of approximately 3.5 million shares of Life
Technologies stock, has demanded an appraisal by the Delaware Chancery Court of
the fair value of its Life Technologies shares.

   The merger ends a seven-month takeover battle for Dexter.

   Invitrogen's stock, which trades under the symbol IVGN, rose 8 percent to
close at $57.31. Teradyne acquires Herco Tech Boston-based Teradyne has acquired
San Diego-based Herco Technology, which makes printed circuit boards, in a
previously announced deal.

   Teradyne also bought Synthane Taylor, a La Verne supplier of printed circuit
board laminates that is a major supplier to Herco. WORLD AND NATION 2 firms
target beauty products Intimate Brands, which operates Victoria's Secret and
Bath & Body Works stores, and Shiseido Co. Ltd., a leading Japanese cosmetic
manufacturer, have formed a joint venture to develop, market and sell new lines
of beauty products.

   The concept, product lines and store design will be finalized in the next 12
months.

   The first store is expected to open in the United States in fall of 2001.
Mortgage rates edge down Mortgage rates edged down this week, with rates on
30-year mortgages below the 8 percent mark for the fifth week in a row.

   The average interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages slipped to 7.88
percent from 7.94 percent last week.

   Fifteen-year mortgages dipped to an average 7.60 percent from 7.65 percent.

   On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial
rate of 7.26 percent, down from 7.33 percent.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             218 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           September 15, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 607 words

HEADLINE: Star power joins stem cell debate

BYLINE: JESSE J. HOLLAND, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Michael J. Fox and Mary Tyler Moore urged lawmakers yesterday to release
federal funding for research involving embryonic stem cells, which the actors
say could lead to cures for diseases such as Parkinson's, juvenile diabetes and
Alzheimer's.

    "The consistent and inescapable conclusion is that this research offers the
potential to eliminate diseases, literally saving millions of lives," said Fox,
who just won an Emmy for the ABC sitcom "Spin City." "I can't help but say,
respectfully, enough! It's time to act on what we've learned. . . . Further
delay would come at a high price."

    Fox left the show in May to devote more time to fighting Parkinson's, a
progressive neurological disorder that he has contracted.

    Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-Miss.) has promised a vote within the
month on legislation allowing funding for research on stem cells from discarded
human embryos, said Sen. Arlen Specter (R- Pa.), chairman of the Appropriations
Committee's Health and Human Services panel.

    "I believe we have the votes," said Sen. Tom Harkin (D-Iowa), who
co-sponsored Specter's legislation. "I hope we have the votes."

    However, critics oppose the research, calling it illegal, immoral and
unnecessary.

    "If a cure for diabetes and a host of other ailments require the production
and destruction of human embryos, then I beg you to consider the possibility
that some diseases are better than their cure," said Russell Saltzman, pastor of
Ruskin Heights Lutheran Church in Kansas City, Mo.

    At issue are embryonic stem cells, the master cells that in very early
embryos generate all the other tissues of the body. Scientists think those stem
cells possibly could cure diseases like Alzheimer's, diabetes or Parkinson's, or
even repair broken spinal cords.

    But the federal government has not funded any research into embryonic stem
cells because of a congressional ban on any research that destroys human
embryos. Taking stem cells from embryos does destroy them.

    The National Institutes of Health has proposed allowing federal funding of
research on stem cells that are removed from human embryos but forbidding
research on the embryo itself.

    Specter's legislation would go further, letting women agree to donate to
federally funded researchers their leftover embryos from in-vitro fertilization.
But Saltzman, who has diabetes, said just because the embryos were going to be
discarded doesn't mean it is right to use them for medical research. "We should
not use human life for the benefit of human life," he said.

    Harkin noted that the embryos in question are no bigger than the period at
the end of a sentence.

   "The embryos that are being discussed, according to science, bear as much
resemblance to a human being as a goldfish," said Moore, star of "The Mary Tyler
Moore Show" that aired from 1970 to 1977. "We're dealing with flesh and blood
people now who feel and deal with real debilitation right now, and our
obligation is to those who are here," said Moore, who suffers from juvenile
diabetes and chairs the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation International.

    Others disagreed. "I'm not opposed to research," said Ron Heagy, who is a
quadriplegic, paralyzed from the neck down. "I'm not opposed to walking again.
I'm just opposed to the process."

   Darwin Prockop, director of gene therapy at the Tulane University Medical
Center, said researchers are getting close to major breakthroughs with adult
stem cell research, with clinical trials on patients with Parkinson's expected
in two or three years. But Prockop said embryonic cell research should proceed.
Fox and Moore testify in favor of funding for research on discarded human
embryos

GRAPHIC: 1. Mary Tyler Moore and Michael J. Fox, appearing on Capitol Hill, want
federal funding for research of embryonic stem cells.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             219 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                    September 14, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 022

LENGTH: 487 words

HEADLINE: Feds propose fines, reform for gene therapy research

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   Responding to a rash of problems involving gene therapy experiments, Donna
Shalala, secretary of health and human services, vowed today to pursue
legislation that could result in fines of $ 250,000 to $ 1 million per violation
of rules designed to protect human research subjects.

   "Recent developments leave me little choice," Shalala wrote in an opinion
piece in today's New England Journal of Medicine.

   She said researchers who violate study protocols or other rules aimed at
protecting subjects would be fined up to $ 250,000 each, while hospitals would
be subject to $ 1 million fines.

   The unsolicited editorial by the outgoing federal Health and Human Services
chief follows the death of an 18-year-old subject in a gene therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania last year and the failure of several gene therapy
researchers to report deaths.

   In Boston, a gene therapy trial at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center was shut
down by the FDA in April after study protocols were found to have been violated.

   In her editorial, Shalala said such violations will cause public support for
gene therapy and other new medical treatments to erode. "Volunteers will not
show up and the generous stream of research dollars     provided in recent years
will shrink," she said.

   Besides the fines, Shalala announced several other federal initiatives to
help address the problem and called on universities and hospitals to do more.

   But medical ethicist George Annas of Boston University said Shalala's
attention to the problem comes late and said her proposals are not sufficient.

   "It's a nice death-bed conversion," he said. "But these are all things she
should have done eight years ago. The problems with research are systemic."

   Shalala said the FDA and National Institutes of Health will work to improve
education and training of researchers and members of institutional review
boards, local panels that approve studies. They will also issue specific
guidelines to make sure potential subjects are given informed consent of a
study's potential risks.

   The NIH will also require monitoring plans, particularly for small-scale
early clinical trials, and regulations on conflict of interest will be issued,
she said.

   "More and more, potential conflicts of interest arise, as academic
researchers serve as both investigators and sponsors or patent holders of
products," she wrote.

   She also challenged leaders of academic medical centers and universities to
take more responsibility, urging more oversight and the strengthening of their
own review boards.

   But Annas said the blame lies with the federal government, for lack of
oversight, and with individual researchers.

   He called for an office independent of HHS to regulate research.

   "HHS sponsors most of the research," he said. "They have a conflict of
interest."

   Annas praised the idea of the fines, however. "That will get their
attention," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2000


                             220 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 14, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1253 words

HEADLINE: A DEMANDING DECADE IN GENE-THERAPY PURSUITS TEN YEARS AGO TODAY, THE
FIRST PATIENT TEST WAS BEGUN. BUT ANOTHER ANNIVERSARY, A PENN DEATH, IS ALSO
NEARING.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Michael Blaese disputes the criticism often lobbed at gene therapy over the
last year - that it has not cured a single person and has killed one.

   Blaese, an immune-disorder specialist and chief scientific officer for a
Bucks County biotech company, cites two teenage girls who he believes are living
healthier and more active lives thanks to the earliest gene-therapy experiments.

   Ten years ago today, Blaese helped administer the first dose of gene therapy
to one of those girls - then a 4-year-old with a dysfunctional immune system.
The experiment, at the National Institutes of Health, where Blaese worked for 33
years, made national headlines.

   But Blaese, 61, who moved last year to Valigen Corp. in Newtown, said the
decade since had been sobering. The dream of correcting faulty genes has proven
much harder than he originally thought. Thousands of participants have taken
part in hundreds of trials involving hundreds of diseases all over the world,
with mixed results.

   And then, a year ago this Sunday, an Arizona teenager died in a gene-therapy
trial at the University of Pennsylvania, bringing intense scrutiny to the field.

   Amid all the controversy, Blaese thought, some individual patients have been
helped - including the first two experimental subjects.

   The first, Ashanthi DeSilva, now 14 and still living in Cleveland, was
suffering from a rare genetic disorder that prevented her from making the
antibodies she needed to fight off infections. Only about a dozen people in the
United States are known to be living with the disorder.

   She was constantly sick with pneumonia, sinus infections and intestinal
problems. She was not growing and was living in isolation to avoid germs. "The
only time she ever left her house was to see her doctor," Blaese said.

   Blaese had worked with a number of children like Ashanthi. He watched many of
them die.

   By the early 1980s, before Ashanthi was even born, Blaese and his NIH
colleagues W. French Anderson and Kenneth Culver started looking into a
futuristic concept known as gene therapy.

   Ashanthi lacked a gene responsible for the production of a single substance,
an enzyme called ADA. If the scientists could figure out how to add a working
copy of the gene to some of the cells in her bone marrow, she might be able to
start fighting infections.

   The best way they could see for getting a corrective gene into the patients'
cells was to take a virus, modify it so that it carried the new gene, and use it
to infect the patients' cells.

   The scientists spent more than five years demonstrating that the technique
would be safe - working through hundreds of experiments in petri dishes, then
with mice and monkeys, followed by 17 hearings before a government committee on
safety and ethics.

   Blaese and Culver remember Sept. 14, 1990, well - the day Ashanthi got the
experimental genes.

   "When I came upstairs with the syringe full of cells and hooked it up to her
IV line, she had had many IVs before," said Culver, now at Novartis
Pharmaceutical Co. in East Hanover, N.J. But this one carried cells that had
been genetically altered.

   Two months after the treatment, Culver said, Ashanthi's father called to say
his daughter had been healthy for the longest time in her life - six weeks. Her
newly functioning immune system appeared to be making lymphocytes, so for the
first time she had discernible lymph nodes and tonsils.

   "It was a very powerful experience being the treating physician for this
team," Culver said.

   The team treated a second girl in 1991. Cynthia Cutshall, then 8, of Canton,
Ohio, also seemed to get better.

   But cause-and-effect in these cases - as in many others - is not entirely
clear because shortly before the first experiment, other scientists had figured
out how to manufacture the enzyme the children lacked and give it as a drug.

   Both Ashanthi and Cynthia had started getting those weekly injections - and
still are, because their doctors have not wanted to risk taking them off the
drug.

   Since then, about 14 immune-disorder children around the world have been
treated with gene therapy. In some cases it seemed to work; in others it did
not.

   Blaese and Culver went on to develop a different kind of gene therapy for
glioblastoma, one of the deadliest cancers known. The results were inconclusive,
although one patient is still alive after seven years.

   That patient - along with the three scientists and the two girls from the
original experiment - is expected to make an appearance today at a conference in
Washington.

   Although the meeting is intended to look toward the future of gene therapy,
last year's death at the University of Pennsylvania cast a shadow over the
field. Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy and its director, James Wilson,
had been international leaders in gene therapy. The death led to a shutdown of
human gene-therapy trials at the institute.

   "The fallout from that has been profound," Blaese said. "It cranked up the
level of regulatory review and dried up money - people are less willing to
invest in gene therapy."

   Blaese is now pursuing a new technique akin to gene therapy but more finely
tuned. In traditional gene therapy, he said, scientists cannot direct where the
genes will go on the cell's chromosomes. "A virus just plops it down in any old
spot," he said. The new technique zeros in on the problem area and can fix a
single spelling error in the genetic code.

   But this technique has a long way to go before human experiments.

   "It's easy to fantasize," Blaese said, "but harder to make it happen in
reality."

   Faye Flam's e-mail address is fflam@phillynews.com

   A TUMULTUOUS YEAR IN GENE THERAPY The decade-old field of gene therapy has
witnessed a volatile 12 months. Successes were reported in studies of hemophilia
B at Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the so-called bubble-boy disease at
the Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris. And a spectacular failure came at
the University of Pennsylvania, which reported the first patient death as a
result of a gene-therapy trial.

   Here are the major events in the Penn case:

   * Sept. 17, 1999: Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., dies in a
gene-therapy experiment to treat ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency.
Penn halts the trial at its Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   * Dec. 8: The FDA uncovers errors in the conduct of the trial, including that
Gelsinger might not have been an eligible candidate and that two other patients
had suffered serious side effects that were not promptly reported. Penn
researchers respond that the "violations" were technicalities.

   * Jan. 21, 2000: The FDA shuts down all gene-therapy trials at the Penn
institute.

   * March 7: The FDA announces new rules for human gene-therapy research;
scientists must submit plans to monitor patient safety to the FDA and the agency
will conduct surprise inspections. The agency also announces more public
disclosure about corporate-sponsored gene-therapy trials.

   * May 24: Responding to the findings of an outside committee it had
commissioned to review the case, Penn transfers all human gene-therapy trials
from the institute to other parts of the medical school.

   * Sept. 14: U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Donna E. Shalala, in a
commentary in the New England Journal of Medicine, calls for increased patient
protections through better training and education, elimination of conflicts of
interest among scientists, and an expanded role for ethics and oversight bodies.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             221 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                          September 14, 2000 Thursday
                                 SOUTH EDITION

SECTION: IN THE TOWNS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 207 words

HEADLINE: Hadassah to hold Myrtle Wreath luncheon

BODY:

   The Southern New Jersey Region of Hadassah will hold its Myrtle Wreath Life
Membership and Associates Luncheon Oct. 29 and its Fulfillers of the Dream
Dinner Nov. 19.

    The luncheon in October will be held at noon at the Princeton Hyatt Regency,
Route 1 North and Alexander Road, West Windsor.

    The day's theme will be "Women Who Make a Difference." Highland Park Mayor
Meryl Frank will talk about what attracted her to politics, and Ruth B. Mandel,
director of the Eagleton Institute of Rutgers University, will talk about women
in politics.

    The Hadassah National Associates Award will be presented to David Burman of
North Brunswick for his accomplishments as national president of Hadassah
Associates.

    The luncheon is $27. The reservation deadline is Sept. 26. Call (732)
679-5408.

    Simon Godfrey, director of the Institute of Pulmonology and professor of
pediatrics at Hadassah University Hospital in Jerusalem, will be the featured
speaker at the Fulfillers of the Dream dinner Nov. 19, 6:30 p.m., at the
Marlboro Jewish Center.

    The charge is $60 with a minimum donation of $1,000. Proceeds will go to the
Hadassah Gene Therapy Research Department, unless the donor wishes to name
another Hadassah project.

    For reservations, call (609) 882-3815.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             222 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                         September 13, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 721 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Qualcomm rallies on China news

   Shares in San Diego's Qualcomm rallied yesterday after a Chinese government
official said his country would adopt Qualcomm's code division multiple access
technology for cellular communications.  The stock rose nearly 6 percent to
close at $61.44. Last year's darling of Nasdaq, Qualcomm's shares have slumped
since May because of lower sales in South Korea and conflicting reports over the
adoption of Qualcomm's technology in China.  The company's shares are traded
under the symbol QCOM.

   Venture Catalyst posts loss

   San Diego-based Venture Catalyst, a publicly traded management services
provider, yesterday posted a net loss of more than $1 million, or 19 cents a
share, for the year ended June 30. That compares with net income of $791,691, or
16 cents a share, in fiscal 1999. Venture Catalyst, which trades under the
symbol VCAT, said revenue increased less than one percent for the fiscal year,
to more than $14.8 million.  The company, which provides management services to
the Barona Casino and various online ventures, said net income amounted to
$462,438, or 6 cents a share, in the fourth quarter.  That compares to net
income of $902,586, or 19 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 1999.
Fourth-quarter revenue was almost $5.6 million, a 39 percent gain over the same
quarter last year.

   Judge trims Synbiotics lawsuit

   A judge dismissed two claims of patent infringement filed by San Diego-based
Synbiotics Corp. against rival Heska Corp. In a news release, Heska said a
federal court found two of Synbiotics' patent claims invalid.  The decision
removes those claims from the case.  However, a third patent infringement claim
was allowed to stand.

   Schenk sells Idec shares

   Gov. Gray Davis' chief of staff, Lynn Schenk, recently sold 30,000 shares of
Idec Pharmaceuticals for $3.9 million, according to a filing with the Securities
and Exchange Commission.  Schenk, a former San Diego congresswoman who serves on
the board of directors at San Diego-based Idec, has been criticized by some
governmental watchdog groups for a potential conflict of interest in her dual
role as government leader and for-profit industry insider.

   Collateral links with university

   Collateral Therapeutics announced yesterday that it collaborating with the
University of Texas to develop gene therapies to treat heart disease.  The San
Diego biotechnology company will exclusively license certain human genes
discovered by researchers at the university's Southwestern Medical Center and
will sponsor additional gene discovery research.

   Medicare to cover new therapy

   CardioDynamics International said its technology for determining whether
heart patients will benefit from an infusion therapy will now be reimbursed by
Medicare.  Such reimbursement can be a crucial step for many companies in
winning acceptance from doctors and insurers for a new therapy or medical
procedure.  The San Diego medical device company said its noninvasive digital
heart monitoring system, dubbed BioZ, offers heart patients an alternative to a
more invasive procedure.  CardioDynamics' stock, which trades under the symbol
CDIC, rose 7 percent, to close at $5.94.

   Ontro wins Army contract

   Ontro Inc. of Poway, which has developed patented technology self-heating
containers, has been awarded a contract by the U.S. Army to conduct research for
heating military rations.  Terms of the contract were not disclosed.  The
company received the award after the Army purchased Ontro's product two years
ago.  The test will involve rations for 18-person platoons.  The company shares,
which trade on the Nasdaq as ONTR, closed up 6 cents yesterday at $2.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Tech stocks surrender gains

   Stocks were mixed yesterday, with blue chips drifting higher and technology
issues giving up early gains, as investors remained uneasy about third-quarter
earnings.  The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 37.74 at 11,233.23. The
Nasdaq composite index fell 46.84 to 3,849.51 and the Standard & Poor's 500
index was down 7.27 at 1,481.99. The major indexes changed course several times
during the day, reflecting the uncertainty many investors feel in advance of
corporate earnings reports due to be released over the next six weeks.


LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2000


                             223 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          September 13, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 704 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Qualcomm rallies on China news Shares in San Diego's
Qualcomm rallied yesterday after a Chinese government official said his country
would adopt Qualcomm's code division multiple access technology for cellular
communications.

   The stock rose nearly 6 percent to close at $61.44. Last year's darling of
Nasdaq, Qualcomm's shares have slumped since May because of lower sales in South
Korea and conflicting reports over the adoption of Qualcomm's technology in
China. The company's shares are traded under the symbol QCOM. Venture Catalyst
posts loss San Diego-based Venture Catalyst, a publicly traded management
services provider, yesterday posted a net loss of more than $1 million, or 19
cents a share, for the year ended June 30. That compares with net income of
$791,691, or 16 cents a share, in fiscal 1999. Venture Catalyst, which trades
under the symbol VCAT, said revenue increased less than one percent for the
fiscal year, to more than $14.8 million.

   The company, which provides management services to the Barona Casino and
various online ventures, said net income amounted to $462,438, or 6 cents a
share, in the fourth quarter.

   That compares to net income of $902,586, or 19 cents a share, in the fourth
quarter of 1999. Fourth-quarter revenue was almost $5.6 million, a 39 percent
gain over the same quarter last year. Judge trims Synbiotics lawsuit A judge
dismissed two claims of patent infringement filed by San Diego-based Synbiotics
Corp. against rival Heska Corp. In a news release, Heska said a federal court
found two of Synbiotics' patent claims invalid. The decision removes those
claims from the case.

   However, a third patent infringement claim was allowed to stand. Schenk sells
Idec shares Gov. Gray Davis' chief of staff, Lynn Schenk, recently sold 30,000
shares of Idec Pharmaceuticals for $3.9 million, according to a filing with the
Securities and Exchange Commission.

   Schenk, a former San Diego congresswoman who serves on the board of directors
at San Diego-based Idec, has been criticized by some governmental watchdog
groups for a potential conflict of interest in her dual role as government
leader and for-profit industry insider. Collateral links with university
Collateral Therapeutics announced yesterday that it collaborating with the
University of Texas to develop gene therapies to treat heart disease.

   The San Diego biotechnology company will exclusively license certain human
genes discovered by researchers at the university's Southwestern Medical Center
and will sponsor additional gene discovery research. Medicare to cover new
therapy CardioDynamics International said its technology for determining whether
heart patients will benefit from an infusion therapy will now be reimbursed by
Medicare.

   Such reimbursement can be a crucial step for many companies in winning
acceptance from doctors and insurers for a new therapy or medical procedure.

   The San Diego medical device company said its noninvasive digital heart
monitoring system, dubbed BioZ, offers heart patients an alternative to a more
invasive procedure.

   CardioDynamics' stock, which trades under the symbol CDIC, rose 7 percent, to
close at $5.94. Ontro wins Army contract Ontro Inc. of Poway, which has
developed patented technology self-heating containers, has been awarded a
contract by the U.S. Army to conduct research for heating military rations.

   Terms of the contract were not disclosed.

   The company received the award after the Army purchased Ontro's product two
years ago.

   The test will involve rations for 18-person platoons.

   The company shares, which trade on the Nasdaq as ONTR, closed up 6 cents
yesterday at $2. WORLD AND NATION Tech stocks surrender gains Stocks were mixed
yesterday, with blue chips drifting higher and technology issues giving up early
gains, as investors remained uneasy about third-quarter earnings.

   The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 37.74 at 11,233.23. The Nasdaq
composite index fell 46.84 to 3,849.51 and the Standard & Poor's 500 index was
down 7.27 at 1,481.99. The major indexes changed course several times during the
day, reflecting the uncertainty many investors feel in advance of corporate
earnings reports due to be released over the next six weeks.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             224 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     SEPTEMBER 12, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. F01

LENGTH: 598 words

HEADLINE: GENE-THERAPY FIRM FETCHES $120 MILLION BIOTECH LEADER HUMAN GENOME
SCIENCES BUYS A TINY NORRISTOWN FIRM WITH A PROMISING TECHNOLOGY.

BYLINE: Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A global pharmaceutical company spent $100 million on a better way to
administer biotechnology drugs, and then abandoned the effort.

   A bitty Norristown biotechnology company picked up the project, licensing
development rights last year with the help of about $10 million in venture
capital funds.

   Yesterday, the technology landed in big brash biotech, with the announcement
that the Norristown company, Principia Pharmaceutical Corp., has been acquired
for $120 million in stock by Human Genome Sciences Inc., of Rockville, Md. The
purchase was effective Friday.

   Human Genome Sciences, which has 600 employees to Principia's 21, is the
world's front-runner in using emerging knowledge of genes to develop drugs. Its
aggressive patenting of genes and discovery of drugs based on those patents has
given it a high-flying reputation, three gene-based drugs in clinical trials,
and about $850 million for research, development and expansion. Last week, the
firm announced plans to sell up to $1 billion worth of stock to fund additional
growth.

   What the Maryland firm didn't have until it bought Principia (pronounced
prin-si-PEE-a) was a good way to make the drugs effective in people.

   The drugs in Human Genome Sciences' pipeline include Mirostipen, to reduce
anemia and infections in people undergoing chemotherapy, and Repifermin, to
speed the healing of chronic wounds.

   But all of its drugs are proteins, and that poses some nagging problems. They
must be injected, rather than taken orally, to be at all effective, and, even
then, they soon lose their potency. That means injections must be frequent -
which alarms patients - and doses must be high, which increases side effects.

   Principia's solution is a method of fusing the drug to an albumin, a
different type of protein that lasts longer in the body. That should reduce the
need for injections, reduce side effects, and improve the drugs' effectiveness,
Principia's founder, Christopher P. Prior, said.

   The acquisition was the culmination of a whirlwind courtship that began in
late July when the two companies began talking about a joint venture in drug
development. Both sides got along so well, and saw such potential for a marriage
between the technologies, that they began thinking acquisition almost
immediately, said Prior and Arthur M. Mandell, Human Genome Sciences' senior
vice president for corporate and business development,

   "Had it been any other company, I'd have thought twice," Prior said. "But
their way of thinking, their vision of how to develop this technology to the
fullest extent, was exactly what was on our minds."

   Under Human Genome Sciences, Principia will continue to develop its
drug-delivery system for use with a variety of drugs made by many manufacturers,
including drugs for treating hepatitis C and growth-hormone deficiencies.

   Prior will run Principia and hold the title of president. David R. King, a
former partner at Morgan Lewis & Bockius in Philadelphia who became Principia's
chief executive officer just three weeks ago, is out of a job. Yesterday, King
said he was excited about the merger, and would be seeking another job.

   The major pharmaceutical company that developed Principia's protein-fusion
technology was Aventis Behring L.L.C., formerly Centeon L.L.C., in King of
Prussia. This was a joint venture of Collegeville's Rhone-Poulenc-Rorer Inc. and
Germany's Hoechst AG. Hoechst merged last year with Rhone-Poulenc-Rorer's parent
company, Rhone-Poulenc S.A., to form Aventis.

   Andrea Knox's e-mail address is aknox@phillynews.com

CORRECTION-DATE: SEPTEMBER 13, 2000

CORRECTION:
CLEARING THE RECORD, PUBLISHED SEPTEMBER 13, 2000, FOLLOWS:
 Principia Pharmaceutical Corp. was incorrectly described as a gene-therapy firm
in a headline yesterday. Principia's method for delivering drugs more
effectively does not involve altering the genetic structure of the patient.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             225 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                September 11, 2000, Monday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH & FITNESS; Pg. 53

LENGTH: 1566 words

HEADLINE: SICKLE CELL - PAINS AND GAINS Racial prejudice complicates some patien
ts' lives, but new treatments show promise

BYLINE: BY AMANDA GARDNER DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
Ivor Pannell came home from the hospital one day with a prescription for an
opioid medication, Percoset, to relieve the mind-numbing pain caused by his
sickle cell anemia.

   He called the pharmacy closest to his apartment in Queens and asked if it had
the drug and if it accepted Medicaid. The answer to both questions was "yes."
When Pannell got to the drugstore a few minutes later, however, the pharmacist
claimed he did not have the medicine.

   "But I just called," Pannell objected.

   "We just ran out," the pharmacist told him.

   Pannell called a second pharmacy from a pay phone. Again, he was told that
the store had the drug and that it accepted Medicaid. When he walked up to the
counter, the pharmacist claimed he did not accept Medicaid, despite a sign in
the window stating the opposite.

   Pannell went to 11 different pharmacies in a half-mile-square area of Astoria
that morning, and was refused at every one of them. He returned home exhausted,
in pain and without any medication to help him.

   When his wife came home from work that night, she took the prescription to
the first pharmacy her husband had visited and had it filled right away. Deborah
Pannell is white. Her husband is black.

   "Drugs and race are linked in their minds," says Ivor, who now runs a sickle
cell advocacy group called SCARE (Sickle Cell Advocates for Research and
Empowerment) from his home in the Bronx, where he now lives. "They can respond
negatively to the combination of a black face, an opioid prescription and
Medicaid."

   But these three characteristics are common among people who have sickle cell
anemia, an inherited disease for which there is no cure. Most of the 72,000
Americans afflicted are black and Hispanic, but the disease for which September
has been designated national awareness month also affects people of Arab, Greek,
Maltese, Italian, Sardinian, Turkish and Indian descent, mostly in other parts
of the world.

   Though Pannell's story is extreme, it is not an isolated one. Taeshea Martin,
26, a student at John Jay College, also has sickle cell and recounts visits to
emergency rooms when doctors would give her only two pills rather than a whole
prescription.

   HOPE FOR SICKLE CELL

   People with sickle cell disease inherit the genes that cause some of their
red blood cells to become sickle-shaped. These cells then get stuck in blood
vessels, cutting off oxygen to various organs and tissues, which can lead to a
number of complications, including infections, stroke and organ damage.

   In recent years, medical researchers have made some promising breakthroughs
in understanding and treating this condition. Bone marrow transplants from
siblings without the disease have erased all traces of sickle cell in a very
small number of children, but most of the advances treat the complications, not
the condition. Penicillin given to children during the first few years of life,
for example, has substantially reduced the number of deaths from pneumococcal
infections. Regular blood transfusions decrease the incidence of strokes (which
occur primarily in young children), and new technology enables doctors to
identify individuals at high risk for stroke.

   The hallmark of sickle cell anemia, though, is periodic episodes of
debilitating pain like the one that sent Ivor Pannell in search of Percoset.
Usually referred to as "crises," these episodes occur when blood flow is cut off
from an area of the body, and can last for an evening or for as long as two or
three weeks.

   In the mid-'90s, an anti-cancer drug called hydroxyurea was found to
significantly reduce the frequency of crises. But once a crisis erupts, there
are few options. Very mild episodes can be handled with non-opioids alone or in
combination with certain opioids (like codeine), but severe crises may require
treatment with morphine-equivalent opioids and even hospitalization.

   Predicting when episodes will occur is difficult, and patients differ greatly
in how their disease manifests itself. "It's very variable. Some patients are
very sick, some are not," says Dr. Sergio Piomelli, director of pediatric
hematology and director of the sickle cell center at Children's Hospital of New
York, Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center. "Some patients come here literally
every week for a year and then nothing more."

   From bad to much worse

   There is no "typical" sickle cell patient. Paige and Walter Culbreth are
siblings who both have the disease. Walter, 15, is on hydroxyurea to help
control his pain; already, he has been hospitalized seven times, missed a lot of
school and has had to have blood transfusions. Paige, 11, on the other hand, has
been hospitalized only twice, Motrin is often enough to manage her pain, and she
has not missed as much school. Pannell suffered a paralyzing stroke at age 16
and yet managed to have a successful career as a professional dancer (including
break dancing) in his 20s.

   Among the so-called high-frequency pain patients the small percentage of
those who suffer an inordinate number of severe crises there are additional
problems. Many of these patients have been on opioids around the clock for
years, a factor that complicates pain management. Many people on short-acting
opioids become dependent and experience withdrawal, which often involves pain
similar to that caused by the disease. Untreated pain also causes many of the
conditions that precipitate a crisis in the first place. "The pain can
ultimately become a disease within itself," says Dr. Lennette Benjamin, clinical
director of the Comprehensive Sickle Cell Center at Montefiore Medical Center,
associate professor of medicine at Albert Einstein College of Medicine and chief
medical officer for the Sickle Cell Disease Association of America.

   Benjamin uses two strategies when treating patients: She administers
longer-lasting opioids so that the patient is not eternally tied to the peaks
and valleys of medication and withdrawal, and, more significantly, she has
changed the traditional setting for treatments. Because of the unpredictable
nature of sickle cell (sometimes complicated by matters of health coverage),
many patients receive care for their crises in emergency rooms, which means that
they see many different doctors, are prescribed many different medications and
must often take a backseat to a gunshot victim or heart-attack patient.

   In 1989, Montefiore started an experimental day center designed for sickle
cell patients in crisis. Patients are treated within 15 to 20 minutes of
arriving, reassessed by staff members every 30 minutes and treated until their
pain is relieved. The first five years of the center's existence saw a 40%
reduction in the hospital admission rate of people in crisis, and a decreased
number of emergency visits as well.

   Patients stay an average of 4?189?  hours, at which point more than 90% are
able to go home. "If you don't minimize the time that the person is in pain, it
can cause more pain. The consequences of unrelieved pain can contribute to the
person being hospitalized unnecessarily for days or even weeks," says Benjamin.

   For Pannell, the results of this approach have been dramatic. Before
Montefiore, he was hospitalized, on average, every two to three months. In the
last five years, however, he has only been hospitalized twice. "I still have
pain, but it's not the daily, oppressive, nonstop pain that it was," says
Pannell, who refers to himself as a sickle cell "defier," rather than "patient"
or "sufferer."

   "A lot of defiers believe life will always be pain," he says. "I let them
know you don't have to wait for a cure, for research to be done 'someday.' You
can be living the quality of life that you were always dreaming about if you get
proper management."

   SIDEBAR: THE GENETICS OF THE DISEASE

   People with sickle cell disease inherit one faulty gene from each of their
parents; different combinations of genes can cause different forms of the
disease. More than 40 states now test newborns for sickle cell, and expectant
parents can choose to receive a prenatal test.

   Although gene therapy is still years away for this disease, there has been
some progress. One possibility would involve correcting the defective gene and
inserting it into the bone marrow in the hopes that it would produce normal
hemoglobin. Another possibility would be to deactivate the defective gene.

   One promising note: In 1999, researchers at New York Weill Cornell Center
successfully used pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) to produce healthy
twin girls from parents who had sickle cell genes. Eggs were fertilized in
vitro, then tested for their genetic status. Healthy embryos were implanted in
the mother.RESOURCES

   * Sickle Cell Disease Association of America, 1-800-421-8453,
www.sicklecelldisease.org

   * National Heart, Blood & Lung Institute, (301) 592-8573, www.nhlbi.nih.gov

   * SCARE (Sickle Cell Advocates for Research and Empowerment, Inc.), (718)
884-9670, http://defiers.com

   The National Institutes of Health has funded 10 comprehensive sickle cell
centers around the U.S. Two of them are in New York City:

   * Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center Sickle Cell Services Department of
Pediatric Hematology Columbia University Harkness Pavilion 1 80 Fort Washington,
FL 5 New York, NY 10032 (212) 305-2466

   * Montefiore Medical Center Sickle Cell Center 111 E. 210th St. Bronx, NY
10467 (718) 920-7373/4321


GRAPHIC: THAOMAS MONASTER DAILY NEWS Ivor Pannell calls himself a sickle cell
"defier," not a "sufferer."    THOMAS MONASTER DAILY NEWS Walter and Paige
Culbreth both have sickle cell, but it affects each of them differently.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000


                             226 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     September 11, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 05G

LENGTH: 385 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shows benefits for heart patients

BYLINE: RICK WEISS Washington Post

BODY:

   Doctors who injected new genes into the hearts of heart-attack survivors said
their experimental technique had rejuvenated damaged cardiac cells, increased
blood flow to the heart and reduced the frequency of chest pains.

   The researchers used a gene called VEGF, part of the body's inborn system for
growing new blood vessels. Scientists have theorized that the gene might
initiate the growth of new coronary vessels that bring oxygen to the heart.

   "There has been great concern about whether gene therapy works," said Jeffrey
M. Isner of the Tufts University School of Medicine in a recent statement. Isner
led the study, published in the September issue of the American Heart
Association journal Circulation. "This is very solid evidence that it does."

   Other experts, however, said the study offered more promise than proof. And
the new report does not mention that all four of Isner's more recent studies of
vessel growth genes were shut down by the Food and Drug Administration in March
because of concerns about the quality of his research -- or the fact that
psychology can contribute to improvements in heart condition.

   According to the FDA, patients were enrolled even though they were not
eligible for the studies, crucial tests to assess the treatment's effectiveness
were not done, and the vessel gene may have sped the growth of a tumor that
tripled in size soon after a patient got the treatment.

   Most cancers depend on new blood vessels to support their growth, and
regulators are concerned about having too many vessel-enhancing genes loose in
the body.

   Isner and six colleagues at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Cambridge,
Mass., made one-inch incisions in the chests of 13 patients and, with a small-
gauge needle, injected the genes into four regions of each patient's heart. All
13 had damaged heart tissue from previous heart attacks and suffered chest pains
despite having had bypasses.

   The study did not look directly for new vessel growth. But using high-tech
and still-experimental imaging devices, the researchers found evidence that some
dormant heart muscle began working again after the treatment.

   Most important to the patients, the average number of chest pain ("angina")
attacks dropped to about two per week, compared to 48 per week before the
treatment.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000


                             227 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      SEPTEMBER 11, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1495 words

HEADLINE: PROFESSOR IS SURE THE SHAME OF THESE GAMES WILL BE DRUGS

BYLINE: Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Charles E. Yesalis has studied the "dark side of sports" for so long that he
is sure the Olympic Games opening Friday will be rife with athletes who have
used drugs to get a competitive edge.

   The Pennsylvania State University professor even calls this year's event "the
hormone Olympics," reflecting his belief that drugs to enhance strength and
endurance are widespread.

   "I don't think in the lifetime of your readers are you ever going to see
drug-free sports," said Yesalis, a professor of health and human development who
has researched the nonmedical use of steroids and other performance-enhancing
drugs for 20 years.

   "The genie is so big and has been out of the bottle for so long that it can't
be controlled," he said.

   Yesalis bases his forecast on "overwhelming" evidence of drug misuse turned
up by scholars, journalists and government inquiries over the last 40 years.

   He's not talking only about the widely known cases such as the systematic
doping of East German athletes from the 1960s to the fall of the Berlin Wall,
the gold-medal stripping of Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson after he tested
positive for drugs during the 1988 Seoul games, and the discovery of
performance-enhancing drugs at the 1998 Tour de France. Yesalis said the problem
has seeped into school sports, gaining a firm foothold.

   So Yesalis is skeptical that the problem will go away simply because of a new
international resolve to do something about it.

   "I have heard the record played so many times that the needle is stuck," said
Yesalis, 53, whose second edition of Anabolic Steroids in Sport and Exercise was
published this summer.

   And it played again last Friday with a report, issued by the White House,
that asserted that as many as 80 or 90 percent of athletes in some Olympic
sports use performance-enhancing drugs - at least according to some coaches and
athletes.

   International Olympic Committee vice president Dick Pound called that
estimate "wildly high."

   Still, the 10,000 runners, swimmers, gymnasts and equestrians descending on
Sydney will be scrutinized more intensely for signs of drug use than any
athletes in Olympic history. The drug-use problem has become so widely
acknowledged that the IOC has taken extra measures to police it and a new World
Anti-Doping Agency will watch to make sure nothing is awry.

   The anti-doping agency was expected to conduct 2,500 unannounced tests this
summer before the athletes ever set foot in an Olympic venue. The IOC will
perform an additional 400 unannounced urine tests during the month. At least 300
athletes will be subjected for the first time to a test for the
endurance-boosting synthetic hormone erythropoietin (EPO). And about 2,100 drug
tests - for everything from steroids to amphetamines and ephedrine - will be
given during the competitions.

   If caught for a first offense, they can be banned from their sport for up to
two years. China last week dropped 40 athletes and coaches from its Olympic
Games roster after members of its rowing team had blood samples with high EPO
levels and some of its women's running team failed doping tests.

   The World Anti-Doping Agency was spawned this year after the White House and
a number of foreign governments pressured the International Olympic Committee to
set up a separate drug-control organization.

   The need for such an agency was obvious, according to the White House drug
czar, Gen. Barry McCaffrey. There was a major drug-abuse problem and the IOC was
not doing enough to counter it, he said. Nor, he said, was the IOC forthcoming
about what it was actually doing.

   "Who says we had to put up with a system like that?" asked McCaffrey, who
aggressively pushed for the world anti-doping agency.

   While he concedes that "we are not where we want to be," his outlook is sunny
compared to that of Yesalis.

   "My guess is you are about to witness the most drug-free Olympics in 15
years," McCaffrey said. "This is slowly going in the right direction."

   McCaffrey says the new determination to do something about the problem - from
the U.S. government and other countries - is not just about cleaning up Olympic
sports. He says it is also intended to be a signal to all athletes - down to
Little League baseball players and club swimmers - that drugs are dangerous and
undermine the concept of fair play.

   "It has become abundantly clear that the use of drugs in sports has become an
international crisis of both public health and public confidence," McCaffrey
said last year during hearings on athletic doping before the Senate Commerce,
Science and Transportation Committee. "This threat is no longer confined to a
mere handful of Olympic athletes. Today, drug use in sport can be found in the
local high school football locker room and on the neighborhood soccer field."

   Because youngsters often attempt to copy their sports heroes, McCaffrey has
used his role as drug czar to put a spotlight on drug use among elite athletes.

   Partly through his efforts, the U.S. government for the first time will help
fund drug testing for Olympic sports through a new organization, the U.S.
Anti-Doping Agency. To enhance the credibility of the U.S. efforts, the agency
will be in charge of drug testing starting next month.

   Like the International Olympic Committee, the USOC has been widely criticized
for its lax enforcement of drug control. In a lawsuit filed in June, its former
drug chief Wade Exum claims the committee blocked efforts to fight drug use to
such an extent that about half the American athletes who tested positive for
prohibited substances in recent years were not punished.

   "I will evaluate the effects of their actions before I make a judgment about
their success," Yesalis said, referring broadly to past efforts to rein in drug
use by the USOC, IOC and sports federations. "They don't deserve the assumption
that they are going to do an honest and fair job because of the terrible ways
they have behaved over the last 40 years."

   Robert Housman, an assistant director in the White House Drug Policy Office,
said Yesalis "has seen and heard it all before and he is looking to see results.
It will take time for the changes to kick in."

   Yesalis, who has a master's degree in public health and a doctorate in
epidemiology, became interested in performance-enhancing drugs in the late 1970s
after some athletes asked him whether the drugs worked. The question "tweaked my
curiosity," he said, so he went to the library, only to find a paucity of
scientific study - and much of it inaccurate. He has testified before Congress
three times on the topic, produced three books and about four dozen journal
articles and chapters - including a seminal survey of 3,400 high school males in
the mid-1980s showing that 7 percent had used steroids. About 40 percent of the
users had cycled the muscle-building substance at least five times, meaning they
had taken steroids regularly for a period of six weeks or longer - and done that
five times.

   Since then, he said, the use among young people has not ceased. The National
Institute on Drug Abuse estimated that in 1999, more than 500,000 youngsters in
eighth through 12th grade, about 3 percent, had used anabolic steroids during
their lives.

   Yesalis said it is easy to reach the conclusion that the Sydney Olympics will
be brimming with athletes who use - or have used - drugs to aid their
performance and training. As in past Olympics, he doubts many will be caught,
because tests and procedures simply can't keep pace with medical breakthroughs
and the ingenuity of the athletes and scientific advisers.

   For instance, he said, human growth hormone (HGH), a drug to boost height,
and another hormone, insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1), have become popular
strength agents among athletes, and drug tests have not yet been invented to
detect them.

   Athletes will even thwart the tests for EPO by using it before the games or
resorting to other drugs that aren't tested, Yesalis said. EPO is used medically
to help increase red blood cells for patients with anemia or undergoing
chemotherapy, but athletes have found it helps improve their endurance.

   "A minority of athletes who compete are clean," Yesalis said. "Another small
minority who use drugs get caught, and the largest group use drugs and don't get
caught."

   Speculation has surfaced that some elite athletes already are using a
veterinary alternative to EPO. It is a hemoglobin-based product, Oxyglobin,
which could give an extra oxygen boost. Biopure Corp., the maker of Oxyglobin,
said it is "unaware of unauthorized use of our product, and does not endorse its
use for unauthorized purposes."

   Yesalis is gloomy about prospects for long-term change. "In the next 10
years, doping as we know it will fade away and will be replaced by genetic
therapy," he said, "where athletes will use genetic therapy to reengineer bodies
instead of drugs."

   Marian Uhlman's e-mail address is marian.uhlman@phillynews.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2002


                             228 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   SEPTEMBER 11, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A6

LENGTH: 2243 words

HEADLINE: Doping for Gold;

Olympic officials are running their own marathon -- a race against
performance-boosting drugs that has no finish line

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:
The Summer Olympics officially begin Friday in Sydney, but one of the most
closely watched competitions is already well under way.

    Drug-taking athletes, desperate for any edge modern medicine can provide,
are squaring off against harried officials charged with upholding the integrity
of sport.

    For now, at least, the anti-doping forces seem to have gained the upper
hand, brandishing a sophisticated new testing scheme that includes, for the
first time, a screen for Epogen -- a widely prescribed drug for treating anemia
in cancer and kidney diseases.

    "Nobody knows how many athletes have been using it, but we know EPO has been
fairly widely used for years, certainly in some sports," said Dr. Don Catlin, a
drug-testing expert at the University of California at Los Angeles and member of
the International Olympic Committee medical commission.

    Designed to stimulate production of oxygen-carrying red blood cells in the
bone marrow, the drug is a synthetic, bioengineered version of erythropoietin, a
natural hormone, produced in the kidney, that regulates the process known as
erythropoiesis.

    Medical experts say there is nothing natural about athletes taking EPO in
massive doses.

    "You're basically putting your red-blood-cell production into turbo mode,"
said David Okrongly, vice president for hematology at Bayer Diagnostics, based
in Tarrytown, N.Y., a manufacturer of drug-testing equipment being used in the
new Olympic anti-doping effort.

   ENHANCING PERFORMANCE

    Athletes have long known that pumping up the red cells could turn an average
performer into a superstar seemingly overnight. That used to require
transfusions, but studies have suggested that EPO can achieve the same results
with a lot less trouble, boosting performance by an estimated 5 percent.

    "At the Olympic level, 5 percent is a huge difference, the difference
between winning and losing," Catlin said.

    Until lately, the risk of getting caught using EPO was just about nil. "It's
been very difficult to detect because the same hormone is there naturally,"
Okrongly said.

    A much more significant risk is dropping dead.

    All those extra red cells thicken the blood and can impair circulation. In
fact, EPO is suspected as a contributing factor in some 20 deaths of bicycle
racers since 1987. In 1998, revelations of widespread EPO use led to the
withdrawal of several top teams from the Tour de France.

    "This particular drug has very significant, very serious negative health
effects for people who don't use it correctly," said Jeffrey Benz, a San
Francisco sports attorney and former international figure skating competitor.
"Basically, you can die."

   SCIENCE PLAYS CATCH-UP

    Although Epogen has long been banned from Olympic competitions, the science
of drug-testing has lagged far behind the cutting edge of performance-enhancing
medicine.

    Now, experts hope the new EPO screen -- a unique combination of blood and
urine tests -- will survive legal challenges likely to arise in Sydney.

    Already, China revealed last week that it has cut 40 athletes and staff from
its Olympic team, including seven rowers who had failed tests for Epogen.
Reasons for the other 33 withdrawals were left unclear, but knowledgeable
observers said the risk of embarrassment in Sydney may well have played a role.

    National teams suspected of doping in past Olympic Games appear to be taking
the rules a lot more seriously. The next question is whether the new testing
technology -- rushed into place just in time for the Summer Games -- will hold
up.

    It works in two stages. First, a blood sample is tested quickly for evidence
of abnormally high levels of immature red cells. Exactly what is the "abnormal"
cut point is a closely held secret, based on some elaborate research involving
speed skaters and other top athletes, including some who can achieve remarkable
oxygen-handling capabilities through such old-fashioned means as high-altitude
workouts.

    Anyone found to be packing a suspicious red-cell count must then provide a
urine sample for a follow-on test that uses electrophoresis technology to take a
molecular fingerprint. This second-stage test is said to be capable of picking
out the subtle molecular markers of synthetic hormone not present in the natural
version.

    "This is going to send a shock wave through the sports world," Okrongly
said.

   NO FOOLPROOF APPROACH

    Other tests are already in place to combat the use of the more traditional
performance enhancing drugs, notably the anabolic steroids and amphetamines. But
while the addition of an effective EPO test may tip the balance in favor of a
clean Olympics, nobody expects it will be so easy to keep performance-boosting
drugs out of the supercharged top echelons of athletics.

    There is no reliable test for synthetic human growth hormone, for example, a
biotechnology drug designed to treat hormone-deficient children, but long touted
as a muscle-builder in adults and long suspected of tainting sporting events.

    Dr. Stephen Rosenthal, a professor of pediatrics at the University of
California at San Francisco, noted the hormone has complicated effects, both
direct and indirect, which can vary widely depending on dosages, natural hormone
production and the age of the person taking the extra jolt.

    "The potential benefits in adults who are not hormone deficient have not
been thoroughly studied, at least not in young adults," he said. "It does
potentially lead to an increase in lean-muscle mass, so you can certainly see
how an athlete might find it beneficial. ... But there's a risk and benefit in
anything you do, and anybody on a drug like this really should be closely
monitored."

    An Uzbekistan team official faced expulsion from the Games last week after
he was found carrying vials into Australia labeled as containing the drug.
Chemical tests were ordered to confirm the substance was growth hormone, which
is banned from Olympic competition.

    Tests have been developed for detecting potential abusers, but current
methods yield a large number of false positives and so will not be used for this
summer's Games.

    Dr. Ray Hintz, an authority on growth hormone at Stanford University Medical
Center, said "there appears to be a great underground belief in the efficacy of
growth hormone among athletes," even though controlled studies show the hormone
brings no significant improvement in athletic performance.

    Long-term risks also are unknown, but theoretically could include an
increased incidence of cardiovascular disease and diabetes.

   FUTURE CHALLENGES

    As if biotech drugs that mimic natural hormones weren't enough to bedevil
the sporting world, even more exotic trickery may be just around the corner --
including the distant possibility of performance-enhancing gene therapies.

    Someday, it might be possible for parents to bestow all sorts of athletic
gifts on their children by using the latest fruits of medical research. That's
still a long way off, but the issue is already starting to come up as the Games
get under way in Sydney.

    "Our whole legal and conceptual framework doesn't address this issue at
all," said Benz, the San Francisco sports attorney. "It's something the
anti-doping authorities will need to take a look at very seriously. Maybe there
will be interventions in the womb to create a superathlete,' which may have to
be treated differently than interventions later in life or right before a
competition. If it becomes possible to use that kind of technology to somehow
change the ability of the human body to perform, then we are going to have to
fundamentally redefine the whole idea of doping."

   PERCEPTIONS COMPROMISE GAMES

    Even if only a handful of the 10,200 athletes arriving in Sydney actually
are using banned substances, the Olympics still suffer from the widespread
public perception that cheaters are going uncaught.

    "Maybe the wrong people are winning," said John White, strength and
conditioning coach at the University of San Francisco. "The Olympics is the
elite of amateur competition. I don't like knowing for a fact that a lot of
those athletes are taking illegal drugs."

    The Clinton administration has urged stronger measures against Olympic drug
offenders, charging that sports authorities have tended to be lax in the past.

    "There are too many gaps -- some scientific and some of commitment -- in
existing anti-drug and doping programs," said White House drug czar Barry
McCaffrey. "Too many athletes still feel they must cheat to compete. As it
stands, we risk creating new records that cannot be bested without chemical
engineering."

   -----------------------------------------------------------

   BANNED SUBSTANCES

    You almost need an advanced degree in pharmacology to understand the efforts
to fight doping at this year's Summer Olympics. Here are some of the substances
that are banned by the International Olympic Committee:

    -- Stimulants: Used to enhance alertness and provide an extra kick of
energy. Includes amphetamines, ephedrines, asthma medications (except prescribed
inhalers) and even caffeine (which can be injected as well as taken in coffee
drinks) above certain limits.

    -- Narcotics: Morphine, methadone, heroin and related opiates prone to abuse
are banned outright. But codeine as a painkiller is OK.

    -- Cannabinoids: Use of marijuana or synthetic THC, marijuana's active
ingredient, is prohibited. If cannabinoid traces above certain levels are
detected in drug tests, the athlete may be disqualified for blood doping.

    -- Anabolic steroids: Muscle-building male sex hormones and hormone
precursors are banned, including nandralone, androstenedione, androstenediol,
DHEA and testosterone. Also banned are certain bronchodilators, known as beta-2
agonists, such as salmeterol and terbutaline, unless prescribed and taken by
inhaler.

    -- Hormones: The banned list includes many synthetic forms of natural
proteins that can affect sugar metabolism, oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood
or other body functions. These include human growth hormone, erythropoietin,
ACTH, insulin-like growth factors and insulin not prescribed for diabetes.

    -- Beta blockers: Blood-pressure drugs known as beta-adrenergic receptor
blocking agents can decrease oxygen requirements of the heart and increase work
capacity. Examples on the banned list include propanolol (Inderal) and related
substances.

    -- Analgesics: Locally injected pain medications are allowed only when
"medically justified."

    -- Prohibited methods: Authorities also have enacted general prohibitions to
cover any form of blood doping, use of artificial oxygen carriers or
blood-plasma expanders, and other "pharmacological, chemical and physical
manipulation."

    For more information, visit
www.olympic.org/ioc/e/org/medcom/medcom%5Fantidopage%5Fe.html.

   Source: International Olympic Committee Medical Commission, Olympic Movement
Anti-Doping Code.

   -----------------------------------------------------------

   SECRETS IN THE BLOOD

    Use of performance-enhancing substances is thought to be widespread in the
top echelons of sport, prompting a crackdown at the Summer Olympics in Sydney.
Much of the attention has focused on Epogen, a hormone drug that boosts red
blood cell production.

   Origin of EPO

    Epogen is a genetically engineered version of a naturally occuring hormone
called erythropoietin. Made by Amgen Inc., it is prescribed for life-threatening
anemia in cases of cancer and kidney disease.

    Use Among Athletes

    Studies show EPO can boost athletic performance between 5 percent and 15
percent. However, heavy use can impair circulation. Too much EPO has been blamed
for heart problems and the deaths of 20 racing cyclists.

    Testing in Sydney

    The International Olympic Committee approved a new blood-urine test for EPO
last month, announcing plans to test 300 to 700 athletes.

   .

   Pumping up

    Known as erythrocytes, red blood cells are produced in the bone marrow. By
increasing the amount of EPO, athletes can increase red-blood-cell production.

    Blood cells form in bone marrow, a network of blood vessels and connective
tissue.

   .

   Oxygen shuttle

    Athletes burn up enormous quantities of oxygen, the main fuel for the
muscles. Red blood cells, which contain hemoglobin, pick up oxygen from the
lungs and transport it throughout the body.

   .

   Doping scandal

    Concern about Epogen use by athletes increased markedly in 1998, when a
blood-doping scandal engulfed the Tour de France cycling classic. French customs
officials stopped Willy Voet, a Belgian employee of a prominent race team led by
Frenchman Richard Virenque, crossing the border carrying large quantities of EPO
and other banned substances. Subsequent investigation led to the
disqualification of Virenque's team, while several other teams quit the race.
Testimony suggested widespread drug use.

   .

   Sources: The Human Body, An Illustrated Guide to Its Structure, Function, and
Disorders and The MacMillan Visual Dictionary

   --------------------------------------------------------------

    HOW TO REACH US

    Comments, questions and suggestions for The Chronicle's Science page are
welcome. Reach us by e-mail at science@sfgate.com, by fax at (415) 896-1107 or
in care of Science Page, San Francisco Chronicle, 901 Mission St., San
Francisco, CA 94103.

    For updated science news throughout the week and links to science Web sites,
go to sfgate.com/science/.


   E-mail Carl T. Hall at carlhall@sfchronicle.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (2), GRAPHIC, PHOTOS: (1) Canada's Ben Johnson had an incredible
100-meter time of 9.79 seconds, but he tested positive for anabolic steroids and
was stripped of his medal., (2) Irish swimmer Michelle Smith, who won three gold
medals at the Atlanta Olympics, was later found guilty of tampering with a urine
sample and banned from the Sydney Games. / Photos by Associated Press, GRAPHIC:
Chronicle Graphic

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000


                             229 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                September 10, 2000, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 64

LENGTH: 930 words

HEADLINE: HOPING TO NIX DOPING CRACKDOWN PRESCRIBED FOR DRUGS AT OLYMPICS

BYLINE: By LUKE CYPHERS DAILY NEWS SPORTS WRITER

BODY:
Let the shames begin.

   The Olympic torch is still five days away from being lit in Sydney, but the
issue of doping is already generating intense heat.

   Australian authorities have stopped an alleged pusher of human growth hormone
at the country's door. Chinese athletes are dropping out of the Games for not
completely specified "rules violations." And Gen. Barry McCaffrey, head of the
White House Office of National Drug Control Policy, last week released a report
from Columbia's National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse that rips the
International Olympic Committee and other sports governing bodies for doing
little to stop use of performance-enhancing drugs.

   "The aura of secrecy in which these bodies squirrel test results invites
public cynicism about the integrity and the meaning of record-breaking Olympic
performances," says the report, titled, "Winning at Any Cost: Doping in Olympic
Sports."

   All that could just be the warmup.

   Lawyers for Dr. Wade Exum, the former head of the U.S. Olympic Committee's
drug-testing program, are proceeding with a discrimination case against the USOC
in which they've said they can prove that 50% of the positive drug tests accrued
by American athletes in recent years went unpunished.

   After years of being ignored, swept under the rug or tossed aside as rumor,
drugs in sports "are a bigger issue than they've ever been going into an
Olympics," Exum says.

   "These Games conceivably could be the last best chance to prevent Olympic
sport from turning into a freak show," says John Hoberman, a University of Texas
professor of Germanic studies and author of "Mortal Engines: The Science of
Performance and the Dehumanization of Sport."

   Why? Down the road is a future of potentially fantastic medical breakthroughs
in biotechnology emanating from work such as the human genome project. This new
knowledge can be put to use curing diseases, but also, potentially, to help
athletes cheat.

   "What high-performance sport has been for the last generation is a laboratory
on the human organism," Hoberman says.

   Unless sports grabs hold of the doping issue now, the next round of
experimentation may well result in genetically derived muscle enhancers, hormone
boosters, respiratory aids and pick-me-ups that render the athletes as something
less, or maybe more, than human.

   Up to now, the Olympics doping program has been a joke. Many performance
enhancers, like human growth hormone, can't be tested for, and even more easily
detectable substances like steroids have resulted in few disqualifications.
Since 1968, when drug testing was introduced at the Games, only 53 cases of
doping have been reported - out of 14,678 tests performed. Given that, cheating
athletes may have more to fear from the sharks in Sydney's harbor than from drug
authorities.

   But Hoberman sees positive signs that an anti-doping movement is gaining
strength and could make Sydney a bellwether event.

   For one, Australian law-enforcement officials seem serious about trying to
stop performance-enhancing drugs from coming into the country, catching - and
making an example of - a member of the Uzbekistan delegation who allegedly tried
to smuggle human growth hormone into the country.

   The IOC has also introduced a new test for EPO, a substance runners and
cyclists use to increase endurance, and which crippled the Tour de France in
recent years. Perhaps fearing the test, more than three dozen athletes from
China, which has been suspected of systematic doping of its athletes, were left
off that nation's team and will sit out Sydney.

   Then there are developments in the U.S., which, except for every four years,
doesn't pay much attention to Olympic sports - or Olympic doping.

   The release of the report by McCaffrey's office Friday is seen as an
encouraging sign. The report basically says the Olympic drug-testing system has
been tainted for years. Nothing new there. But the fact that it comes from the
White House, and that it says drug cheating stems from big money and huge
pressures to win, makes it significant. So does the report's call for an
independent drug-testing agency across all sports.

   Which brings up the Exum case. USOC officials have downplayed Exum's claims
of widespread coverups of cheating in this country as the mutterings of a
disgruntled employee. But the report may give Exum some ammunition, and his case
some exposure. "This report seems to substantiate and reinforce everything I've
been saying," Exum says. "It says there needs to be an independent agency to
police doping, and it calls the system corrupt."

   Although the report mostly steers clear of pointing figures at any U.S.
interests, it does mention Exum's lawsuit. Exum promises that documents for his
claims - which include allegations that banned drugs were distributed to
athletes at USOC headquarters - will emerge in court, some perhaps as early as
this month.

   Some of the names on those documents will shock U.S. sports fans, says Exum's
attorney, John Pineau.

   While Exum is gladdened that the White House report seems to bolster his
case, he's skeptical about its short-term impact. "A lot of this is just
political game-playing, a lot of fluff," he says. "The only people who have the
power to do something are the active athletes."

   Hoberman is more hopeful. "Right now, this issue has legs because it's not
just about athletes," Hoberman says. "What emerges from the Sydney Games can go
a long way in determining how sports and society handle wider use of hormones
and gene therapies." Ultimately, he says, "That involves all of us."

GRAPHIC: AP BITTER PILL Ex-U.S. Olympic Committee exec Wade Exum alleges the
organization covered up positive drug tests.

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2000


                             230 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 10, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 1001 words

HEADLINE: Biotech payoff? At long last, market-scarred companies are taking
their first shot at profitability

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 In gambling parlance -- in jargon more painfully appropriate than many care to
admit -- the nation's bustling biotechnology sector is headed for the finish
line.

   The developers of about 50 potential drugs are either into late-stage,
pivotal testing or they are expected to seek approval of their drugs from the
Food and Drug Administration within the next 18 months.

   That's the biggest batch yet to emerge from the estimated 370 medicines under
development in biotechs across the United States, say industry and Wall Street
analysts.

   It's payoff time.  Or such is the hope of many Wall Street-scarred biotechs,
including an array of companies in San Diego County that have spent years and
lost millions of dollars in an attempt to bring drugs to market.

   "It's a huge number compared to past years, where we may have had five or 10
or even 20 new drugs in the pipeline," says John McCamant, an analyst with the
Medical Technology Stock Letter in Berkeley "This is a clear illustration of the
critical mass and value that has been created by the biotechnology industry."

   In San Diego, where biotechnology is a major engine of economic growth and
high-paying jobs, the sector already has proved to be a boon.  Yet the value of
biotechnology eludes many shareholders.  Of the 30 or so publicly traded biotech
companies in the region, only a few are profitable.

   That might change soon.

   Many potential drugs are expected to come from what analysts have dubbed the
Initial Public Offering Class of 1991-92, a group of about 100 biotechnology
companies nationwide that went public in the first wave of enthusiasm for the
high-risk sector.

   Conventional wisdom has it that 10 years are required for an experimental
drug to travel from lab to medicine cabinet.  Along the way, an estimated five
in 5,000 drug candidates that enter preclinical testing make it to human
clinical trials.  Then, only one in five make it to market.

   Such odds have made biotechnology stocks among the most fickle in recent
years.  Historically, the sector rises and falls dramatically, moved by the
latest drug approval or the latest failure of a drug in human clinical trials.

   Now, after a decade notable for wild investor mood swings and a lengthy
financial drought that brought the biotechnology sector to the brink in the late
1990s, the IPO Class of 1991-92 is graduating.

   Local members of that class include Amylin Pharmaceuticals, which went public
in 1992 and has spent about $300 million in developing drugs to treat diabetes.
The company has completed Phase III clinical testing of its first drug, Symlin,
and plans to file an application seeking FDA approval this fall.

   Idec Pharmaceuticals, which went public in 1991, is one of San Diego's few
profitable biotechnology companies.  Idec, which had its first drug approved in
late 1997, plans this winter to seek FDA approval for a second cancer drug,
Zevalin.

   And there is Maxim Pharmaceuticals, a comparatively precocious company that
didn't go public until 1996, though its cancer-fighting drug, Maxamine, has been
in development since the early 1990s.

   Maxim, which spent about $100 million to usher the drug through clinical
trials, announced last week that the FDA has granted Maxamine a fast-track
review, which means federal regulators will decide within six months whether to
approve the drug designed to fight malignant melanoma.

   They aren't, of course, the only regional players with a product in sight.
Companies who are in Phase III clinical trials -- the final, large-scale test of
a drug in humans -- or have applied to the FDA for approval include:

   Ligand Pharmaceuticals, which is seeking FDA approval for Morphelan, an oral
morphine for the management of pain in cancer and HIV patients.

   Advanced Tissue Sciences, which is seeking FDA approval of Dermagraft, a
treatment for diabetic foot ulcers.

   Vical, which is conducting a Phase III clinical trial on a gene therapy drug
called Allovectin-7, a potential treatment for patients with terminal melanoma.

   La Jolla Pharmaceutical, which plans to begin Phase III trials this fall of
its drug to treat lupus.

   Isis Pharmaceuticals, which this fall will begin testing ISIS 3521 in a Phase
III trial for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.

   Alliance Pharmaceutical, which announced in August that it received an
approvable letter from the FDA for an ultrasound contrasting agent called
Imagent.

   Approvable status usually indicates that the FDA is inclined to approve a
drug after minor issues such as final labeling language are resolved.

   Far more crucial to Alliance are Phase III clinical trials for Oxygent, a
temporary blood substitute to reduce or eliminate the need for donor blood
transfusions during surgery, and LiquiVent, an oxygen-carrying liquid drug used
to open up collapsed air sacs in treatment for acute lung injury and respiratory
distress.

   Both products have the potential to serve large patient populations.

   The stakes are high for biotechs and investors.  A nod from the FDA -- it can
take six months to a year to review an application for a new drug -- can
translate into a windfall for a company and its shareholders.

   Many analysts say the biotechnology sector has never been stronger, and while
a string of drug approvals -- or failures -- could set the tone on Wall Street
in coming months, analysts say the sector won't rise or fall as dramatically on
news of a single company's advances or retreats.

   Biotechs have been both petted and pummeled, enjoying a heady rise in stock
prices and $22 billion in new funding from public offerings and private
financings.  In March, the industry suffered an abrupt plunge in stock prices,
although it has since regained its strength.

   "I'd be hard pressed to see anything to stop this kind of momentum," says
Michael Becker, editor of Beck on Biotech, a Chicago-based investment
newsletter.  "The industry is mature and broad-based now; failures shouldn't
hurt it, and successes can only help it."


GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; 1. Fred Greaves / Union-Tribune 2. Fred Greaves photo; 1. CaBao
Nguyen, a research associate, monitors a laboratory experiment at Maxim
Pharmaceuticals. 2. Bao Nguyen, a research associate, monitored a laboratory
experiment at Maxim Pharmaceuticals. (H-6)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2000


                             231 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           September 10, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. H-1

LENGTH: 988 words

HEADLINE: Biotech payoff? At long last, market-scarred companies are taking
their first shot at profitability

BYLINE: Penni Crabtree, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In gambling parlance -- in jargon more painfully appropriate than many care
to admit -- the nation's bustling biotechnology sector is headed for the finish
line. The developers of about 50 potential drugs are either into late-stage,
pivotal testing or they are expected to seek approval of their drugs from the
Food and Drug Administration within the next 18 months. That's the biggest batch
yet to emerge from the estimated 370 medicines under development in biotechs
across the United States, say industry and Wall Street analysts. It's payoff
time.

   Or such is the hope of many Wall Street-scarred biotechs, including an array
of companies in San Diego County that have spent years and lost millions of
dollars in an attempt to bring drugs to market. "It's a huge number compared to
past years, where we may have had five or 10 or even 20 new drugs in the
pipeline," says John McCamant, an analyst with the Medical Technology Stock
Letter in Berkeley "This is a clear illustration of the critical mass and value
that has been created by the biotechnology industry." In San Diego, where
biotechnology is a major engine of economic growth and high-paying jobs, the
sector already has proved to be a boon.

   Yet the value of biotechnology eludes many shareholders.

   Of the 30 or so publicly traded biotech companies in the region, only a few
are profitable. That might change soon. Many potential drugs are expected to
come from what analysts have dubbed the Initial Public Offering Class of
1991-92, a group of about 100 biotechnology companies nationwide that went
public in the first wave of enthusiasm for the high-risk sector. Conventional
wisdom has it that 10 years are required for an experimental drug to travel from
lab to medicine cabinet.

   Along the way, an estimated five in 5,000 drug candidates that enter
preclinical testing make it to human clinical trials.

   Then, only one in five make it to market. Such odds have made biotechnology
stocks among the most fickle in recent years.

   Historically, the sector rises and falls dramatically, moved by the latest
drug approval or the latest failure of a drug in human clinical trials. Now,
after a decade notable for wild investor mood swings and a lengthy financial
drought that brought the biotechnology sector to the brink in the late 1990s,
the IPO Class of 1991-92 is graduating. Local members of that class include
Amylin Pharmaceuticals, which went public in 1992 and has spent about $300
million in developing drugs to treat diabetes.

   The company has completed Phase III clinical testing of its first drug,
Symlin, and plans to file an application seeking FDA approval this fall. Idec
Pharmaceuticals, which went public in 1991, is one of San Diego's few profitable
biotechnology companies.

   Idec, which had its first drug approved in late 1997, plans this winter to
seek FDA approval for a second cancer drug, Zevalin. And there is Maxim
Pharmaceuticals, a comparatively precocious company that didn't go public until
1996, though its cancer-fighting drug, Maxamine, has been in development since
the early 1990s. Maxim, which spent about $100 million to usher the drug through
clinical trials, announced last week that the FDA has granted Maxamine a
fast-track review, which means federal regulators will decide within six months
whether to approve the drug designed to fight malignant melanoma. They aren't,
of course, the only regional players with a product in sight. Companies who are
in Phase III clinical trials -- the final, large-scale test of a drug in humans
-- or have applied to the FDA for approval include: Ligand Pharmaceuticals,
which is seeking FDA approval for Morphelan, an oral morphine for the management
of pain in cancer and HIV patients. Advanced Tissue Sciences, which is seeking
FDA approval of Dermagraft, a treatment for diabetic foot ulcers. Vical, which
is conducting a Phase III clinical trial on a gene therapy drug called
Allovectin-7, a potential treatment for patients with terminal melanoma. La
Jolla Pharmaceutical, which plans to begin Phase III trials this fall of its
drug to treat lupus. Isis Pharmaceuticals, which this fall will begin testing
ISIS 3521 in a Phase III trial for patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
Alliance Pharmaceutical, which announced in August that it received an
approvable letter from the FDA for an ultrasound contrasting agent called
Imagent. Approvable status usually indicates that the FDA is inclined to approve
a drug after minor issues such as final labeling language are resolved. Far more
crucial to Alliance are Phase III clinical trials for Oxygent, a temporary blood
substitute to reduce or eliminate the need for donor blood transfusions during
surgery, and LiquiVent, an oxygen-carrying liquid drug used to open up collapsed
air sacs in treatment for acute lung injury and respiratory distress. Both
products have the potential to serve large patient populations. The stakes are
high for biotechs and investors.

   A nod from the FDA -- it can take six months to a year to review an
application for a new drug -- can translate into a windfall for a company and
its shareholders. Many analysts say the biotechnology sector has never been
stronger, and while a string of drug approvals -- or failures -- could set the
tone on Wall Street in coming months, analysts say the sector won't rise or fall
as dramatically on news of a single company's advances or retreats. Biotechs
have been both petted and pummeled, enjoying a heady rise in stock prices and
$22 billion in new funding from public offerings and private financings.

   In March, the industry suffered an abrupt plunge in stock prices, although it
has since regained its strength. "I'd be hard pressed to see anything to stop
this kind of momentum," says Michael Becker, editor of Beck on Biotech, a
Chicago-based investment newsletter.

   "The industry is mature and broad-based now; failures shouldn't hurt it, and
successes can only help it."

GRAPHIC: 2 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. CaBao Nguyen, a research associate, monitors a
laboratory experiment at Maxim Pharmaceuticals. 2. Bao Nguyen, a research
associate, monitored a laboratory experiment at Maxim Pharmaceuticals. (H-6);
PHOTOBY: 1. Fred Greaves / Union-Tribune 2. Fred Greaves photo

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             232 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   September 10, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 976 words

HEADLINE: A LOOK AT . . . The Prescription Drug Debate; AL GORE AND GEORGE BUSH
DUELED last week over which had a better plan for assisting the nation's elderly
with rising drug costs. Here, a retiree takes a consumer's view of the proposals
and a health care expert challenges the thinking that went into them.; Two Plans
Mired in The Past

BYLINE: Alan L. Hillman

BODY:


   Today's quiz: Why did prescription drug coverage for elderly citizens
suddenly become a central battleground in the presidential campaign?

   Answer: The political clout of that voting group known as the middle class.

   The rising cost of health care in general, and pharmaceuticals in particular,
is nothing new. The working poor (remember those 35 million uninsured?) have
faced this crisis for years. But now that aging Baby Boomers increasingly feel
the pinch (or punch) of insurance premiums and health care expenses, a longtime
"problem" has become a "crisis."

   Unfortunately, both Al Gore's and George Bush's prescription drug plans risk
escalating the crisis because they--like Medicare and Social Security when they
were first enacted--do not envision, or even consider, what we already know
about the future of pharmaceutical research and development. More importantly,
their proposals fail to consider America's obsession with new technology--what I
would call our "technologic imperative"--and the accelerating costs of this
obsession. Moreover, the plans do not take into account the forthcoming conflict
between the patient's demand for the best available therapies and society's need
to make fair and rational decisions about who gets what health care.

   In short, both candidates are offering plans for tomorrow based on the
medical world of yesterday.

   It is not hard to see the future of medical care for today's senior citizens.
Technological advances in pharmaceuticals and other health care services are
already producing drugs, devices and procedures that cost thousands of dollars
per year or per treatment. There will be more "miracle" drugs (such as anti-TNF
for inflammatory bowel disease, a common elderly ailment) and products of human
gene therapy (coming soon) that will rapidly send our national health care bill
to astonishing levels if access to all health care interventions continues
relatively unabated (HMOs initially brought lower costs, but now even their
prices are rising exponentially).

   The technologic imperative will break the health care bank in the next five
to 10 years. Now along come the candidates with proposals (and cost estimates)
that fail to deal with this phenomenon.

   Comparisons of the candidates' competing proposals abounded last week, and
analyses differed depending on what one read. But there is no dispute that both
would be expensive. Gore's campaign estimated the cost of his more robust plan
at $ 253 billion by 2010, while the Bush proposal was projected at $ 158 billion
by the same year. But the lack of clarity about crucial details--deductibles,
co-payments, the criteria for who qualifies as low-income--made both estimates
seem shaky.

   The Gore proposal would have the federal government cover catastrophic
prescription costs in excess of $ 4,000. Bush would set the ceiling higher, at $
6,000. But at a time when a vast array of current and future therapies can cost
hundreds of dollars or even thousands of dollars per dosage, it is clear that
both plans could place a huge burden on the federal treasury.

   The Bush and Gore plans fail to foresee the breathtaking future of
pharmaceutical advances. This oversight will fuel the crisis instead of
harnessing it. Negotiations with drug manufacturers to accept lower profit
margins, even if fruitful, will not solve the problem. The pharmaceutical
industry is a wildly successful research and development enterprise (with a big
assist from the federal government) from which Americans want to benefit.

   Such a crisis could force overt rationing of health care instead of the
covert "bedside rationing" that occurs now. Bedside rationing happens, for
example, when compassionate health care providers influence families toward a
"dignified death" for their family members, saving precious resources along the
way.

   Up to now, no one has stepped forward to provide leadership in the debate
about rationing that inevitably lies ahead. The discussion must include a way to
move from the covert rationing we have now to the more overt form--an approach
that could rescue us from the ill effects of Americans' desire to "do
everything," to use new technologies (and old) simply because they exist.
Whereas rationing is currently widespread, it affects different classes of
Americans differently; surely it is time in our society of plenty to change
these behind-the-curtain decisions into well-analyzed and equitable ones made in
plain sight.

   I believe that leadership will come from a public/private consortium
implemented, but not led, by the federal government. This consortium should
include physicians, lawyers, patients, private sector leaders and others who can
work together to recommend (and enforce?) the hard choices about "who gets
what."

   This has happened in other countries, particularly in Europe. In Britain, for
example, such discussions about availability and cost of pharmaceuticals are
part of the social fabric. The British do not ask for expensive resources at all
times and at all costs. In contrast to our "more is better" approach, they try
not to spend money on futile interventions. Despite long queues for some
elective procedures, the British generally approve of their health care system,
everyone there has access to primary care, and some of their public health
statistics are much better than our own.

   We tend to be a society that relies on incremental steps toward fixing social
problems (even crises). The candidates' plans may help the elderly a little, for
a little while. But if they don't address and acknowledge the effects of the
technologic imperative, the cost of health care will be back four years from
now--and in every presidential campaign thereafter.


   Alan Hillman is professor of medicine and health care management at the
University of Pennsylvania.





GRAPHIC: Illustration, adam niklewicz for The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2000


                             233 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 9, 2000, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: LAWYERS FOR AMGEN, TKT SWAP CHARGES IN FINAL ARGUMENTS IN PATENT CASE

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Trading charges of greed and deception, attorneys for Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. and Amgen Inc. concluded a four-month-long trial over TKT's alleged
infringement of patents Amgen holds on the world's best-selling biotechnology
drug, Epogen.

   "The greed here is the defendants who wish to take our product and sell it,"
said Lloyd Day, Amgen's chief attorney. Epogen, which stimulates production of
red blood cells and is useful in combating anemia, has sales of $4 billion
worldwide.

      In a courtroom filled with patent attorneys and Wall Street biotechnology
analysts, Day argued that TKT and its partner, Aventis SA, did not prove that
Amgen's five patents were invalid, unclear, or that critical information was
withheld from the US Patent and Trademark office and from patent examiners.
Thus, he argued, Amgen's patents were sound.

   TKT's defense team said the Cambridge company is not violating Amgen's
patents because its gene-activation technology for making erythropoietin, the
protein that is the active ingredient in Epogen, is significantly different.
However, US District Court Judge William Young ruled early in the trial that TKT
infringed on one of the five patents in question, weakening TKT's arguments.

   Yesterday, several TKT attorneys reiterated their defense that Amgen's
patents are overly broad. Amgen, based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., is abusing the
patent system by making claims that were never explained in its patent filings,
said James Haley, a TKT attorney.

   "There is a common thread here, and that thread is greed," said Herbert
Schwartz, the last of the four TKT attorneys who said Amgen constructed a "wall
of patents" to protect its product from competitors.

   Both sides were interrupted several times by Young, who sought to clarify
several issues as he listened to the closing arguments.

   "This is a complex case, and the judge knows the legal framework is very
difficult," said Kathy Williams, biotech patent counsel at the Boston law firm
of Palmer & Dodge.

   "I think the judge gave himself a mental time frame for deciding of a month
or two," said Ivor R. Elrifi, a biotech patent attorney at Mintz Levin Cohn
Ferris Glovsky and Popeo.

   On the Nasdaq Stock Market, TKT shares closed at $38, down $3.50, while Amgen
shares rose $2.94 to close at $74.94.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000


                             234 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                   September 9, 2000, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 9B

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: UB'S MINI-MEDICAL SCHOOL IS SET TO BEGIN

BODY:


   The latest advances in genetics, surgery and chemotherapy will be among the
topics presented in the next session of the University at Buffalo's Mini-Medical
School that will begin Tuesday.

   Designed for the general public, the course will be held in Butler Auditorium
in 150 Farber Hall on the UB South campus on Main Street.

   The new five-session course taught by UB faculty members will be held from 7
to 9 p.m. Tuesdays from Sept. 12 through Oct. 10.

   Topics and speakers will be:

   Sept. 12: "Infection, Inflammation and Heart Disease," Dr. Robert J. Genco,
distinguished professor and chairman of the department of oral biology, and "New
Concepts Challenging the Lipid Hypothesis," Dr. Sebastian G. Ciancio, professor
and chair in the department of periodontics and endodontics.

   Sept. 19: "Vaccines in the 21st Century," Dr. Timothy F. Murphy, professor of
medicine and microbiology, and "New Advances in Gene Therapy," John Hay,
professor and chair of the department of microbiology and UB associate provost
for research.

   Sept. 26: "Assuring the Breaths of Life: New Treatment for Lung Disease,"
Bruce A. Holm, senior associate dean of the School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences and associate professor of pharmaceutics and pediatrics.

   Oct. 3: "History and Recent Advances in the Treatment of Multiple Sclerosis,"
Dr. Lawrence D. Jacobs, professor of neurology.

   Oct. 10: "The Latest in Research and Treatment of Digestive Disorders," Dr.
Peter Lance, associate professor of medicine.

   The cost of the course is $ 30 for individuals, $ 45 for couples, $ 25 for
senior citizens, $ 40 for senior couples and $ 20 for students.

   A mini-graduation and certificate ceremony will be held at the final session.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000


                             235 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                   September 9, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 535 words

HEADLINE: PATENT VALIDITY FOCUS AS AMGEN PATENT TRIAL ARGUMENTS END

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. and smaller rival Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. fought over the
validity of patents on the top-selling anemia drug Epogen, as lawyers concluded
arguments in a patent-infringement trial that could shape the future of the
biotechnology industry.

   U.S. District Judge William Young, calling the case a "fascinating legal
puzzle," must decide whether Transkaryotic infringed patents for Epogen, Amgen's
anemia treatment developed by genetically engineering a copy of a human protein.

   Transkaryotic's lawyers argued that Amgen's patents were obtained without
disclosing material information to government examiners and are invalid. Amgen's
attorney countered that Transkaryotic failed to prove that patent examiners were
misled.

   Shares in Amgen, the world's largest biotechnology company, rose $ 2.94 to
close at $ 74.94, and Transkaryotic fell $ 3.50 to close at $ 38, both on
Nasdaq.

   Transkaryotic's lawyers devoted most of their closing arguments to
challenging the validity of the Amgen patents, rather than contesting claims
that the patents were infringed.

   "Amgen wants to preclude far more than it invented," Transkaryotic attorney
James Haley contended. "That abuses the patent system. It abuses the public and
it abuses Transkaryotic."

   Transkaryotic attorneys said Amgen failed to disclose material information to
patent examiners, rendering their patents unenforceable. Transkaryotic lawyer
Herbert Schwartz said filing notification with the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office--not the examiners reviewing the patent applications--is insufficient.

   Amgen argued that Transkaryotic never proved that material information was
withheld from examiners.

   A victory by Cambridge, Mass.-based Transkaryotic would make it easier for
up-and-coming gene therapy companies to challenge the established pharmaceutical
companies' dominance, patent experts say.

   "The judge said it's a legal puzzle and the framework is challenging," said
Robert LeBoyer, an analyst with Leerink, Swann & Co. "But he's going to have to
draw the distinctions and reconcile these opposing points of view."

   Judge Young occasionally interrupted attorneys during closing arguments, to
ask his own questions and comment on the case's complexity. He had warned
attorneys Thursday that it may take him some time to reach a decision.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen is fighting to keep a tight grip on its signature
drug Epogen, a version of the human protein erythropoietin. The drug, expected
to have U.S. sales of $ 4 billion in 2000, is given to kidney dialysis patients,
who often become anemic, to help stimulate red-blood cell production.

   Amgen sued Transkaryotic and Aventis predecessor Hoechst Marion Roussel Inc.,
saying the companies were infringing five of its patents by developing another
version of erythropoietin.

   Amgen wants Transkaryotic stopped before its drug goes on the market. Aventis
filed last month with U.S. and European regulators for permission to sell a
version of Epogen produced using Transkaryotic's methods.

   Transkaryotic, which has yet to put a product on the market, says it didn't
infringe Amgen's patents because it used a different method to develop
erythropoietin.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2000


                             236 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                        September 8, 2000, Friday ,FINAL

SECTION: EDITORIAL ,23A

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: Too much silence in branding epidemics

BYLINE: Ira R. Allen

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- As the public affairs director of a nonprofit health
institution, I spend much of my time reading news stories about medical
advances. But I must say to my friends in the news media and my colleagues in
public relations that if I see or hear the phrase "silent epidemic" one more
time, I am just going to (deleted).

    What is a "silent epidemic"?

    Is it an outbreak of bone disease or upsurge (or downturn) of erectile
dysfunction? What is not a "silent epidemic" -- thousands of people writhing and
screaming from bubonic plague, or, perhaps, the pain of something as frequent
and joyful as childbirth?

    Only the rubella outbreak of the 1960s, which caused an inordinate number of
babies to be born deaf, could accurately be called a " silent epidemic." But a
cursory scan of headlines for the past six months reveals the following "silent
epidemics," "silent killers," "silent diseases" and, most recently, the "silent
infection" known as West Nile virus:

    Bone disease in men

    Erectile dysfunction

    Decreased sexual desire in women

    Oral disease among the poor

    Chlamydia among the young

    Traumatic brain injury

    Asthma (which if you live with or near it is not so silent)

    Heroin

    Inhalant abuse

    Hepatitis C

    Diabetes

    Depression

    Autism

    Ovarian cancer

    (Surveying different disease advocacy groups will reveal even more silence
regarding such ailments as obsessive compulsive disorder, anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female athletes and gastrointestinal stasis.)

    So, one is tempted to ask: If the disease organizations lobbied in a forest,
wouldn't all epidemics be silent?

    There is much to be learned about all of these conditions, none of which is
the least bit funny to those who have them, and labeling them silent epidemics
is an easy way of getting a reporter's -- or congressman's -- attention.

    But their attention ought to be more on the real science that tells us how
to prevent, treat and live with chronic illness.

    Nearly half of us live with chronic conditions, yet they may well have been
caused by behaviors that are changeable. Studying behavioral change is a
productive -- yet silently under-funded -- field of inquiry.

    Gene therapy may provoke a gee-whiz from the science writers and the public,
but the reality is that half of the deaths in the United States are caused by
things we already know about and can stop.

    Unraveling the human genome is a breathtaking achievement, but what kills us
is not simply a matter of switching a gene on or off the way you do a
transistor. The promise of gene therapy still can't be expected to stop us from
smoking, drinking, eating and worrying ourselves to death.

    Unfortunately, the funding tends to follow the disease -- the "epidemic" --
not the cause. All diseases are worth studying and trying to cure, but not all
are silent, and not all are epidemics. What we can do is to apply the knowledge
we already have about the psychological, behavioral, social and environmental
causes of illness and translate them into better practices by caregivers.

    We might, while we're at it, retire the cliché of "silent epidemics" and
concentrate on how medical science and public health research can be heard and
heeded more effectively.

    Ira R. Allen is public affairs director of the Center for the Advancement of
Health, a nonprofit institution that promotes greater understanding of the
psychological, behavioral, social and environmental determinants of health.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2000


                             237 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                      September 8, 2000 Friday 2D EDITION

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. D-01

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Broncos' injury list grows McCaffrey may play with strained groin

BYLINE: By Patrick Saunders, Denver Post Sports Writer,

BODY:

   BOSTON - Amgen Inc.'s in-house patent lawyer Stuart Watt  testified in
federal court that he didn't provide data from a  scientific study to a
government patent examiner, claiming it had  been previously disclosed.

   Watt was testifying in the patent-infringement suit that  Amgen, the world's
largest biotechnology company, has brought to  block smaller rival Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. from selling its  own version of the top-selling anemia drug
Epogen.

   Amgen's second-largest office is in Longmont.

   Watt was questioned by Cambridge, Mass.-based Transkaryotic's  attorney
Gerald Flattmann, who is seeking to show Epogen patents  shouldn't be enforced
because Amgen withheld key data from patent  examiners.

   Transkaryotic shares, which rose 12 percent Wednesday after  testimony by an
Amgen lawyer, fell $ 5.50, or nearly 12 percent, to  $ 41.50 Thursday. Shares of
Thousand Oaks, Calif.-based Amgen,  which fell more than 6 percent Wednesday,
rose $ 3.94, or nearly 6  percent, to $ 72.

   'I think that Amgen really turned the table on Transkaryotic  today,' said
Meirav Chovav, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney.  'Yesterday, it looked like
Transkaryotic showed that Amgen  probably fulfilled legal duties to the patent
office but did not  go beyond the call of duty in terms of disclosure. But today
Amgen  showed that the patent office was aware of the prior studies and  based
their decisions on these studies.'

   Closing arguments in the case are slated to begin today, and  U.S. District
Judge William Young said 'it's pretty clear I won't  decide this case from the
bench.'    As testimony in the trial  wrapped up Thursday, Watt was questioned
about a scientific study  that Transkaryotic claims deals with therapeutic
results similar  to those described in Amgen's patents. Flattmann asked Watt if
the  study's findings had been disclosed during government review of an  Amgen
patent application.

   'I'm not aware that the study or its results are recorded' in  documentation
of the patent review process, Watt said. Watt added,  however, that the study's
existence was disclosed.

   Amgen also provided evidence Thursday showing, the company  contends, that
the examiner reviewing its patent application was  aware of the study.

   Flattmann also quizzed Watt on whether he told government  examiners that
Amgen had sued Transkaryotic over three Epogen  patents while awaiting action on
two other patent applications.

   Watt said the company disclosed the existence of litigation  by filing a
notice with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.     Young's ruling, and any
later appeals court decisions, could shape  the biotechnology industry for years
to come, experts say. Should  Young decide in Transkaryotic's favor, it would
clear the way for  up-and-coming gene therapy companies to challenge the
established  pharmaceutical companies' dominance, patent experts say.

   The Denver Broncos' injury list grew longer instead of shorter  Thursday when
Pro Bowl wide receiver Ed McCaffrey was added to the  cast of limping wounded.

   Coach Mike Shanahan had hoped that running back Terrell Davis  would be back
at practice, but his sprained right ankle prevented  that. Whether Davis will
play Sunday against the Atlanta Falcons  in the Broncos' home opener will likely
be a game-time decision.

   Now McCaffrey, who had seven catches for 115 yards in Denver's
season-opening loss at St. Louis, is out with a strained groin.  For how long,
Shanahan isn't sure.

   'We thought it would be better for him to stay out of  practice,' Shanahan
said. 'If we were playing the game today, I'm  not sure he could have played.
But an ounce of prevention is worth  a pound of cure. So we'll see how he feels
tomorrow, and if it  feels better, he'll practice. If not, we'll wait until
Saturday.'

   Shanahan said McCaffrey strained his groin Monday night in St.  Louis, but
didn't really feel the effects of the injury until  Thursday.

   The one starter who almost certainly will miss the game is  middle linebacker
Al Wilson. His separated shoulder is a little  better, but probably won't have
healed enough to allow him to  play. He'll be replaced by Glenn Cadrez.

   Davis might not be able to practice again today. But if he  doesn't, that
doesn't guarantee he'll miss Sunday's game.

   'My gut feeling is that he is going to be able to play,'  Shanahan said. 'I
can see he was jogging a little bit out there  today. We are going to make the
decision about an hour and a half  before game time.'

   If Davis can't play, the Broncos will start rookie Mike  Anderson in his
place, and then move rookie KaRon Coleman off the  practice squad and onto the
active roster in order to provide  depth at running back.

LOAD-DATE: September 08, 2000


                             238 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   September 7, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C13

LENGTH: 506 words

HEADLINE: AMGEN PATENT ATTORNEY TESTIFIES HE HID NO DATA

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Insisting he never withheld pertinent information from patent examiners,
Michael Borun, the chief patent attorney for Amgen Inc., yesterday defended his
actions in court when he was called to testify against his employer by
Transkaryotic Therapies.

   Cambridge-based TKT and its partner, Aventis SA, are being sued by Amgen for
allegedly violating five Amgen patents that cover Epogen, the world's
best-selling anemia-fighting drug.

      TKT's shares rose $5.13 to $47 after Borun testified. Amgen shares dropped
$4.44 to close at $68.06.

   In an unusual move, Borun was called to testify by TKT. It claims he
deliberately withheld critical information - about research that had been
published in scientific journals - when he applied for patents on Amgen's
behalf, between 1984 and 1995.

   TKT hopes to prove that those discoveries preceded Amgen's patents and that
the company, based in Thousand Oaks, Calif., should not have received
intellectual proprerty protection, since the information was known to the
scientific community.

   If it prevails - and is then allowed to manufacture and sell its version of
Epogen - TKT would be Amgen's first major competitor in the $4 billion worldwide
market for the drug.

   Borun was in a federal courtoom in Chicago with TKT and Amgen attorneys
yesterday. His testimony was televised to US District Court in Boston, where
Judge William G. Young is presiding over the nonjury trial. Unlike all the other
witnesses, who traveled to Boston, Borun was unable to leave Chicago due to
family medical problems.

   During more than 2 1/2 hours of questioning by Lloyd Schwartz, TKT's
attorney, Borun said he used the "best information" available when he submitted
documents to the US Patent and Trademark Office.

   Sifting through various technical documents and patent filings, Borun
explained his actions, stating at one point that he got information in oral form
or that he did not recollect a particular discussion.

   He also cited some typographical changes and errors at the US Patent printing
office, noting that there was "nothing wrong with the information."

   Schwartz bored in on the inconsistencies in Amgen's patent documents and on
whether Borun recalled them or chose to leave out some relevant data.

   Asked whether he had an obligation to tell the patent examiner that Amgen was
suing TKT over three Epogen patents while seeking approval for two others, Borun
simply said he was not obliged.

   "So you made a conscious decision not to tell the patent office about this
lawsuit?" Schwartz continued.

   Borun's response: "I don't recall that."

   A Wall Street analyst, Elise Wang of PaineWebber, said Borun's testimony did
not show that he intentionally withheld material information.

   However, Jonas V. Alsenas, of Ing Furman Selz Asset Management LLC, said that
Borun's testimony raises questions about the validity of the patents.

   "He [Borun] was aware of the prior art," Alsenas said.

   The case continues today in Boston, with closing arguments tomorrow morning.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2000


                             239 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                  September 6, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C9

LENGTH: 164 words

HEADLINE: REGION BRIEFS;
AMGEN-TRANSKARYOTIC TRIAL NEARING FINISH

BYLINE: By RONALD ROSENBERG

BODY:

   Closing arguments in the closely watched Amgen Inc. patent infringement case
against Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge and its partner Aventis SA are
set for Friday morning before US District Judge William Young in Boston. The
civil trial, which began in May over Amgen's claims that TKT was violating five
of its patents for Epogen, a $4 billion a year anemia-fighting drug, has been
heard without a jury by Young over the summer. TKT maintains it has a different
manufacturing process, called cell activation, to make the same drug, which does
not infringe on Amgen's patents. Moreover, TKT claims Amgen's in-house patent
attorney Michael Borun withheld critical information about prior discoveries
from the US Patent and Trademark Office. Today Borun will respond to that charge
in Chicago, where he is staying because he is unable to travel. He will testify
before Young and attorneys from TKT and Thousand Oaks, Calif.-based Amgen, who
flew there yesterday.

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2000


                             240 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    September 4, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: SAY 'AAAH';
 CAPSULES;
 HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE STUDY BACKS OLDER DRUG

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:


   As many as 85,000 deaths worldwide--half of them in the United States--may
occur because physicians use calcium channel blockers to treat high blood
pressure rather than cheaper diuretics, according to an analysis of several
previous studies.

   An estimated 28 million people--12.7 million of them in the United
States--now take the drugs. North Carolina researchers reported Aug. 28 that
patients using the calcium channel blockers had a 27% higher risk of heart
attack and a 26% higher risk of heart failure.

   The study shows that older and cheaper drugs are sometimes better than newer,
more expensive ones.

   Dr. Curt D. Furburg and his colleagues at the Wake Forest University School
of Medicine combined the results of nine large studies comparing calcium channel
blockers to other blood pressure drugs. Those studies enrolled more than 27,000
people. He reported his findings at a meeting of the European Cardiology Society
in Amsterdam.

   The drugs in question are calcium channel blockers, a family of drugs that
includes Adalat, Calan, Cardene, Cardizem, Covera, Dilacor, Isoptin, Nimotop,
Norvasc, Plendil, Procardia, Sular, Tiazac, Vasco and Verelan.

   Furburg cautioned patients against stopping use of the drugs abruptly and did
not call for them to be removed from the market. Instead, he stressed,
physicians should be more cautious in prescribing them, and diuretics and other
drugs should be the first line of therapy for high blood pressure. Patients
should consult their physicians if they are concerned, he said. The National
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute has a large study of calcium channel blockers
underway, but results are not expected until 2002.

   Beta-Blockers Useful in Severe Cases, Team Says

   There was better news from the same meeting about another family of heart
drugs called beta-blockers, which are widely used to treat patients with mild to
moderate heart failure.

   Despite their common use, physicians have been reluctant to prescribe them
for people with severe heart failure because the drugs depress the heart rate
and cardiologists feared that would create problems for people whose hearts were
already badly damaged. The new study demonstrated, however, that the drugs are
just as effective in this group of patients as in patients with milder heart
failure.

   Dr. Milton Packer and his colleagues at the Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons studied 2,289 people who had severe heart failure but
did not require treatment in a hospital intensive care unit. In addition to
medications they were already taking, half the patients received the
beta-blocker Coreg (carvedilol) and half received a placebo.

   After 30 months of treatment, Packer told the Amsterdam meeting on Tuesday,
35% fewer patients had died in the group receiving Coreg. The trial was halted
in March, more than a year early, because the benefits were so substantial.

   Report Touts Gene Therapy for Vessels

   Boston researchers have reported what they call the first objective evidence
that gene therapy to promote the growth of new blood vessels can improve the
health of victims of heart disease.

   Previous studies have claimed to produce improvements in pain and mobility in
heart attack victims and patients with circulatory problems in their legs.
Critics of these previous studies have contended that there was no evidence that
new blood vessels were actually formed as the result of treatment.

   Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner and his colleagues at the Tufts University School of
Medicine studied eight men and five women who had suffered at least one heart
attack, had severe chest pain (angina) and had undergone bypass surgery. In the
new study, however, each patient underwent a special imaging technique called
electromechanical mapping to determine which areas of the heart had an
inadequate blood supply. Another test, called single-photon emission computed
tomography, also revealed heart tissue that was starved for blood and thus not
functioning.

   The patients then received injections of so-called naked DNA containing the
gene for a protein called vascular endothelial growth factor.. The hope was that
the gene would be taken up by heart cells, leading to the production of the
growth factor, which stimulates the growth of new blood vessels.

   Isner's team reports in the September Circulation: Journal of the American
Heart Assn. (http://www.ahajournals.org) that six months after the treatment,
the average number of angina attacks had dropped from 48 a week to only two.
Average use of nitroglycerine tablets to fight pain dropped from 55 a week to
two. Moreover, repeat imaging tests showed increased blood flow through the
heart and partial or complete restoration of function in areas of oxygen-starved
tissue.

   St. John's Wort Tested Against Antidepressant

   St. John's wort is as effective for treating mild depression as one of the
most commonly used antidepressants and has fewer side effects, according to
German researchers. The herb, whose active ingredient is hypericum, is widely
used in Europe for treating depression and is gaining popularity in the United
States. The results of previous clinical trials have been criticized for
scientifically unsound research methods. Dr. Helmut Woelk of Universitat Giessen
designed the new study to overcome those objections.

   Woelk and his colleagues enrolled more than 300 patients with mild to
moderate depression who were randomly treated for six weeks with either
hypericum or the antidepressant imipramine (Tofranil). They reported in the
Sept. 2 British Medical Journal (http://www.bmj.com) that the two drugs were
"therapeutically equivalent," as measured by standard rating scales for
depression. Side effects, such as dry mouth, sweating and dizziness, were
reported by only 39% of those taking hypericum, contrasted with 63% of those
taking imipramine. Only 3% of those receiving hypericum stopped taking it,
contrasted with 16% of those on imipramine. In view of its superior safety
record, they concluded, St. John's wort should be considered for first treatment
of mild to moderate depression.


   *

   Medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II can be reached at thomas.maugh@latimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 2000


                             241 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                September 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Page 9; Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 216 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS;
Jennifer Tseng, Marc Sabatine

BODY:

   Dr. Jennifer Fan-Yu Tseng and Dr. Marc Steven Sabatine, physicians at
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, were married yesterday at Harvard
University in Cambridge, Mass. The Rev. George S. Salzman, a Roman Catholic
priest, performed the ceremony in the Memorial Church.

   The bride is a general surgery resident, the bridegroom a fellow in
cardiology. They are also research fellows for Harvard Medical School, she in
gene therapy at Children's Hospital and he in cardiology at Brigham and Women's
Hospital, both in Boston.

    Dr. Tseng, 31, will continue to use her name professionally. She graduated
with distinction from Stanford and received a medical degree from the University
of California at San Francisco. She is the daughter of Dr. Rose Yun-Li Tseng and
Dr. Raymond Chi-Jen Tseng of Hilo, Hawaii. Her father retired as the director of
reliability engineering at Komag Inc., a manufacturer of computer hard disks in
Milpitas, Calif. Her mother is the chancellor of the University of Hawaii at
Hilo and a vice president of the university's overall system.

   Dr. Sabatine, 32, received a bachelor's degree and an M.D. magna cum laude
from Harvard. He is the son of Natalie and Matthew Sabatine of New York. His
parents own S&C Products, a construction company in New York.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2000


                             242 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                           September 1, 2000, Friday

SECTION: FEATURES - ACCENT & ARTS, Pg. 10H

LENGTH: 589 words

HEADLINE: TELETHON A LABOR OF LOVE FOR ITS CO-HOSTS

BYLINE: Tim Feran, Dispatch TV-Radio Critic

BODY:


   By the time Columbus viewers catch up with Jerry Lewis' annual MDA Labor Day
telethon, Lewis and sidekick Ed McMahon already will have been on the air in
other parts of the country for nine hours.

   But even if the duo don't look terribly fresh at 6 a.m. Monday, McMahon said
that he and Lewis will be in relatively good condition compared to last year.
During that telethon, Lewis battled double vision and headaches, the result of
having been ill with viral meningitis a month before the telecast. The show was
so grueling that doctors watched over the comedian all during the broadcast.

   "He is vaguely, vaguely aware of that,'' McMahon said. "He was really pushing
it out of the reserve box to get through that show.''

   This year, Lewis is in "the best shape he's been in for a long time,'' said
Casey Kasem, who will be the local host of the telethon's Los Angeles broadcast
and a frequent guest on the national broadcast.

   Even so, plowing through 21 1/2 hours on the air isn't as tough as it might
seem, said McMahon, who has been participating in the telethon for 33 years.

   "You do get on a high,'' McMahon said. "It's like anything else. You just put
in your mind you have to do it. We do get some breaks -- when we go to Casey and
the other local hosts we have a 15-minute break. It gives us a chance to refresh
ourselves.

   "I don't think of it as grueling. I think of it as the beginning of another
year, of learning more about the latest advances in research. It's something I
always look forward to, learning something from the doctors and research
scientists,'' McMahon added.

   "Another thing that keeps you on your toes,'' Kasem said, "are the statements
by parents of children who have muscular dystrophy -- not to mention the
entertainment on top of that. It's an exciting time.''

   "It's very thrilling to be there and hear a doctor of consequence, who has
been in the arena, say, 'A cure is on the horizon,' '' McMahon said. "When I
first started, we never heard the word cure. The thought really never entered
our minds. All we were doing then was raising money to help people buy
wheelchairs.''

   "There was a period of time when things just galloped along year after year,
I think it was the late '80s and early '90s,'' Kasem said. "Then along came gene
therapy. Those are in trials right now, and the only reason they're not moving
along is that they want to put safety ahead of speed. But now we can talk about
the possibility of a cure.''

   Gene therapy "is going to affect everything,'' McMahon said. "Alzheimer's,
multiple sclerosis, cystic fibrosis -- this is hope for everything.''

   The annual telethon has become part of the television landscape, a signal
that fall has arrived. As usual, it will feature a passel of celebrities,
including Christina Aguilera, Dennis Franz, Brad Garrett, Savion Glover, Marilu
Henner and Charo, "our standard visitor,'' McMahon said. "But the hottest thing
is an appearance by Regis Philbin.''

   With everyone having such a good time, the time-worn joke has been that
Lewis, McMahon et al. would be lost without a show to do over Labor Day.

   What would happen to the show if doctors did find a cure for muscular
dystrophy?

   McMahon and Kasem said they would welcome that day.

   "That would be great,'' McMahon said. "We would rejoice. Casey and I would
throw the biggest barbecue you've ever seen.''

   "I'm a vegetarian, so we would have to have potatoes!'' Kasem said,
chuckling.

   "How about Garden Burgers?'' McMahon said with his familiar guffaw.

GRAPHIC: Phot, (1) Ed McMahon (2) Jerry Lewi

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2000


                             243 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    August 31, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 308 words

HEADLINE: CALIFORNIA;
 GERON SHARES SOAR ON NEWS OF CANCER VACCINE RESEARCH;
 MEDICINE: FINDINGS FROM MICE STUDIES OF THE ENZYME TELOMERASE MAY BENEFIT
HUMANS.

BYLINE: From Reuters

BODY:


   Shares of Geron Corp. jumped 19% on Wednesday after research on mice
suggested a vaccine based on an enzyme studied by the company might work against
a range of cancers.

   Menlo Park, Calif.-based Geron, which has specialized in the study of the
enzyme telomerase, rose $ 5.44 to close at $ 34.31 in heavy trading on Nasdaq.

   "Telomerase is expressed in most human tumors, but it is not present in most
normal tissue. This suggests that it could be used as a generalized target,"
said Jane Lebowski, vice president of cell and gene therapy at Geron.

   The researchers, from Duke University and Geron, cautioned that their
findings have yet to be tested in humans.

   Lebowski said Geron is planning to begin trials of the vaccine in humans
within a year or two and, if all goes smoothly, could have an actual vaccine in
four to seven years.

   The research, reported in the journal Nature Medicine after the close of
trading Tuesday, found that an active part of the enzyme can stimulate
development of immune cells that can kill several kinds of mouse and human
cancers.

   Such a vaccine, if developed for humans, would be a "therapeutic" vaccine,
meaning it would not prevent cancer but instead would prompt the body's immune
system to fight existing tumors.

   "This is potentially quite exciting, but most of the work they're talking
about is preclinical--done only in mice--so you can't get too excited," said
Alan Auerbach, an analyst at First Security Van Kasper.

   Geron has specialized in the study of telomerase since earlier studies
indicated the enzyme appeared to be present in unusually high amounts in many
types of cancer cells.

   In the first half of this year, Geron reported a net loss of $ 25 million on
operating revenue of $ 3 million, compared with a loss of $ 31.4 million and
revenue of $ 2.8 million a year ago.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2000


                             244 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     August 31, 2000 Thursday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 17A

LENGTH: 562 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS OFFER HOPE FOR DEVELOPING CANCER VACCINE

BYLINE: By ANDRE PICARD; TORONTO GLOBE AND MAIL

BODY:

   Scientists say they have the first concrete evidence that it may be possible
to manufacture a "universal" cancer vaccine.

   The vaccine would not prevent the disease from developing initially but would
help the body fight off cancers once they are detected, regardless of whether
they originated in the breast, prostate, lung or elsewhere.

   Writing in the new edition of Nature Medicine, researchers at Duke University
Medical Center report that cancer sufferers could be immunized against
telomerase, a protein that plays an important role in the replication of cancer
cells.

   In the laboratory, this approach stimulated development of immune cells in
such large numbers that they were able to kill human cancer cells in test tubes
and to slow tumor growth in mice.

   Dr. Eli Gilboa, director of the Center for Genetic and Cellular Therapies at
Duke, said most vaccines work by stimulating the body's natural immune response,
prompting it to build an army of cells that recognize, then attack and kill the
target cells. The challenge has been to find what will trigger immune responses
strong enough to fight off wily cancer cells.

   The protein telomerase has become a focus of much research because it is
produced during the replication of all cancer cells. Telomerase allows the cells
to divide unchecked and also provokes the immune system to work.

   As cancer progresses, the immune system becomes progressively weaker but
seems to retain the ability to recognize telomerase. The idea then is to bolster
the telomerase level to stimulate the immune system to keep fighting.

   "The question posed in the study was whether the telomerase-based vaccine can
stimulate an immune response from cancer patients, and whether (immune response)
cells can attack and kill the patient's tumor cells," Gilboa said.

   The answer, at least in the laboratory, is yes, according to the researcher,
and that is the "first indication that a more broadly applicable cancer vaccine
might be possible."

   While telomerase is present everywhere cancer cells are replicating, it is
not a strong antigen, meaning it does not provoke a strong immune response. For
a universal vaccine to be effective, it would have to contain other antigens
that would better stimulate the immune system.

   Using new genetic therapy techniques, Gilboa and his team used RNA -
ribonucleic acid, part of the cell's machinery for building proteins - to teach
dendritic cells to display telomerase protein on their surface. Dendritic cells
are often described as the most-wanted posters of the immune system, because
they circulate through the body eating foreign proteins and displaying their
antigens on the cell surface. These displays, in turn, stimulate the production
of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, known as killer T cells.

   Cancer cells produce a number of unusual proteins and have developed ways of
hiding these proteins from the dendritic cells, making cancer virtually
invisible to the immune system.

   Several cancer vaccines are in development and one for the skin cancer known
as melanoma is being tested on humans.

   Most cancer vaccines, however, target specific antigens. For example,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is found in 90 percent of colon cancers. To date,
most vaccines have been made by extracting protein antigens from the tumors of
specific patients, an onerous and expensive process.

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2000


                             245 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   August 30, 2000, Wednesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: National briefs

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Services

BODY:

   Anti-mob law can be used to sue L.A. police

   LOS ANGELES - Victims of the Los Angeles police corruption scandal can sue
under the federal racketeering law originally aimed at the mob, a judge ruled in
a decision that could cost the city hundreds of millions of dollars.

   U.S. District Judge William J. Rea issued his ruling in a civil rights
lawsuit filed July 3 on behalf of Louie Guerrero, 36, who alleges that officers
grabbed, choked, kicked and punched him, then arrested him on trumped-up charges
in 1997.

   The ruling allows Guerrero to refile the lawsuit under the Racketeer
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, the 1970 law aimed at busting
"criminal enterprises" such as the Mafia. RICO allows plaintiffs to receive
triple damages and extends the statute of limitations to 10 years after a crime
is committed.

   Minority population majority in California

   LOS ANGELES - California's minority population became the majority in 1999,
continuing a demographic evolution that could have wide-ranging consequences for
the state's political future.

   The non-Hispanic white population was 49.8 percent last year, according to
U.S. Census Bureau estimates released today. In 1990, non-Hispanic whites were
57 percent of California's population.

   That marks the first time since 1860, when accurate census data for
California started being recorded, that whites did not have a majority.

   300-pound counselor fatally crushed camper

   TALLAHASSEE, Fla. - An investigation into the death of a 12-year-old boy who
was fatally crushed at a camp for delinquents concluded that a 300-pound
counselor used too much force to restrain the 65-pound boy.

   Joseph Cooley pinned Michael Wiltsie down for about 15 minutes at Camp
E-Kel-E-Tu in the Ocala National Forest in February.  Wiltsie first struggled
but then stopped breathing. He was revived but died the next day.

   The Department of Juvenile Justice released results Tuesday of its
investigation, which concluded that Cooley used excessive force and an improper
and unauthorized restraint.

   Wiltsie died of "compressional asphyxiation," which means there was so much
pressure on him he couldn't breathe.

    Cholesterol drugs may help build blood vessels

    WASHINGTON - Cholesterol-lowering drugs known as statins may help promote
the development of new blood vessels, or at least may help preserve them, which
may explain why they work so well to prevent heart disease, researchers said
Tuesday.

   One of the drugs, simvastatin, helps in the growth of tiny new blood vessels
in the hind legs of rabbits and in tissue grown in laboratory dishes, Dr.
Kenneth Walsh and colleagues at the Tufts University School of Medicine in
Boston said.

   They said this may mean that statins might be useful in treating patients who
have blockages that have damaged tissue. They might also help in gene therapy
treatments aimed at helping patients grow their own bypasses, Walsh's team wrote
in their report, published in the journal Nature Medicine.

    Bird believed the cause of jumbo jet's trouble

   LOS ANGELES - Investigators found the first tangible evidence Tuesday that a
bird might have been sucked into a KLM jumbo jet's engine over the weekend,
causing the airliner to spew big pieces of its rear assembly and make an
emergency landing.

   Investigators inspecting the scarred engine found animal matter and
immediately sent it to a lab in Washington for DNA testing, said Federal
Aviation Administration spokesman Jerry Snyder.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                             246 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 30, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 383 words

HEADLINE: 9 local tech firms win state funding

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Nine San Diego firms won $1.4 million in seed capital from the state
government's California Technology Investment Partnership program -- the largest
amount awarded in San Diego since the program began in 1994.

   Local companies getting funding through the program range from Advanced Brain
Monitoring -- which is developing a device to detect drowsiness in airline
pilots and truck drivers -- to Hi-Z Technology, which is exploring a method for
converting waste heat into electricity.

   Cliff Numark, who heads the San Diego Regional Technological Alliance, noted
that San Diego took nine of the 35 grants offered through the program this year.

   "San Diego clearly demonstrated its technology strength," he said.  "This
funding will help bring new technologies to the market."

   The taxpayer-funded program -- which provides matching grants to federal
technology awards -- is designed to help California companies sell their
innovative ideas and products.

   Chris Berka, who heads Advanced Brain Monitoring, notes that her firm already
has close to $3 million from the National Institutes of Health to help build its
devices, which look similar to a baseball cap.  But she says the $175,000 from
the state program will "help with the more commercial aspects of the business,
such as business development and finding strategic partnerships."

   Other local companies that won grants include:

   [] Glysens, awarded $175,000 for a sensor system that enables diabetics to
detect their glucose levels without pricking themselves for blood samples.

   [] Aguila Technologies, $175,000, for technology that should slash power
requirements for computing devices.

   [] SABIA, $175,000, for a new generation of nuclear analyzer.

   [] Advanced Tissue Sciences, $165,000, to develop artificial tissue used in
heart transplants and surgery.

   [] LightPointe Communications, $165,000, for a microwave backup to help
optical laser systems deliver information at speeds up to 20 times faster.

   [] Quantum Magnetics, $150,000, for a sensor for evaluating composites.

   [] Gene Therapy Systems, $150,000, for its patented technology used in
treating diseases ranging from cancer to malaria to AIDS.

   [] Hi-Z Technology, $70,000, for its thermoelectric devices.


LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000


                             247 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 30, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 368 words

HEADLINE: 9 local tech firms win state funding

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Nine San Diego firms won $1.4 million in seed capital from the state
government's California Technology Investment Partnership program -- the largest
amount awarded in San Diego since the program began in 1994. Local companies
getting funding through the program range from Advanced Brain Monitoring --
which is developing a device to detect drowsiness in airline pilots and truck
drivers -- to Hi-Z Technology, which is exploring a method for converting waste
heat into electricity. Cliff Numark, who heads the San Diego Regional
Technological Alliance, noted that San Diego took nine of the 35 grants offered
through the program this year. "San Diego clearly demonstrated its technology
strength," he said.

   "This funding will help bring new technologies to the market." The
taxpayer-funded program -- which provides matching grants to federal technology
awards -- is designed to help California companies sell their innovative ideas
and products. Chris Berka, who heads Advanced Brain Monitoring, notes that her
firm already has close to $3 million from the National Institutes of Health to
help build its devices, which look similar to a baseball cap.

   But she says the $175,000 from the state program will "help with the more
commercial aspects of the business, such as business development and finding
strategic partnerships." Other local companies that won grants include: []
Glysens, awarded $175,000 for a sensor system that enables diabetics to detect
their glucose levels without pricking themselves for blood samples. [] Aguila
Technologies, $175,000, for technology that should slash power requirements for
computing devices. [] SABIA, $175,000, for a new generation of nuclear analyzer.
[] Advanced Tissue Sciences, $165,000, to develop artificial tissue used in
heart transplants and surgery. [] LightPointe Communications, $165,000, for a
microwave backup to help optical laser systems deliver information at speeds up
to 20 times faster. [] Quantum Magnetics, $150,000, for a sensor for evaluating
composites. [] Gene Therapy Systems, $150,000, for its patented technology used
in treating diseases ranging from cancer to malaria to AIDS. [] Hi-Z Technology,
$70,000, for its thermoelectric devices.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             248 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 29, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 712 words

HEADLINE: DOCTOR REPORTS SUCCESS WITH GENE TRIAL

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   One of six gene therapy experiments shut down by the government at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center has yielded dramatic improvement in a small group of
patients with advanced heart disease, the trials' embattled director is
reporting today.

   Even as Dr. Jeffrey Isner and the hospital await federal permission to resume
the research, a report on 13 patients treated prior to the shutdown provides
"very solid evidence" that gene therapy can work, said Isner.

      Most gene therapy experiments, in which genes are inserted into the body
to correct inherited diseases or treat cancer, have failed to show much effect.
Today's report of success comes as a "breath of fresh air" at a time when gene
therapy has been under intense attack, wrote two doctors in an editorial
accompanying the article in today's edition of the journal Circulation.

   In the experiment carried out in 1998-99, Isner and his colleagues inserted
genes that trigger the production of growth hormones into the heart muscle of
patients who had a history of heart attacks and bypass surgery and continued to
have chest pain. Previous animal work had suggested that the growth factor would
spur new blood vessels to revive damaged heart muscle.

   Today's report said that 9 of the 13 patients showed evidence that inactive
or "hibernating" heart muscle returned to normal function, said the report, and
in the overall group, episodes of angina (chest pain) went down sharply.

   One of the patients, a manager at a Kansas aircraft plant, said Isner's
treatment brought him major relief from what he had been told was inoperable
blockage in a heart artery that caused angina with almost any exertion.

   Within a month, Philip Fletcher, 50, said, "I was raking leaves, and that
ordinarily would have brought on angina fairly rapidly, but I raked a big pile
and noticed I didn't have any pain." Fletcher said he continues to feel better
than he did before the treatment.

   "I think that's very encouraging," Isner said. But he agreed with critics who
have said it will be difficult to prove the therapy's effects until it's tested
in a trial alongside an untreated control group of patients.

   The Food and Drug Administration last spring halted all six gene therapy
trials that Isner was conducting, citing a long list of alleged violations of
patient protection rules.

   Among the accusations were that a patient with cancer who should have been
excluded from the trials on medical grounds was admitted; that the researchers
didn't monitor the subjects' health closely enough; and that they neglected to
file required reports on two patients' deaths.

   In alleging 21 violations, the FDA said Isner showed "a serious lack of
knowledge of your responsibilities as a principal investigator."

   Isner and the hospital have said that most of the allegations were untrue and
that other lapses have been corrected. Isner said yesterday that he has had
"several encouraging interactions" with the FDA, but that he has not been told
when he might be allowed to resume the experiments.

   Isner also has been accused of having a conflict of interest because he holds
an equity position in a company, Vascular Genetics, that is sponsoring some of
the trials. (The company did not sponsor the trial in today's report.) The
president of the American Society of Gene Therapy has asked Isner to comply with
the society's guidelines prohibiting such conflicts. Yesterday, Isner said he
was still considering the issue.

   The editorial accompanying Isner's report, written by Drs. Cam Patterson and
Marschall S. Runge, said the St. Elizabeth's team took a cautious approach,
avoiding using a virus to carry the genes into the patients' hearts. A reaction
to such a virus caused the death of Jesse Gelsinger, a teenage patient with
liver disease, at the University of Pennsylvania last year, touching off a wave
of criticism of gene therapy.

   Instead, Isner's group used a simple vehicle - a ring of DNA - that succeeded
in getting the genes into the heart muscle cells without causing a defensive
reaction by the body.

   Patterson, of the University of Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, and Runge,
of the University of North Carolina, said the work was encouraging, but probably
won't become a routine tool any time soon.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000


                             249 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 29, 2000 Tuesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 020

LENGTH: 451 words

HEADLINE: Halted gene therapy treatment proves helpful for bad hearts

BYLINE: By MICHAEL LASALANDRA

BODY:

   A controversial gene therapy treatment for cardiac disease, shut down by the
federal government at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in May,has been proven
successful in increasing blood flow to the hearts of patients, a study published
yesterday shows.

   The study, published in the American Heart Association's journal Circulation,
is the first using objective findings to show the treatment's effectiveness.

   "There has been great concern about whether gene therapy works," said Dr.
Jeffrey Isner, a St. Elizabeth's cardiologist who pioneered the treatment. "This
is very solid evidence that it does."

   The treatment involves injecting genetically engineered DNA - known as
vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF - into the heart muscle of patients
seriously ill with heart disease to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels.

   Isner's study was shut down by the federal government in May after it found
the researchers violated FDA rules for the conduct of gene therapy experiments.
The FDA's harshly worded letter said the study deviated from an authorized study
plan and violated regulations designed to protect human subjects.

   Over the past few years, Isner has presented data purporting to show the
treatment works, but critics said the evidence was not scientifically measurable
in that it relied mostly on patients' self-reporting of improved symptoms.

   Today's study reported on 13 patients, all with serious heart disease. In
some patients, the researchers found that the gene therapy revived areas of the
heart that had appeared to be dead, but were only hibernating.

   The patients were tested before and after their treatments with a
conventional CT scan and a newer electromechanical mapping technique. Each
measured blood flow and areas of dead tissue.

   Isner said both tests showed objective evidence of improved blood flow to the
heart following the gene therapy.

   The study also showed the average number of angina attacks dropped from 48
per week before the treatment to two per week six months after the therapy.

   More importantly, areas of heart muscle that were assumed to be dead showed
restored function in nine patients, either partially or completely, within 60
days of treatment, the study found.

   "After gene therapy, these areas lit up like a Christmas tree," Isner said.

   However, the study did not involve a control group, the gold standard for
evaluating a treatment. Isner said such a randomized, controlled study was in
the works at the time the federal government shut him down.

   He said he has been involved in talks with the government about resuming the
trials and is hopeful they can be resumed soon.

   "Our discussions have been encouraging," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000


                             250 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            August 29, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-5

LENGTH: 84 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may revive heart tissue

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- Gene therapy may work not only to help patients grow their own
heart bypasses but to revive heart tissue that appeared to be dead, researchers
said yesterday.

   They said their study, published in the American Heart Association journal
Circulation, boosted evidence that gene therapy could help patients with heart
disease.

   The gene therapy not only made patients feel better but was shown on scans to
increase blood flow to the heart, said Dr. James Symes of Tufts University in
Boston.


LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2000


                             251 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 29, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 633 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Benefits Cited; Study Suggests Diseased Heart Cells
Renewed; Doubts Remain

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Doctors who injected new genes into the hearts of heart-attack survivors said
yesterday their experimental technique had rejuvenated damaged cardiac cells,
increased blood flow to the heart and reduced the frequency of chest pains.

   The researchers used a gene called VEGF, part of the body's inborn system for
growing new blood vessels. Scientists have theorized that the gene might
initiate the growth of new coronary vessels that bring oxygen to the heart.

   "There has been great concern about whether gene therapy works," said Jeffrey
M. Isner of the Tufts University School of Medicine in a statement. Isner led
the study, published in the September issue of the American Heart Association
journal Circulation. "This is very solid evidence that it does."

   Other experts, however, said the study offered more promise than proof. And
the new report does not mention that all four of Isner's more recent studies of
vessel growth genes were shut down by the Food and Drug Administration in March
because of concerns about the quality of his research.

   According to the FDA, patients were enrolled even though they were not
eligible for the studies, crucial tests to assess the treatment's effectiveness
were not done, and the vessel gene may have sped the growth of a tumor that
tripled in size soon after a patient got the treatment.

   Most cancers depend on new blood vessels to support their growth, and
regulators have repeatedly said they are concerned about having too many
vessel-enhancing genes loose in the body.

   The new study used one of several versions of VEGF (pronounced "Vej-F")
discovered in recent years. Isner and six colleagues at St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center in Cambridge, Mass., made one-inch incisions in the chests of 13 patients
and, with a small-gauge needle, injected the genes into four regions of each
patient's heart. All 13 had damaged heart tissue from previous heart attacks and
suffered chest pains despite having had bypass surgery.

   The study did not look directly for new vessel growth. But using high-tech
and still experimental imaging devices, the researchers found evidence that some
dormant heart muscle began working again after the treatment. Most important to
the patients, the average number of chest pain ("angina") attacks dropped to
about two per week, compared to 48 per week before the treatment. Their need for
pain-killing nitroglycerin tablets dropped to two per week, from a starting
average of 55.

   That's promising, said Marschall S. Runge, chairman of medicine at the
University of North Carolina. But chest pains and pain-killer requirements are
notoriously subject to psychological influences, including the mere belief that
a treatment will work. "Just being part of a study can have that effect," Runge
said.

   Moreover, a new imaging tool the team used to show increased heart muscle
function has yet to be validated by the FDA.

   Ronald Crystal of Weill Cornell Medical School in New York, who has led
similar studies with a different version of the VEGF gene, said Isner's results
resembled his own, which he characterized as "interesting and encouraging."

   Both researchers helped found competing companies that are racing to profit
from the approach. Crystal founded GenVec of Rockville, and Isner is a founder
of Vascular Genetics of Durham, N.C. Human Genome Sciences of Rockville, which
holds the rights to a version of VEGF, is a major shareholder in Isner's company
and has granted it a license to commercialize the gene's therapeutic uses.

   Isner also has been involved in a study with Genzyme Corp., a Massachusetts
biotechnology company, aimed at enhancing the body's own supply of VEGF. But
Genzyme suspended Isner as an investigator three months ago, citing the
scientist's problems with the FDA.


LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000


                             252 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      August 28, 2000 Monday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 954 words

HEADLINE: INTEGRITY IN RESEARCH AND PUSH FOR PROFITS CONCERN SCIENTISTS

BYLINE: By ALICE DEMBNER; BOSTON GLOBE

DATELINE: BETHESDA, MD.


BODY:

   Scientific research to improve medical care has become so commercialized in
the last decade that existing safeguards are failing to protect both patients
and scientific integrity, participants agreed during a landmark
government-sponsored conference last week.

   Once these experiments were largely funded by the federal government and
primarily conducted openly in academic settings, but now most are done in the
private sector under a cloak of secrecy. Even the fraction still conducted at
academic medical centers is potentially tainted because the centers and their
scientists increasingly hold a financial stake in the outcome, said speakers
from academia, government, industry and advocacy groups who were among 700
discussing the financial conflicts of interest in human research.

   "Profits do drive this business," said Jane E. Henney, commissioner of the
Food and Drug Administration.

   "Conflicts of interest are very real, very serious and a threat to our entire
endeavor," said Dr. Greg Koski, director of human research affairs at Partners
HealthCare and the newly named director of the federal Office for Human Research
Protection. "During the last five years, they may have gotten out of control.
Public trust has been eroded."

   Some of the ethically dubious tactics include cash payments to doctors who
recruit their patients into experiments as well as bias in the design and
reporting of studies to favor the projects' funders, participants said. For
example, when drug companies funded experiments, the results favored their new
drugs 89 percent of the time, compared to only 61 percent among those funded
from independent sources, according to a review cited by one speaker.

   What can be done? The federal Department of Health and Human Services held
the conference to get advice on shaping new policies on scientific conflicts of
interest. Some participants pressed for a surgical separation of research and
private money, while others suggested that more public disclosure of financial
interests, coupled with prohibition of the most severe conflicts, was the
solution.

   The stakes are high. Currently, more than 60,000 human experiments are under
way in the United States, at a cost topping $7 billion, according to
CenterWatch, a Boston organization that tracks these studies.

   In 1991, nearly 80 percent of these studies were conducted by nonprofit
academic medical centers. Now, CenterWatch estimates that the nonprofit share of
research has been cut in half, and 60 percent of studies are conducted by
for-profit companies. A whole industry of private research firms has developed,
numbering nearly 500 nationally, according to a trade group.

   The shift is being driven by industry pressure to speed products to the
market as cheaply as possible. The commercialization was also spurred by the
federal Bayh-Dole Act, which gave academic researchers and their institutions
the rights to products developed with government money. Today, it's a rare
academic researcher who has no financial ties to the biotechnology or
pharmaceutical industries.

   With more research moving to private settings and even storefront clinics,
more studies are beyond the reach of federal rules. And most conference
participants agreed that those rules don't go far enough to protect participants
or to limit financial ties that could bias the research.

   "Why do we have a national law that covers the safety of animals in research,
but not one for humans?" asked Abbey S. Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Diseases, a patient advocacy group. "If you want patients
to continue to lay their lives on the line ... you must regain the public
trust."

   Several participants mentioned the death of a healthy young man last
September in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in
which both the university and the lead researcher owned stock in the company
backing the study.

   They pointed to cases in which doctors eager to collect stock options or cash
payments of up to $5,000 per person have enrolled their patients in studies for
which they were not qualified, potentially compromising their health as well as
the validity of the study.

   "Some doctors are selling their patients into clinical studies," said Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, director of the Health Research Group of Public Citizen.

   In other instances, studies are structured to compare new treatments to
"straw men," making them useless, said Dr. Marcia Angell, former editor of the
New England Journal of Medicine.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, an internist at the University of California at San
Francisco, blew the whistle on a growing number of published articles favoring
new treatments that are ghost-written by drug company employees but carry the
name of a hired academic researcher who had nothing to do with the study.

   The government leaves much of the oversight of experiments to the
institutions or companies sponsoring the research, in the form of an
"institutional review board." But in the private sector, those boards are made
up of hired hands, whose primary allegiance may be to the company rather than to
the research participants. At universities, the boards must police institutions
that themselves own a piece of the research.

   Many institutions deal with these conflicts by asking researchers to disclose
any financial interest that would lead to conflicts. But it's unclear how much
is ever revealed. At Johns Hopkins University Medical School last year,
researchers disclosed conflicts of interest in only 4 percent of 2,800 studies
proposed, according to an administrator, Julie Gottlieb. Even fewer of these
conflicts are ever made public to participants or doctors seeking to evaluate
the studies.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000


                             253 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      August 27, 2000 Sunday Finl Edition

SECTION: NEW; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1266 words

HEADLINE: Needle implanted in brainaids Parkinson's patients

BYLINE: Tim Bonfield, The Cincinnati Enquirer - R. SCHUSTER

BODY:

   By Tim Bonfield

   The Cincinnati Enquirer

   A month ago, Parkinson's disease was causing Fred Dye's left arm to shake so
badly heneeded help to get dressed.

   His leg would seize up so intensely he couldn't work and couldn't drive. In
fact, the physical pain and mental anguish of gradually losing control of his
body was enough to make the 59-year-old Sharonville man consider suicide.

   Now, however, Mr. Dye can walk without constantly relying on a cane. His
hands are steady enough to tinker with bicycles and lawnmowers that need repair.

   Mr. Dye isn't cured and he isn't completely back to normal. But his life has
improved dramatically, thanks to a needle-like probe permanently implanted in
his brain to control his tremors.

   Doctors call it "deep brain stimulation." The treatment, which involves a
high-tech

   device that won FDA approval in October, has been hailed among experts as one
of the few major improvements in treatment in Parkinson's disease in many years.

   On July 18, Mr. Dye became the first patient to have the device installed at
Bethesda North Hospital in Montgomery -- the first time the device had been
implanted locally outside University Hospital.

   Mr. Dye's successful treatment increases hope for an estimated 400 to 500
other Tristate residents with severe cases of Parkinson's disease that no longer
respond to medications. Doctors also say his case represents another sign that
high-tech medicine can continue spreading to Cincinnati's suburbs -- if the
money can be found to pay for it.

   "This is as cutting edge as it gets anyplace in the country," said Dr. Robert
Schwetschenau, a neurosurgeon who installed the device. "The Bethesda Foundation
has brought a very promising treatment program to the people who come to
Bethesda North Hospital. But without the foundation, this program wouldn't be
here."

   The disease

   Parkinson's disease affects about 1 million Americans and many more
worldwide. Those suffering from the disease include Pope John Paul II, former
heavyweight boxing champion Muhammad Ali, U.S. Attorney General Janet Reno and
actor Michael J. Fox.

   Parkinson's is a neurological disorder that causes tremors, muscle rigidity,
garbled speech and other motor-control problems. The disease occurs when a nerve
center in a part of the brain called the thalamus begins to deteriorate. As a
result, brain cells gradually stop producing dopamine, a neurotransmitter that
helps control movement.

   Mr. Dye, who had worked for 29 years at Borden Inc., an ink-making company in
Woodlawn, was diagnosed in 1994. The tremors along his left side eventually got
so bad he couldn't run the machines anymore.

   For several years, medications that mimic dopamine have helped control Mr.
Dye's symptoms. But in the past year and a half, the drugs lost their power. Mr.
Dye said he heard about deep brain stimulation during a support group meeting in
Kenwood.

   "A lady there told us about it. Then I talked with my wife and we talked to
the doctors and we went from there," Mr. Dye said.

   Someday, researchers hope to cure Parkinson's disease through genetic
therapies or via stem cell transplants. The stem cell concept got a boost this
week when the National Institutes of Health announced plans to lift a funding
moratorium on research.

   But those therapies remain years away. For now, thousands of patients --
mostly in Europe -- already have benefited from deep brain stimulation.

   The device

   The Activa brand device, made by Medtronic Inc., works on the brain much as a
pacemaker works on a heart.

   An needle-like probe about half as thick as a coffee-stirring straw is
carefully pushed deep into the brain to a spot known to control tremors.

   The probe is connected by wires running under the scalp and under the skin of
the neck to a pulse generator placed under the muscles of the chest. The
electric pulses then stimulate the part of the brain that controls the tremors.

   The impact

   Counting human clinical trials and several years of approved use in Europe,
the deep brain stimulation device has been implanted in about 10,000 people
worldwide, according to Medtronic.

   Studies in the United States led by the University of Southern California
have reported as many as 90 percent of patients achieve substantial reduction in
tremors and muscle seizures after receiving the device.

   While most Parkinson's patients will continue to try medications as a first
level of control, there are 400 to 500 Tristate residents with advanced cases
who could benefit from this therapy, Dr. Schwetschenau said.

   In Greater Cincinnati, Bethesda North is the second hospital to offer the
therapy. Dr. Jamal Taha, a neurosurgeon at University Hospital, has installed
about 200 of the devices since Sept. 1997, a figure that includes many patients
in clinical trials, said spokeswoman Amy Bomar.

   The procedure

   The trickiest part of the treatment is getting the needle probe to the right
place in the brain.

   The area affected by Parkinson's disease, the thalamus, lies deep inside the
middle brain. If the surgeon were to miss the target by just one millimeter to
the side, the probe could cause paralysis. One millimeter too deep and the
patient could wind up blind.

   To achieve the precision movements needed, the Bethesda Foundation invested
about $500,000 in specialized equipment.

   First, doctors mapped the least-damaging path through Mr. Dye's brain by
using a series of MRI scans and custom computer mapping software. For the
surgery itself, the team used an ominous-looking stereotactic head frame to keep
Mr. Dye's head perfectly still.

   After drilling a small hole in Mr. Dye's skull, Dr. Schwetschenau used the
computer-controlled head gear to push the probe, millimeter by millimeter into
Mr. Dye's brain.

   Mr. Dye was conscious during this part of the procedure. He needed to be
awake to move his limbs while the surgical team tested the device.

   The brain itself does not feel pain, Dr. Schwetschenau said. The dura tissue
that surrounds the brain does feel pain, but it was numbed with a local
anesthetic.

   Once the electric probe had reached the right place, the needle was fixed to
a plastic plug mounted in Mr. Dye's skull. Then, while Mr. Dye was unconscious,
the connecting wires were tunneled under his skin and the pulse generator was
installed in his chest.

   Mr. Dye said he can move his head freely without shaking the probe and can
barely feel the device.

   "I only felt some tugging when they were sewing me up. I don't even notice
(the probe) is there," Mr. Dye said.

   Doctors use a magnetic programming wand to adjust the electric pulses. Mr.
Dye may need several adjustments over the next few months to get the optimal
level of control.

   Even with the device not perfectly tuned, Mr. Dye's wife, Darlene, said she
sees a big difference.

   "He seems a lot freer now," she said. "He's able to act like a normal person
instead of like a sick person. He still has Parkinson's but at least now he can
live a better life."

   About deep brain stimulation

   The procedure

   A small hole is drilled in the patient's skull. Then, using MRI images,
computer mapping software and a high-precision head ring, surgeons drive a
needle-like electric probe deep inside the brain to a region called the
thalamus.

   About half the diameter of a coffee-stirring straw, the probe controls
tremors by emitting electric pulses. Power and frequency can be fine-tuned from
the outside.

   After the procedure

   The probe is connected by wires under the skin to a pulse generator, like a
pacemaker, placed in the chest.

   GR

   The Cincinnati Enquirer - R. SCHUSTER

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2003


                             254 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 25, 2000, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 503 words

HEADLINE: Smallpox vaccine to be revived ;
Military's effort is a top priority

SOURCE: Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - A Rockville, Md., company has signed on to manufacture a
smallpox vaccine for the military, marking the first time in decades that a
weapon against the disease will have been produced.

   BioReliance Corp., a biological testing and manufacturing company that has
specialized mostly in gene therapies, said it will initially make about 300,000
doses of the smallpox vaccine, beginning by the end of the year.

   Making the vaccine has become a priority in recent years amid growing fears
of a bioterrorist attack using the deadly virus.

   A vaccine for smallpox has not been produced since the disease was eradicated
in the mid-1970s, leaving populations open to infection if the virus were
released.

   Only two tightly controlled samples of the virus are believed to have
survived eradication of the disease, one in Russia and one at the national
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

   However, health officials and biological warfare experts say that virus
samples may have been obtained by other countries, including North Korea, Iran,
Syria and Libya.

   "The potential for an outbreak is very real," said Michael Osterholm, chief
executive of the Infection Control Advisory Network in Minnesota.

   "It's been so long since anyone has had the vaccine. If smallpox came back,
it would be one of the most horrible nightmares we could imagine among humans."

   The smallpox vaccination is only one part of a 10-year program to make new,
more efficient and safer vaccines for the military. CDC officials said they have
enough vaccine for 15 million people, but scientists estimate that as much as a
quarter of the vaccines are no longer effective.

   The CDC expects to choose a manufacturer by the end of September to make
another 40 million doses of the vaccine.

   Smallpox, caused by the variola virus, was a major plague, killing an
estimated half-billion people - more than all the wars and epidemics combined.

   The last reported case was in Britain in 1978. Smallpox, which is highly
contagious and produces a striking, pustular rash, kills about 30 percent of
those who contract it. Victims die of hemorrhaging.

   There is no drug treatment for smallpox. The only way to halt an outbreak is
to quarantine infected patients and conduct a mass vaccinations, said Donald A.
Henderson, who was director of the World Health Organization's smallpox
eradication campaign. He is director of the Center for Civilian Biodefense
Studies at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.

   A worldwide vaccination campaign began in 1966 and was largely responsible
for the disease's eradication. The United States stopped widespread vaccinations
in 1972, and Wyeth Laboratories, the last company to make a vaccine, stopped
manufacturing it in 1975.

   The military stopped routinely vaccinating troops against smallpox in the
mid-1980s.

   Humans were declared free of smallpox in 1980, and nearly all laboratory
stocks of the disease were destroyed. Outside of the lab, variola can exist only
in the human body.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                             255 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    August 24, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

HEADLINE: BRIEFLY / BIOTECHOLOGY;
 INCYTE'S PRESIDENT TO HEAD NEW START-UP

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Incyte Genomics Inc. said President Randy Scott will leave the genomics
information company to head a new company that plans to provide Incyte's genetic
information over the Internet. Scott, an Incyte founder and chief scientific
officer since the company began in 1991, will also become chairman of Incyte's
board, succeeding retiring board Chairman Jeff Collinson. Collinson, a founding
investor in the company, will stay on as an Incyte board member. The new company
plans to provide genetic information to consumers to help them understand
gene-related diseases. Scott, 42, who has served as the Palo Alto company's
president since 1997, will take charge Sept. 1. Incyte has grown into an
important player in the genomics information market by developing and selling
its gene databases to help drug makers and biotechnology companies make new
drugs. The new company is expected to be closely affiliated with Incyte and is
likely to be started sometime this fall, the company said. One of the start-up
company's goals is to provide information on gene therapy and clinical trials to
patients with serious diseases. Incyte shares fell $ 6.88 to close at $ 80.63 on
Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2000


                             256 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 24, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-8

LENGTH: 93 words

HEADLINE: Vical vaccine in new tests

BODY:
 Vical has started the second phase of testing on its DNA vaccine against
malaria, which it is developing with France's Aventis SA and the U.S. Navy. The
U.S. Office of Naval Research is paying the gene therapy company $5.5 million to
develop the vaccine.  The Navy has long had an interest in an effective vaccine
against malaria, which in the past century has caused more casualties among U.S.
troops in malaria-infested areas than hostile fire, said the company.  Phase II
testing of the vaccine's safety and efficacy probably will last a year.


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2000


                             257 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 24, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 939 words

HEADLINE: BioReliance Vs. Bioterrorism; Md. Firm Prepares Smallpox Vaccine for
Military

BYLINE: Dana Hedgpeth , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   A Rockville company has signed on to manufacture a smallpox vaccine for the
military, marking the first time in decades that a weapon against the disease
will have been produced.

   BioReliance Corp., a biological testing and manufacturing company that has
specialized mostly in gene therapies, said it will initially make about 300,000
doses of the smallpox vaccine at its facilities on Broschart Road in Rockville.
Company officials expect to begin the initial production process for the vaccine
by the end of the year.

   Making the vaccine has become a priority in recent years amid growing fears
of a bioterrorist attack using the deadly virus. A vaccine for smallpox hasn't
been produced since the disease was eradicated in the mid-1970s, leaving whole
populations open to infection in the event the virus is released.

   Only two tightly controlled samples of the virus are supposed to have
survived the eradication of the disease, one in Russia and one at the federal
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta. But health officials and
biological warfare experts say that virus samples may have been obtained by
other countries, including North Korea, Iran, Syria and Libya.

   "The potential for an outbreak is very real," said Michael Osterholm, chief
executive of the Infection Control Advisory Network in Minnesota. "It's been so
long since anyone has had the vaccine. If smallpox came back, it would be one of
the most horrible nightmares we could imagine among humans."

   BioReliance was chosen to make the smallpox vaccination as only one part of a
10-year, $ 322 million contract, which Frederick-based DynPort is overseeing, to
make new, more efficient and safer vaccines for the military. The CDC says it
has enough vaccine for 15 million people, but scientists estimate that as much
as a quarter of the vaccines are no longer effective. The CDC expects to choose
a manufacturer by the end of September to make another 40 million doses of the
vaccine.

   Smallpox, caused by the variola virus, was a major plague through most of
human history, killing an estimated half-billion people--more than all the wars
and epidemics put together. The last reported case occurred in 1978 in England.
Like chickenpox, smallpox is highly contagious and produces a striking, pustular
rash. Unlike that disease, however, smallpox kills about 30 percent of people
who contract it, researchers said. In the fatal form of the disease, victims
typically die of massive hemorrhaging.

   There is no drug treatment for smallpox, and the only way to halt an outbreak
is to quarantine infected patients and to conduct a mass vaccination campaign,
said Donald A. Henderson, the physician who ran the World Health Organization's
smallpox eradication campaign and who is now director of the Center for Civilian
Biodefense Studies at Johns Hopkins University.

   A worldwide vaccination campaign began in 1966, a campaign that was largely
responsible for the disease's eradication. The United States stopped widespread
vaccinations in 1972, and Wyeth Laboratories, the last company to make a
vaccine, stopped doing so in 1975. The American military stopped routinely
vaccinating troops against smallpox in the mid-1980s.

   World health experts declared humans free of smallpox in 1980, and nearly all
laboratory stocks of the disease were destroyed. Outside of the lab, variola can
exist only in the human body.

   Attention came back to the disease when in 1992 a Soviet official named
Kanatjan Kalibekov, who is now known as Ken Alibek, defected to the United
States. In secret debriefings, Alibek, formerly a top player in Soviet germ
warfare, told Washington that Moscow had made large quantities of smallpox for
war, and he suggested that the virus might have been sold or secreted away as
the Soviet state collapsed and Russian scientists were looking for jobs in other
countries. The danger, many researchers and scientists said, could come if the
virus gets into the hands of terrorists.

   "We know the Russians produced smallpox in large quantities and intended to
use it as a biological weapon," Henderson said. "Many of those people have left
those labs and they may have carried the virus with them. We don't know."

   Last year, the Clinton administration announced that it opposed destroying
the last remaining samples of the deadly virus, for research purposes.

   "A biological event is expected to be rare, but if it were to occur a
smallpox outbreak would be catastrophic," Henderson said. "We need a lot more
vaccine than we have on hand."

   The smallpox vaccine is made not from smallpox virus but from a related virus
known as cowpox virus. It was originally produced by making a laceration on a
calf's belly and inserting the virus, whereupon the wound produces defenses
against the virus that can be given to humans. "It was made from what was in
essence purified cow pus," Osterholm said.

   That way of making the vaccine will not be used because health regulations
are now much stricter. BioReliance said it will grow the vaccine in cell
cultures in its new laboratory, which was specially designed handle developing a
vaccine. The facility can hold between 10 million and 20 million doses, said
John Gilly, vice president of the manufacturing division at BioReliance.

   The company was founded in 1947 and went public in 1997. It now has 470
employees--most of whom are in Rockville. The deal, company officials said, is
worth at least $ 10 million to BioReliance. It also gives the company more
exposure.

   "It's going to give us visibility," said Capers W. McDonald, chief executive
at BioReliance.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2000


                             258 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    August 22, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E2

LENGTH: 2042 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH INTEGRITY DECLINES

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. - Scientific research to improve medical care has become so
commercialized in the last decade that existing safeguards are failing to
protect both patients and scientific integrity, participants agreed during a
landmark government-sponsored conference last week.

   Once these experiments were largely funded by the federal government and
primarily conducted openly in academic settings, but now most are done in the
private sector under a cloak of secrecy. Even the fraction still conducted at
academic medical centers is potentially tainted because the centers and their
scientists increasingly hold a financial stake in the outcome, said speakers
from academia, government, industry and advocacy groups who were among 700
gathered in Bethesda, Md., to discuss financial conflicts of interest in human
research.

      "Profits do drive this business," said Jane E. Henney, commissioner of the
Food and Drug Administration.

   "Conflicts of interest are very real, very serious and a threat to our entire
endeavor," said Dr. Greg Koski, director of human research affairs at Partners
HealthCare and the newly named director of the federal Office for Human Research
Protection. "During the last five years, they may have gotten out of control.
Public trust has been eroded."

   Some of the ethically dubious tactics include cash payments to doctors who
recruit their patients into experiments as well as bias in the design and
reporting of studies to favor the projects' funders, participants said. For
example, when drug companies funded experiments, the results favored their new
drugs 89 percent of the time, compared to only 61 percent among those funded
from independent sources, according to a review cited by one speaker.

   What can be done? The federal Department of Health and Human Services hosted
the conference to get advice on shaping new policies on scientific conflicts of
interest. Some participants pressed for a surgical separation of research and
private money, while others suggested that more public disclosure of financial
interests, coupled with prohibition of the most severe conflicts, was the
solution.

   The stakes are high. Currently, more than 60,000 human experiments are under
way in the United States, at a cost topping $7 billion, according to
CenterWatch, a Boston-based organization that tracks these studies.

   In 1991, nearly 80 percent of these studies were conducted by nonprofit
academic medical centers. Now, CenterWatch estimates that the nonprofit share of
research has been cut in half, and 60 percent of studies are conducted by
for-profit companies. A whole industry of private research firms has developed,
numbering nearly 500 nationally, according to a trade group. Massachusetts is
home to the third-largest, Parexel International of Waltham, as well as at least
15 others, according to CenterWatch.

   The shift is being driven by industry pressure to speed products to the
market as cheaply as possible. The commercialization was also spurred by the
federal Bayh-Dole Act, which gave academic researchers and their institutions
the rights to products developed with government money. Today, it's a rare
academic researcher who has no financial ties to the biotechnology or
pharmaceutical industries.

   With more research moving to private settings and even storefront clinics,
more studies are beyond the reach of federal rules. And most conference
participants agreed that those rules don't go far enough to protect participants
or to limit financial ties that could bias the research.

   "Why do we have a national law that covers the safety of animals in research,
but not one for humans?" asked Abbey S. Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Diseases, a patient advocacy group. "If you want patients
to continue to lay their lives on the line . . . you must regain the public
trust."

   Several participants mentioned the death of a healthy young man last
September in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania in
which both the university and the lead researcher owned stock in the company
backing the study.

   In addition, they pointed to cases in which doctors eager to collect stock
options or cash payments of up to $5,000 per person have enrolled their patients
in studies for which they were not qualified, potentially compromising their
health as well as the validity of the study.

   "Some doctors are selling their patients into clinical studies," said Dr.
Sidney Wolfe, director of the Health Research Group of Public Citizen.

   In other instances, studies are structured to compare new treatments to
"straw men," making them useless, said Dr. Marcia Angell, former editor of the
New England Journal of Medicine.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, an internist at the University of California at San
Francisco, blew the whistle on a growing number of published articles favoring
new treatments that are ghost-written by drug company employees but carry the
name of a hired academic researcher who had nothing to do with the study.

   The government leaves much of the oversight of experiments to the
institutions or companies sponsoring the research - in the form of an
"institutional review board." But in the private sector, those boards are made
up of hired hands, whose primary allegiance may be to the company rather than to
the research participants. At universities, the boards must police institutions
that themselves own a piece of the research.

   Many institutions deal with these conflicts by asking researchers to disclose
any financial interest that would lead to conflicts. But it's unclear how much
is ever revealed. At Johns Hopkins University Medical School last year,
researchers disclosed conflicts of interest in only 4 percent of 2,800 studies
proposed, according to an administrator, Julie Gottlieb. Even fewer of these
conflicts are ever made public to participants or doctors seeking to evaluate
the studies.

   Money paid to patients in exchange for their participation can also be a
corrupting factor, said Duke University medical ethicist Dr. Jeremy Sugarman. "I
know of instances in which individuals have lied about themselves in order to be
enrolled in a clinical trial. In some cases, they lie to get the money; in
others, they lie to get the drug."

   The few industry representatives at the conference questioned the depth of
the problems, suggesting that most companies follow government rules and act
ethically, if partly out of fear that deception or bias would prevent them from
getting their products licensed.

   But there was general consensus that the nation must find a way to immunize
science from financially induced bias. At one extreme were those industry and
government officials who said more disclosure was the answer. At the other was
Wolfe, who advocated banning finder's fees for doctors and outlawing for-profit
"human experimentation corporations," his name for contract research firms. And
Angell, who called for strict limits on financial ties between academic
researchers and companies, said "institutions should not become outposts of
industry."

   "Disclosure is simply passing the buck to the patient-subject," she said.
"Patients should not have to wonder if the investigator is motivated by
financial gain. The only way to deal with the problem is to eliminate it."

   There was widespread praise for the American Society of Gene Therapy, which
in April decided that no member should hold equity or stock options in any
company sponsoring experiments in which he played a leading role. And several
speakers lauded Harvard Medical School for sticking with what is believed to be
the strictest ethics policy of any university nationwide. That policy prohibits
faculty from conducting research on any product or for any company in which they
own more than $20,000 in stock or from which they earn more than $10,000 in
consulting fees.

   David Korn, senior vice president of the Association of American Medical
Colleges, said the variations in policies among colleges and professional
associations were so broad as to be dangerous. He urged those organizations to
seek agreement - at a minimum - on "limits as to what is prima facie
unacceptable" before the government imposed such limits.

   In fact, Harvard's dean, Joseph Martin, is convening a group of colleagues
this fall to seek agreement on common policies.

   Meanwhile, the federal government is moving ahead to establish stricter
policies that Koski suggested will probably bar some financial arrangements,
while requiring that remaining conflicts be disclosed to study participants in
advance.

   "Disclosure is not enough in most instances, but openness is essential," said
Koski, who in September will become the top federal official overseeing the
ethics of human experimentation.  "Institutions and individuals who fail to
truly accept their responsibilities . . . should not be permitted to engage in
this endeavor."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, 1. Allegations of ethical lapses have increased as more medical
research is underwritten by private firms. 2. GREG KOSKI, director of human
research affairs at Partners HealthCare and newly named director of the federal
Office for Human Research Protection. / GLOBE PHOTO/LESLIE E. KOSSOFF

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2000


                             259 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            August 22, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 8A

LENGTH: 549 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCH QUESTIONS CONFLICTS OF INTEREST TAINT DRUG STUDIES

BODY:


   Consider these facts found in a review of tests of new drugs:

   * When the study is done by researchers being paid by the drug's
manufacturer, 89 percent of the time the drug is found to be better than those
it would be replacing.

   * When scientists doing the study are not being paid by the company
developing the new drug, it is given high marks 61 percent of the time.

   This troubling tendency was revealed last week in a conference sponsored by
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

   These disclosures resulting from a yearlong study by Dr. Thomas S.
Bodenheimer, a contributor to the New England Journal of Medicine, are
disconcerting.

   The strong suggestion is that when researchers have a financial incentive to
give a good review to a drug, they probably will do so.

   Researchers might make millions of dollars through stock arrangements with
the companies that might benefit from bringing new drugs to market, although
these new medications might be no more effective than those already available.

   In September, Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., died while serving as a
test subject in a gene-therapy trial. Although his death did not speak to the
issue of drug- research bias, it was a further reason for the Food and Drug
Administration to look closely into how research is being conducted.

   Referring specifically to the death of Gelsinger, FDA Commissioner Dr. Jane
E. Henney told the conference, "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research
subjects no longer feel safe, then medical research will grind to a halt.''

   Dr. Greg Koski, director-designate of the federal Office for Human Research
Protection, sounded another somber note. He said conflicts of interest in
medical research have become so serious that "the system may have gotten
entirely out of control.''

   He added, "We must take steps to re- establish the public's trust in the
goodness of our endeavors.''

   The specter of millions of dollars flowing from drug companies to friendly
medical researchers points to the need for stronger guidelines on conflict of
interest in these studies.

   David Korn, a senior vice president at the Association of American Medical
Colleges, reminded conferees that the government earlier had tried to set rules
on when scientists could accept money or stock while working on a company's
product, but the proposal was defeated after heavy lobbying by the scientific
community.

   Korn said that if researchers themselves did not develop safeguards against
such conflicts, then the government should make another, stronger run at doing
so.

   Surely scientists would rather police their own ranks than have the
government step in.

   At a time when the pharmaceutical industry is under fire for the high prices
of its products, it should take measures to guard against skewed drug- trial
results, which further smudge its image.

   To some, the American pharmaceutical industry has taken on a Jekyll-and- Hyde
aspect: on the one hand, developing the most effective medicines in the world
for a wide array of illnesses, but then pricing them out of reach of many people
who need them.

   And now the very quality of drug research is being questioned with the
suggestion of profits for friendly researchers. The industry needs to clean its
skirts.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2000


                             260 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 22, 2000 Tuesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: SCN; Pg. E-02

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Guests have a lot in common

BYLINE: Joanne Davidson, SEEN,

BODY:

   At Denver Hadassah's Road to Discovery Dinner, where 300-some  friends of the
chapter each made a minimum $ 350 contribution to  the Goldyne Savad Institute
of Gene Therapy in Jerusalem, guests  made an interesting discovery of their
own:

   The evening's three Women of Distinction - Denver City  Councilwoman Joyce
Foster, the University of Denver's  longest-serving trustee, Marion Gottesfeld,
and community  volunteer Marlene Siegel - have more than just an award in
common.

   Both Foster and Siegel were introduced to Hadassah by their  mothers.
Foster's mom, the late Beverly Bender, purchased a life  membership for her, and
as Foster accepted her award last Tuesday  night, she announced she was doing
the same for her daughter,  Deborah, and daughters-in-law, Allison and Becky.

   When Foster, a Democrat who has served on the Denver City  Council since
1993, made her first bid for office, Siegel hosted  an informational coffee and
'invited all my Republican friends  from Cherry Hills III.' It turned out to be
the first in a series  of similar events that would solidify Foster's bipartisan
support.

   Other connections

   There's more: Siegel's mother, Zelda Gutman, introduced  Marion Gottesfeld to
her husband, the late Dr. Ray Gottesfeld, and  Marion helped start the Women's
Library Association at DU; Siegel  is its president-elect.

   Then, after the last award had been given and the final  speaker finished her
report, Penny Alfrey and Paul Dwyer from the  Country Dinner Playhouse
entertained with a chorus of Broadway  melodies. Between songs, Dwyer noted that
he and Alfrey had been  'married' in two different productions and will say
their vows for  real in 2001.

   Dorothy Parris and Norma Sierota chaired the Road to  Discovery Dinner, and
welcomed such dignitaries as Rochelle  Edelman, president of Hadassah's Desert
Mountain region; Arlene  Hirschfeld, chairwoman of the Allied Jewish Federation
board;  Foster's husband, Steven, senior rabbi at Temple Emanuel; and  cantors
Regina Heit (Temple Emanuel) and Martin Goldstein (Hebrew  Educational
Alliance).

   Summer travel was a popular topic during the social hour that  preceded the
dinner catered by David Fine.

   Faraway places

   Chapter president Betty Lee Hahn and her husband, David, an  attorney and
sculptor, had vacationed with their grandchildren in  Ixtapa, Mexico; Ruth
Silver made two trips to Europe, visiting  Germany for the Passion Play and
England, where she attended the  wedding of the woman who had been her Mormon
missionary companion  44 years ago. Barbara Nieder, there with her husband, Bob,
had  been to Chicago for the birth of her niece's baby, while Estelle  Klubock
was in Florida for a family reunion.

   Guests at the Hahn table included Pearl Wolfson, who had  just seen her
granddaughter off to Israel, where she will enter  medical school, and fellow
artist Milton Meyer, whose works have  been featured in Denver Rotary's Artists
of America show and sale.

   Others at the dinner were Dorothy Goodstein, who had  introduced Gottesfeld
to Hadassah 50 years ago; Joni Troy, Denver  chapter's immediate past president;
chapter advisers Laura Schiff  and Judy Kaiser; American Growth Fund president
Robert Brody and  his wife, Paulette; Faye Schayer; Marilyn Kopelman, who is
also  active in the National Council of Jewish Women; Elizabeth Yanish
Shwayder, who is co-chairing a November benefit for QuaLife  Wellness Community;
Sally Metzger, Rose Medical Center's retired  public relations director; Ida
Goldberger; and sisters-in-law  Helen Shapiro and Sylvia Ginsburg.

   This and that

   The first Stephen R. Narans Alumni Assistance Award will be  presented at the
Cenikor Foundation's graduation ceremony and  appreciation luncheon set for
Sept. 15 at Lakewood Country Club.  Narans, a player with a heart of gold,
perished in the crash of  his private plane earlier this year     Edmundo Aquino
is  considered Mexico's greatest living artist on the European art  scene, and a
collection of his whimsical prints and drawings,  Aquino's Turtles, Birds and
Beasts, opens with a reception at 5:30  p.m. Thursday at Museo de las Americas,
861 Santa Fe Drive. Call  303-571-4401. Denver Post Society Editor Joanne
Davidson's column  runs every day except Saturdays. E-mail her at
jmdpost@aol.com.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Barb Nieder, left, and Road to Discovery Dinner co-chair Norma
Sierota.

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2000


                             261 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      August 21, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 025

LENGTH: 837 words

HEADLINE: A born biotech booster; Fearless Bourque organizes, defends; Bourque's
role grows with group

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Janice Bourque, recently named president of the Massachusetts Biotechnology
Council, has a new title - but her role remains essentially unchanged.

   She has to bring together a diverse and growing number of executives, uniting
their voices and raising the profile of the young industry.

   More recognition also means facing an increasing number of critics concerned
about everything from the high cost of drugs to cloning to genetically altered
crops.

   It's a role for which Bourque, who has led the organization for eight years,
is uniquely suited, industry leaders say.

   "She's a person who is not afraid of anything," said Elliott Hillback Jr.,
Genzyme senior vice president.

   Bourque refuses to be intimidated by well-known community leaders,
politicians or even protesters, he said.

   "She believes you can't be afraid of people. You can't be in awe of people.
You can't feel like you have the short end of the stick," he said. "That's how
she looks at things, even when she's holding the short end of the stick."

   But with a wry sense of humor and a knack for building coalitions, Bourque
leaves few with grudges, Hillback said.

   "She may check someone into the boards," he said, "But she smiles when she
does it."

   During her tenure, the organization has nearly tripled in size, from around
100 members to 290, and now is reputed to be the best-organized state biotech
group in the country.

   Bourque, 43, has gone from administrative director to executive director and
now to president.

   Until now, the president has been a corporate executive from the industry.
But that person is now called chairman, reflecting a maturation of the group,
said Michael Astrue, of Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., the group's current
chairman.

   As it's grown, the biotech council has taken its place as a community force,
working on policy issues, promoting science education and recently helping to
organize the largest industry gathering in the world, BIO 2000, earlier this
year.

   "Janice is very patient, very clear and very well informed - I think people
appreciate that," Astrue said. "She's liked and respected. You can't take that
for granted in a trade organization."

   Her work to prepare for and run the four-day BIO 2000 conference highlighted
how well she does what she does, said Carl Feldbaum, president of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, which co-sponsored the event.

   The conference drew thousands of protesters from around the country, along
with an unexpectedly large number of participants. But Bourque kept it all under
control, Feldbaum said.

   "She's a practical person, cooperative and easy to work with, but she has a
certain steeliness," he said.

   Bourque came to the biotech council with a background in science and
business. She studied veterinary medicine as an undergraduate at the University
of New Hampshire and stayed on to earn an MBA.

   Before coming to the biotech organization, she worked as a consultant for two
biotechnology start-ups, spent time at a law firm and was chief financial
officer of a biotechnology company.

   She often spends more than 40 hours a week on the job, balancing her time as
a single parent raising a daughter, Elycia, who has cerebral palsy and mild
retardation.

   Colleagues say they admire her stamina and devotion to her family and job.

   For Bourque, biotech is an easy sell.

   "I'm very proud of this industry, personally proud of it," she said. "Every
day when I come to work, I'm proud of the advances, and the opportunities and
the difference this technology will make."

   The biggest challenge may be explaining to people what the industry is, she
said. That is getting easier as more biotechnology gains a higher profile, but
the visibility also draws more critics.

   "What I try to do is bring continued dialogue and openness to hearing the
concerns and taking a good look at ourselves, our industry and trying to allow
science to move forward, but with great respect for the concerns of the public
and scientists," she said.

   Bourque was the first employee of the trade group, which now has a staff of
eight. As part of becoming more professional, the biotech council is considering
forming a separate foundation to promote science education and provide other
community benefits.

   "We're getting to the point where we're getting bigger and not having the
structure is getting in the way of getting things done," Astrue said. "We want
to be more effective players more broadly in the community."

   The group is also looking for more ways to promote the industry and is
gearing up for a second investor conference this fall.

   At the same time, the council will continue taking on policy issues such as
assuring genetic privacy without hindering research and stopping government drug
discount programs that industry leaders fear would hamper investment in
development.

   Photo Caption: STEEL AND SMILES: Janice Bourque, president of the
Massachusetts Biotechnology Council, is reputated to be tough - but easy to work
with. STAFF PHOTO BY PATRICK WHITTEMORE

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2000


                             262 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     August 20, 2000, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: U.S. official for research ethics signals new, tougher guidelines

SOURCE: New York Times

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md.- The chief federal official overseeing the safety and ethics of
experiments with human subjects said last week that conflicts of interest in
medical research were so troublesome that "the system may have gotten entirely
out of control" and may have to be reorganized.

   The remarks by the official, Dr. Greg Koski, director-designate of the Office
for Human Research Protections, concluded a two-day government-sponsored
conference in Bethesda on conflicts of interest in medical research.

   Speakers at the conference presented evidence that questionable financial
ties between industry and researchers who test drugs or medical devices were
more widespread than previously believed.

   These were Koski's first public remarks since his appointment by Donna
Shalala, secretary of health and human services. They were particularly
significant because his predecessor, Gary Ellis, was removed from office after
shutting down human-experi-mentation programs at a series of major universities
and medical centers for violations of federal ethics rules.

   Patient-advocacy groups have speculated that Koski was put in the job to take
a softer line.

   But his comments last week signaled, if anything, a tougher stance. He said
confidence in researchers to conduct human experiments had so eroded "that we
must take steps to re-establish the public's trust in the goodness of our
endeavors."

   The problems pointed out by critics of the current ethics system, he said,
are "very real, very serious and a threat to our entire endeavor."

   Koski, a cardiac anesthesiologist at Harvard University and Massachusetts
General Hospital, said he would not offer specific proposals until after he
takes office in September.

   But in response to a challenge here from Marcia Angell, former editor of The
New England Journal of Medicine, he did say that researchers should not conduct
studies on products of companies in which they own shares.

   Such arrangements are currently allowed, and even encouraged by many
universities, which also frequently have a financial interest in the company,
and so stand to profit if the tested product proves successful.

   Koski said he had been thinking about ways to reorganize the ethics system.

   "It may not be possible to drive that old Edsel much farther," he said.

   On the question of the eight major universities and hospitals whose research
has been shut down for ethics violations, including failure to fully disclose to
the experiments' subjects the risks they faced, Koski said anyone who did not
comply with ethics rules was showing a lack of regard for patients.

   "Compliance is one way we demonstrate our respect for the subjects," he said.
"And failure to comply is a symptom of an institution's unwillingness to accept
responsibility" in its work.

   Koski paused in his remarks to emphasize that point.

   "I want to make it unmistakably clear that institutions and individuals who
fail to accept this responsibility should not be permitted to engage in this
endeavor" of human experimentation, he said.

   One reason is that when one institution so fails, the entire research
enterprise suffers with the stigma, he said.

   However, Koski said his goal would be more than mere compliance with current
standards. He added that he wanted to urge research centers to work at "the
highest standard of ethical responsibility."

   Koski lauded the American Society of Gene Therapy for "just saying no" with
its recently established policy that researchers should be free of significant
financial involvement with the companies that sponsor their studies.

   He challenged other academic and industry groups, specifically the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, to make similar declarations about
financial conflicts.

   Koski said he would use the information from the conference to begin
formulating a new conflict-of-interest policy for the government.

   Disclosure of a scientist's conflict, as is required, would no longer be
enough; new restrictions will be necessary, he maintained.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2000


                             263 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Sunday Oregonian
                              The Sunday Oregonian

                     August 20, 2000 Sunday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL STORIES; Pg. B04, Community Helpers

LENGTH: 517 words

HEADLINE: COMMUNITY HELPERS CHRISTIAN FOUNDATION SOARS

SOURCE: Osker Spicer - The Oregonian

BODY:

   Through gifts from new and continuing donors, the Northwest Christian
Community Foundation has expanded its assets to almost $5 million.

   The Lake Oswego-based foundation received more than $2.2 million in
contributions this year and awarded about $382,000 in support of more than 54
projects throughout the Northwest, said Mike Stice, executive director.

   The public foundation manages the charitable funds of private individual,
family and institutional donors. Among this year's grant recipients are Albina
Ministerial Alliance, Campus Crusade for Christ, Frontier Missions, George Fox
University, Holt International Children's Services, North Portland Bible
College, University of Oregon, Mercy Corps International, Northwest Medical
Teams, Oregon Natural Resources Council, Oregon Fellowship of Christian
Athletes, Portland Rescue Mission, Portland Opera, Puppets & Praise Ministries
and Women of Purpose.

   For information, contact the foundation at 503-675-9023 or online at
www.nccf4christ.org.

   Meyer Trust awards grants

   The Meyer Memorial Trust recently announced 71 grant awards totaling $8.8
million to nonprofit groups in Oregon this summer.

   The grants included 34 awards in the trust's small grants program, designed
to assist small projects and groups, said Charles Rooks, executive director.

   The smallest grant presented during the past three months was $2,500 to the
Rogue Valley Art Association in Medford to develop a five-year strategic plan.
The largest awards were $1 million each to the Portland Affordable Housing
Preservation Trust and Linfield College, to help construct a new music building.

   The grants bring the total to $12.9 million awarded in the trust's current
fiscal year, which began in April, Board Chairman Gerry Pratt said.

   Gift aids cancer center

   The HEDCO Foundation of Northern California has awarded a $661,959 grant to
Oregon Health Sciences University to finish developing a facility for genetic
research.

   Called the HEDCO-Oregon Cancer Center Gene Array Shared Resource, it puts the
Oregon Cancer Center at the forefront of research into leukemia as well as
breast, colon and other cancers, said Dr. Grover C. Bagby, the center director.
The facility is expected to speed up advances in gene therapy, which targets
cancers and other diseases at the molecular level.

   PGE backs worker efforts

   Portland General Electric has awarded $36,720 in grants to 90 nonprofit
organizations and schools during the second quarter of the year through its
Employee Volunteer Grant Program, said Kregg Arntson, a company spokesman.

   Among other gifts . . .

   The Tillamook County General Hospital Auxiliary is giving $35,000 to purchase
new equipment for the hospital's anesthesia department. The auxiliary also will
donate $1,000 to other hospital memorials and programs. -- Osker Spicer

   If you know of a grant or donation to a nonprofit group or project to note in
Community Helpers, please call Osker Spicer at 503-221-8463; or e-mail the item
to: helpers@news.oregonian.com; and/or fax it to 503-227-5306.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000


                             264 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 18, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. B-9

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: NEW HEAD OF PITT CANCER PROGRAM TO FOCUS ON BRAIN TUMORS, GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: ANITA SRIKAMESWARAN, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Officials of the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute yesterday
announced their recruitment of a nationally prominent brain tumor expert and
noted that they may soon begin a trial of gene therapy to treat glioblastoma,
the most aggressive type of brain cancer.

   Dr. Clifford Schold has joined the cancer institute as director of its
neuro-oncology program and will co-direct the Brain Tumor Center.

   "We'll make great strides in the next few years," he promised, noting that
Pitt's neurosurgery department already is arguably one of the best in the
country.

   Schold and other neuroscience experts emphasized that a multidisciplinary
approach would be essential to find effective treatments for brain cancers.

   Before his arrival in Pittsburgh, Schold was head of neuroscience research at
Duke University in Durham, N.C. From 1992 to 1998, he was chairman of the
neurology department at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in
Dallas, where he was involved in its first gene therapy trial for glioblastoma.

   One of his interests is finding ways to defeat drug resistance in brain
tumors, Schold said. Some chemotherapy medications work by damaging the DNA of
cancer cells to trigger their death. But some tumor cells have enzyme-based
repair systems, so they can dodge the bullet.

   Schold has pretreated tumors with an agent that throws a wrench into the
repair work, leaving them vulnerable to chemotherapy. In animal studies, the
tumors regressed.

   His research team at Duke participated in a multicenter, early phase human
trial of the technique, which found that the therapy was not toxic. The next
step, assessing whether it can actually shrink human brain tumors, could get
under way in the spring and will include patients from Pittsburgh.

   At that time, another study may begin that uses a modified form of the herpes
virus to transport genes into glioblastoma cells and make them more sensitive to
conventional treatments.

   Dr. L. Dade Lunsford, chairman of neurosurgery at Pitt's School of Medicine,
will conduct the research with Joseph Glorioso, chairman of molecular genetics
and biochemistry, who will become the president of the American Society of Gene
Therapy next summer.

   For the trial, the herpes virus is engineered so that it cannot replicate and
cause disease. It will carry a gene that makes tumor necrosis factor alpha,
which increases sensitivity to radiation, and a gene that makes thymidine
kinase, which makes the tumor cells highly vulnerable to being killed by a drug
called gancyclovir.

   Herpes virus infects cells that are multiplying, such as tumor cells. Normal
brain cells don't get the special genes because they do not multiply, and so
they should come to no harm. Also, the virus-gene particles are implanted
directly into the tumor using neurosurgical techniques.

   Two days after the gene therapy has been administered, the tumor will be
attacked with the highly-focused radiation beams of the gamma knife, Lunsford
said. Finally, chemotherapy will be given.

   In earlier experiments, 90 percent of mice survived for 120 days and had no
residual cancer when their brain tumors were treated with the combination of
gene therapy, radiation and chemotherapy. All the untreated mice had died by
then because of disease progression.

   Effective treatments for glioblastoma are desperately needed. In the late
stages of the disease, where the tumor has recurred or progressed despite
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, the prognosis is bleak.

   "The average patient in that group lives three to six months, at the most,
from that point," Lunsford said. "Ninety percent will be dead within one year."

   The researchers are awaiting federal approval to conduct the gene therapy
study. Another gene therapy trial, in which a vaccine is made to combat the
brain tumor, is already under way at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Photo: Matt Freed/Post-Gazette: Dr. Clifford Schold will direct
the; neuro-oncology program and co-direct the Brain Tumor Center at the
Pittsburgh; Cancer Institute.

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2000


                             265 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                    August 17, 2000 Thursday, 7 SPORTS FINAL

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A9

LENGTH: 492 words

HEADLINE: EXPERTS WORRY ABOUT CORPORATE CASH'S SWAY OVER RESEARCH

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md. --

BODY:

   A new era of biotechnology economics that promises some scientists great
wealth may cause conflicts of interest that affect patient safety and undermine
medical research, experts say.

   At a National Institutes of Health conference this week, speakers said that
researchers who have a financial interest in drug companies may bias medical
findings, put patients at risk and erode public trust in the integrity of health
science.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   The danger posed by the growing reliance of researchers on corporate cash was
the subject of an in-depth series that ran in The Courant April 9-11 this year.

   The conference, called by Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala,
comes amid growing concern over the influence of money over science.

   In May, Dr. Marcia Angell, former editor-in-chief of the New England Journal
of Medicine, sounded a public alarm in an editorial that said an explosion of
research money from drug and medical-equipment makers is injecting commercial
concerns into the scientific process in troubling ways.

   That same month, Harvard University, which had been considering loosening its
conflict-of-interest rules, decided not to do so.

   Federal officials called the conference to gather information that may later
be used to write new federal regulations controlling oversight of conflict of
interest in medical research.

    Henney said the death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test
subject in a gene-therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions
to take a close look at highly profitable arrangements that some researchers
enjoy with companies that are financing their research.

    "Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and
whether these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made,"
said Henney.

    Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of
California, San Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers
can "impact the practice of tens of thousands of physicians" who are guided by
the research in treating millions of patients.

    "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

    Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

    The fact that most drug trials are paid for by pharmaceutical firms creates
a great risk of bias and inaccurate results.

    For instance, Bodenheimer said, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the
drugs to be safe, while among experts with no drug company connections, only 37
percent said the drugs were safe.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2000


                             266 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                August 17, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 676 words

HEADLINE: Medical-Research Official Cites Ethics Woes

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Aug. 16

BODY:

   The chief federal official overseeing the safety and ethics of experiments
with human subjects said today that conflicts of interest in medical research
were so troublesome that "the system may have gotten entirely out of control"
and might have to be reorganized.

   The remarks by the official, Dr. Greg Koski, director-designate of the Office
for Human Research Protections, concluded a two-day government-sponsored
conference here on conflicts of interest in medical research. Speakers at the
conference presented evidence that questionable financial ties between industry
and researchers who test drugs or medical devices were more widespread than
previously believed.

    These were Dr. Koski's first public remarks since his appointment by Donna
E. Shalala, the secretary of health and human services. As such, they were
particularly significant, because his predecessor, Gary B. Ellis, was removed
from office after shutting down human-experimentation programs at a series of
major universities and medical centers for violations of federal ethics rules.
Patient-advocacy groups have speculated that perhaps Dr. Koski was put in the
job to take a softer line.

   But his comments today signaled if anything a tougher stance. He said
confidence in researchers to conduct human experiments had so eroded "that we
must take steps to re-establish the public's trust in the goodness of our
endeavors."

   The problems pointed out by critics of the current ethics system, he said,
are "very real, very serious and a threat to our entire endeavor."

   Dr. Koski, a cardiac anesthesiologist at Harvard University and Massachusetts
General Hospital, said he would not offer specific proposals till after he took
office in September. But in response to a challenge here from Marcia Angell,
former editor of The New England Journal of Medicine, he did say that
researchers should not conduct studies on products of companies in which they
own shares. Such arrangements are currently allowed, and even encouraged by many
universities, which also frequently have an interest in the company and so stand
to profit if the tested product proves successful.

   Dr. Koski said he had been thinking hard about ways to reorganize the ethics
system. "It may not be possible to drive that old Edsel much farther," he said.

   On the question of the eight major universities and hospitals whose research
has been shut down for ethics violations, including failure to fully disclose to
the experiments' subjects the risks they faced, Dr. Koski said that anyone who
did not comply with ethics rules was showing a lack of regard for the patients.

   "Compliance," he said, "is one way we demonstrate our respect for the
subjects. And failure to comply is a symptom of an institution's unwillingness
to accept responsibility" in its work.

   He stopped in his talk to re-emphasize that point. "I want to make it
unmistakably clear," he said, "that institutions and individuals who fail to
accept this responsibility should not be permitted to engage in this endeavor"
of human experimentation. One reason, he said, is that when one institution so
fails, the entire research enterprise suffers with the stigma.

   But Dr. Koski said that his goal would be more than mere compliance with the
current standards, that he wanted to urge research centers to work at "the
highest standard of ethical responsibility."

   He lauded the American Society of Gene Therapy for "just saying no" with its
recently established policy that researchers should be free of significant
financial involvement with the companies that sponsor their studies. He
challenged other academic and industry groups, specifically the Biotechnology
Industry Organization, to make similar declarations on financial conflicts.

   Dr. Koski said he would use the information from the conference here to start
developing a new conflict-of-interest policy by the government. He said
disclosure of a scientist's conflict, as is currently required, would no longer
be enough; new restrictions will be necessary, he maintained.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000


                             267 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   August 17, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A-22

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH CONFLICTS MAY MEAN CHANGE NEEDED, OFFICIAL SAYS

BYLINE: PHILIP J. HILTS, THE NEW YORK TIMES

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md. --

BODY:


   The chief federal official overseeing the safety and ethics of experiments
with human subjects yesterday said conflicts of interest in medical research
were so troublesome that "the system may have gotten entirely out of control"
and might have to be reorganized.

   The remarks by the official, Dr. Greg Koski, director-designate of the Office
for Human Research Protections, concluded a two-day government-sponsored
Bethesda conference on conflicts of interest in medical research.

   Conference speakers presented evidence that questionable financial ties
between industry and researchers who test drugs or medical devices were more
widespread than previously believed.

   These were Koski's first public remarks since his appointment by Health and
Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala.

   They were particularly significant because his predecessor, Gary Ellis, was
removed from office after shutting down human-experimentation programs at a
series of major universities and medical centers for violations of federal
ethics rules.

   Patient-advocacy groups have speculated that Koski was put in the job to take
a softer line.

   But his comments yesterday signaled, if anything, a tougher stance.

   Koski said confidence in researchers to conduct human experiments had so
eroded "that we must take steps to re-establish the public's trust in the
goodness of our endeavors. "The problems pointed out by critics of the current
ethics system, he said, are "very real, very serious and a threat to our entire
endeavor."

   Koski, a cardiac anesthesiologist at Harvard University and Massachusetts
General Hospital, said he would not offer specific proposals until after he
takes office in September.

   But in response to a challenge from Marcia Angell, former editor of The New
England Journal of Medicine, he did say researchers should not conduct studies
on products of companies in which they own shares.

   Such arrangements are now allowed and even encouraged by many universities,
which also frequently have a financial interest in the company and so stand to
profit if the tested product proves successful.

   Koski said he had been thinking hard about ways to reorganize the ethics
system. "It may not be possible to drive that old Edsel much farther," he said.

   On the question of the eight major universities and hospitals whose research
has been shut down for ethics violations, including failure to fully disclose to
the experiments' subjects the risks they faced, Koski said anyone who did not
comply with ethics rules was showing a lack of regard for the patients.

   "Compliance," he said, "is one way we demonstrate our respect for the
subjects. And failure to comply is a symptom of an institution's unwillingness
to accept responsibility" in its work.

   Koski paused in his remarks to emphasize that point.

   "I want to make it unmistakably clear," he said, "that institutions and
individuals who fail to accept this responsibility should not be permitted to
engage in this endeavor" of human experimentation.

   One reason, he said, is that when one institution so fails, the entire
research enterprise suffers with the stigma.

   But Koski said his goal would be more than mere compliance with current
standards, adding that he wanted to urge research centers to work at "the
highest standard of ethical responsibility."

   He lauded the American Society of Gene Therapy for "just saying no" with its
recently established policy that researchers should be free of significant
financial involvement with companies that sponsor their studies.

   He challenged other academic and industry groups, specifically the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, to make similar declarations on financial
conflicts.

   Koski said he would use the information from the Bethesda conference to start
formulating a new conflict-of-interest policy for the government.

   He said disclosure of a scientist's conflict, as is now required, would no
longer be enough, and he maintained that new restrictions will be necessary.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2000


                             268 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               August 17, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B6

LENGTH: 463 words

HEADLINE: DOLLARS, DEATH AND DISCLOSURE

BODY:


RESEARCH ETHICS

   THERE is no longer any doubt that researchers' financial stakes in the
medical studies they conduct have jeopardized patients and skewed results. All
that remains to debate is what will be done about it.

   The outcome has major implications for anyone who sees a doctor or takes
prescription drugs, whether or not they've participated in medical research. The
results of those studies have a significant impact on the treatments physicians
offer and the drugs they prescribe. Yet during a two-day conference at the
National Institutes of Health that ended Wednesday, the talk among some
participants was of "managing" conflicts of interest. That same strategy has
already undermined the credibility of some medical researchers. It has prompted
Congress to consider fining scientists who violate informed consent rules. And
it permitted the experiment that cost 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger his life.

   Mr. Gelsinger was a participant in a gene therapy study at the University of
Pennsylvania. He had liver damage that should have disqualified him. The therapy
being evaluated had already seriously sickened four other participants, though
only two incidents were reported to federal officials as required by law. Still,
Mr. Gelsinger was injected with the drug. Four days later he died. The study's
lead investigator was a major stockholder in the company sponsoring the
research. He has denied wrongdoing, but critics have questioned whether the rush
to market a promising new gene therapy colored his judgment.

   Most conflicts of interest are far less dramatic. But financial ties between
researchers and drug companies have been clearly shown to skew results. Reviews
of industry-sponsored studies comparing one drug to another have shown that an
overwhelming majority conclude the sponsoring company's drug is superior. At
least twice in recent years, studies that came to the opposite conclusion have
been suppressed by the company paying for the study.

   At this week's conference, several speakers suggested that the antidote to
such problems is "managing conflicts" -- that is, the public disclosure of
financial ties between drug companies and researchers. But that standard has
long prevailed. The prestigious New England Journal of Medicine has gone even
further. Since 1984, it refused to publish drug reviews or editorials written by
researchers with financial ties to makers of those drugs. Yet last year, the
Journal was forced to admit undisclosed conflicts of interest in nearly half the
drug studies it published since 1997.

   The line between researcher and paid consultant has blurred to the point it
can often no longer be discerned. But this much is clear: Managing conflict of
interest looks an awful lot like ignoring it.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000


                             269 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                           August 16, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NWANEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 883 words

HEADLINE: Government weighs changing finance rules for researchers

BYLINE: PAUL RECER, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:

   *NW EDITION*
ROCKVILLE, Md. -- Prompted by the death of a teen-ager in a medical trial last
year, federal health officials are investigating whether lush financial rewards
earned by some researchers may affect patient safety and public health.
In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said Tuesday
that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may earn
millions through stock deals with drug companies, has raised serious questions
about scientific integrity and threatens public confidence in medical research.
"If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel safe,
then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney, commissioner of
the Food and Drug Administration.
She said the death in September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test subject
in a gene-therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions to take
a close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers have
with companies financing their research.
"Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and whether
these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made," said
Henney.
Gelsinger died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene-therapy
program led by Dr. James Wilson. It later was learned that a company founded by
Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc., later was
sold to a bigger company, and Wilson got a reported $ 13.5 million in stock.
Penn's gene-therapy research has been suspended by the FDA, in part because the
agency found that researchers did not report two other serious reactions from
it.
Wilson has not commented publicly on violations cited by FDA but will have an
opportunity to challenge the agency's findings. He did say of Gelsinger that "we
may have activated his immune system very early."
Tests showed that there was a swift rise of immune system proteins, just as
there were with other patients who had been in the therapy. But for Gelsinger,
the proteins never receded.
Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California,
San Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers risks
scientific misconduct that can affect "the practice of tens of thousands of
physicians" who are guided by the research in treating millions of patients.
"Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.
Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug trial,
making claims not justified by the evidence and committing "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."
Most drug trials, he said, are paid for by drug companies. Other trials are
conducted by researchers with a financial interest in the companies.
For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the
drugs safe, while among experts with no drug company connections only 37 percent
said the drugs were safe.
When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own pain
relievers, Bodenheimer said, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.
An analysis of company-funded studies published in peer-reviewed journals found
that results of the studies favored the company's products 98 percent of the
time.
"The take-home message of these studies is that company-funded trials have a
high likelihood of favoring the company's products," said Bodenheimer.
Among other examples of conflict of interest cited by Bodenheimer:
Private physicians may be paid $ 1,000 to $ 5,000 for each patient recruited for
a drug trial. This leads to doctors sometimes enrolling patients who don't
belong in the drug trials. Some doctors have even enrolled patients who don't
even have the disease being studied.
Up to 75 percent of people enrolled in cancer studies are younger than 65
because older people respond more poorly to chemotherapy. Yet 63 percent of
cancer patients in the United States are over 65. Excluding older people can
make it appear that a drug works better than it really does.
Drug companies own the data from drug trials. Bodenheimer said that in some
cases companies release only results that make their drug look good "and bury
data on less favorable" results.
In at least two cases, said Bodenheimer, drug companies threatened researchers
who tried to publish company-paid studies that put their drug in a poor light.
Many research studies are written by "ghost" authors, usually hired by a drug
company. The company then pays prominent researchers to be named as authors
"though they contributed nothing except their prestige," said Bodenheimer.
And, yet, said Bodenheimer, thousands of doctors rely upon the results of these
studies to make treatment decisions for their patients.
He said the data show "that scientific misconduct does take place in clinical
drug trials, that conflict of interest is a risk factor for scientific
misconduct and that something must be done about it."
Federal officials called the conference to gather information that may later be
used to write new federal regulations controlling oversight of conflict of
interest in medical research.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2000


                             270 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                    August 16, 2000, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. 1E

LENGTH: 956 words

HEADLINE: Biotech 'gold rush' taking dot-com funds;
 ATLANTA TECH: WEDNESDAY FOCUS on TECHNOLOGY and TELECOMMUNICATIONS in METRO
ATLANTA

BYLINE: Bob Keefe, Staff

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
San Diego --- You'd expect an office like Lew Shuster's at a budget- conscious
growing technology company.

   His walls are bare, dominated by a pair of mismatched bookshelves containing
financial documents and company catalogs. His office furniture is cheap and
nondescript. All he really needs sits on the credenza behind his desk: A laptop,
a Palm Pilot and a cell phone.

   Around him, his business is bustling. After raising nearly $ 53 million in an
initial public offering a year ago, the company has just moved into one new
building and has another --- its third --- under construction. Last month, it
completed a string of acquisitions and its stock is soaring.

   Shuster's company has nothing to do with dot-coms or the Internet. His
Invitrogen Corp. is in biotechnology, an industry that is booming these days.
The boom is being driven by interest in the human genome project, new drugs
coming to market and investors looking for a new place to put their money after
the dot-com cool-down.

   The biotech sector is outperforming the overall Nasdaq market 4-to-1. Venture
capitalists, including many burned by biotechs a decade ago, are pouring money
into them again. There were more initial public offerings last month of biotech
companies than of Internet-related businesses.

   Gene mapping companies like Celera Genomics and giant drug makers like Amgen
Inc. may grab the headlines but behind them are hundreds of companies such as
Invitrogen, which makes testing kits used in gene analysis and other research.

   "It's like the gold rush," explained Shuster, chief operating officer of
Invitrogen, based in Carlsbad, Calif., just north of San Diego. The region has
become one of the nation's hotbeds for biotechnology. "And we're selling the
picks and shovels and wheelbarrows." Though Invitrogen made $ 9 million last
year, biotechs don't have to make money to make it on Wall Street.

   Testing equipment company Luminex Corp. of Austin, Texas, isn't expected to
make a profit until 2001. But its stock price, currently around $ 36, is double
what it was when the company went public in March. Chief Financial Officer James
Persky attributes interest in his and other biotech stocks in large part to the
dot-com fallout.

   "There was just so much money that went into dot-coms," he said. "When money
started moving out of there and they were looking for someplace else to put
their money, biotechs became a hot area."

Internets rule --- for now

   Investors aren't bypassing everything else to get into biotechs, of course.

   While dot-coms are generally down, stocks of companies that drive the
Internet --- fiber-optics, Internet software and hardware makers --- still rule
on Wall Street. And the amount of venture capital being sunk into biotechs is
still just a fraction of the money going into Internet-related businesses.

   "The disproportionate amount of action continues to be in the (other) tech-
related issues," said Gail Bronson, a Silicon Valley Internet start-up executive
who also is an analyst for the publication IPO Monitor. She predicts
Internet-related companies will continue to dominate the market for new stock
issues this year.

   That said, despite one of the worst stetches on Wall Street this year,
several new biotech issues hit the floor running in recent weeks.

   Applied Molecular Evolution Inc., a gene therapy company, saw its stock shoot
up $ 11.88, or 62 percent, during its IPO a few weeks ago. Medical products
company Rita Medical Solutions Inc.'s stock rose 20 percent on its first day of
trading. Several other biotech companies had strong IPOs in recent weeks.

   Biotechnology drugs are those based on cells, genes and other living matter,
as opposed to chemicals. While many chemical drugs --- asprin, for instance - --
treat symptoms, biotech drugs --- such as Epogen or Newpogen, which help create
blood cells --- typically are designed to treat the underlying causes of medical
problems.

   "The market is hot and there's a lot of attention on it," said Tracy
Lefteroff, global managing partner for consulting firm PricewaterhouseCooper's
venture capital and private equity businesses. " People are very excited about
the completion of the human genome project and all that it means."

   During the first quarter of this year, more venture capital went to biotech
than in any other quarter in history. According to figures from the National
Venture Capital Association, investors poured $ 511.5 million into biotech
companies between January and March --- more than double the amount in the
comparable period a year earlier.

   Just a year ago, when venture capitalists went to institutional investors and
others seeking to raise money to fund an upstart company, talk typically focused
on Internet issues, particularly dot-coms. Now, "they're asking about the
Internet as well . . .  but regardless of where we go, people really perk up
when we begin to talk about biotech," said Chris Moller, who oversees biotech
investing for venture capital firm Wayne, Pa.-based TL Ventures Inc.

   The University of Texas just this year made its first stock-for-research
investment in a biotech company called Labnetics Inc. Through the deal, UT gets
shares in Labnetics in exchange for research developed by UT professors.
Labnetics plans to manufacture and sell electronic "tongues" --- testing
equipment that can be used by researchers to "taste" blood and other substances
for chemicals.

   "We're really starting to see a shift in invention disclosures (by UT
researchers) in general," said Renee Mallett, associate director for UT's
technology licensing.

   "Traditionally we've had a lot in the engineering-related areas, but we're
really seeing the biosciences coming in now."

GRAPHIC: Graphic
BIOTECH BOOM
Biotechnology revolves around researching and creating drugs based on living
material, such as cells, genes or enzymes. Best-selling biotech drugs:
Epogen/Procrit....... boosts red blood cells
 Newpogen............. boosts white blood cells
Epivir............... AIDS drug
Humulin................Insulin replacement
Intron............... cancer/viral treatment

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             271 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   August 16, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A5

LENGTH: 764 words

HEADLINE: INTERNIST HITS PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. - Some researchers with financial ties to the pharmaceutical
industry are eroding the integrity of medical research and potentially harming
patient care, a University of California doctor told nearly 700 scientists,
advocates, and policy-makers gathered here yesterday for a national conference
on conflicts of interest.

   Symptoms that commercialism is hurting research include studies that are
deliberately skewed to produce favorable results for the funders' drugs, and
research articles guest-written by prominent researchers whose only contact with
the project is a paycheck from drug makers, said Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, an
internist at the University of California at San Francisco.

      Bodenheimer, who spent a year reviewing published accounts of such
problems in drug research, was invited to share his findings by the National
Institutes of Health, which sponsored the conference.

   In a striking counterpoint to some other speakers who suggested such
conflicts are manageable by merely disclosing them to the public, Bodenheimer
said, "Conflict of interest is associated with intentional bias in the conduct
and publication of drug trials. Disclosure is not enough."

   The NIH convened the conference in response to congressional demands for
greater protections for research participants following deaths in gene therapy
experiments. The studies, including several at St. Elizabeth's in Boston, were
overseen by scientists with financial stakes in the outcome.

   Dr. Marcia Angell, former editor in chief of the New England Journal of
Medicine, said Bodenheimer's "terrific" presentation was the first comprehensive
review of the topic.

   "Dr. Bodenheimer showed that conflicts of interest have real effects," she
said.

   Angus Grant, a representative of the Biotech Industry Organization, defended
the drug industry, saying, "Most of our investigators are free from (Food and
Drug Administration) defined conflicts" and that companies are very "wary of
compromising their ability to get a drug licensed."

   The FDA must approve all drugs before they can be marketed in the United
States. Grant, who is an executive with Aventis Pharmaceuticals, said the
companies must submit all data to the FDA, not just favorable data.

   Bodenheimer agreed that some of the research problems may occur more
frequently in tests after the drugs are approved by the FDA, tests used to help
market the drugs to physicians.

   In such cases, when only the favorable data make it into the medical
journals, he said, practicing physicians like him are left relying on flawed
data in deciding which drugs to prescribe for their patients.

   Bodenheimer cited instances in 1990 and 1996 in which pharmaceutical
companies refused to allow researchers to publish data unfavorable to company
products. And he cited a recent review of reports on 196 tests of nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs that found "doubtful or invalid statements" in 76
percent of the articles.

   He also detailed five reviews of clinical trials made by other researchers
that showed that "company-funded trials have a high likelihood of favoring the
company's products."

   In addition, he said, another researcher's study of 809 articles published in
major journals found that 29 percent had "guest or ghost authors," leaving
researchers in the dark about who had really done the research. Ghost authors
are often hired by drug companies, he said, but their names do not appear on the
articles.

   Instead, the article appears under the name of a guest writer who has agreed
to review it in exchange for an honorarium.

   The conflicts carry over to the design of drug tests or trials, he said.

   For example, a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association last
year, he said, examined tests of the effectiveness of two anti-fungal drugs. In
the studies funded by the maker of the new drug, 79 percent of the patients
received the older drug orally even though it is an intravenous drug.

   "The design virtually guarantees . . . the funding company's drug will
produce better results," he said.

   Bodenheimer said that not every conflict leads to such misconduct, but he
proposed erecting barriers between drug company funding and drug research. His
most radical proposal called for drug companies to turn over final testing of
new drugs to the NIH with the drug companies providing the funding.

   But Ruth L. Kirschstein, principal deputy director of NIH called that plan
impractical.

   Kirschstein said she thought simple disclosure of conflicts "certainly goes a
long way toward solving any problems."

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             272 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

             August 16, 2000, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 35; SHEA L

LENGTH: 499 words

HEADLINE: Feds investigate ill effects of company-funded research

BYLINE: BY PAUL RECER

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

   Prompted by the death of a teenager in a medical trial last year, federal
health officials are investigating whether the financial rewards earned by some
researchers affects patient safety.

   In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said Tuesday
that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may earn
millions through stock deals with drug companies, has raised serious questions
about scientific integrity and threatens public confidence in medical research.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney, the U.S.
food and drug commissioner.

   She said the death last September of Jesse Gelsinger, a test subject in a
gene therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions to take a
close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers have with
companies that are financing their research.

   "Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and whether
these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made," said
Henney.

   Gelsinger, 18, died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene
therapy program led by Dr. James Wilson. It later was learned that a company
founded by Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc.,
later was sold to a bigger company and Wilson got a reported $ 13.5 million in
stock.

   Penn's gene therapy research has been suspended by the FDA.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California,
San Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers risks
scientific misconduct that can "impact the practice of tens of thousands of
physicians" who are guided by the research in treating millions of patients.

   "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

   Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

   Most drug trials, he said, are paid for by drug companies. Other trials are
conducted by researchers with a financial interest in the companies.

   For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the
drugs to be safe, while among experts with no drug company connections only 37
percent said the drugs were safe.

   When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own pain
relievers, said Bodenheimer, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.

   An analysis of company-funded studies published in peer-reviewed journals
found that results of the studies favored the company's products 98 percent of
the time.

   "The take-home message of these studies is that company-funded trials have a
high likelihood of favoring the company's products," said Bodenheimer.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             273 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                    August 16, 2000, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 9; National Desk

LENGTH: 442 words

HEADLINE: TEEN'S DEATH PROMPTS U.S. LOOK AT BIG RESEARCH DEALS

BYLINE: From Associated Press

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:


   Prompted by the death of a teenager in a medical trial last year, federal
health officials are investigating whether lush financial rewards earned by some
researchers may affect patient safety and public health.

   In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said Tuesday
that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may earn
millions through stock deals with drug companies, has raised serious questions
about scientific integrity and threatens public confidence in medical research.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   She said the death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test
subject in a gene therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions
to take a close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers
have with companies that are financing their research.

   Gelsinger died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene
therapy program led by Dr. James Wilson. It later was learned that a company
founded by Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc.,
later was sold to a bigger company and Wilson got a reported $ 13.5 million in
stock.

   Penn's gene therapy research has been suspended by the FDA, in part because
the agency found that researchers did not report two other serious reactions
from it.

   Wilson has not commented publicly on violations cited by FDA but will have an
opportunity to challenge the agency's findings.

   Tests showed that there was a swift rise of immune system proteins, just as
there were with other patients who had been involved in the therapy. But for
Gelsinger, the proteins never receded.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at UC San Francisco, said
financial conflict of interest among researchers risks scientific misconduct
that can "impact the practice of tens of thousands of physicians" who are guided
by the research in treating millions of patients.

   "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

   Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

   For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96% of authors who had drug company ties found the drugs
to be safe, while among experts with no drug company connections only 37% said
the drugs were safe.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             274 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                    August 16, 2000 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 274 words

HEADLINE: Changes considered in research finance rules

BYLINE:  Associated Press

BODY:

   Rockville, Md. -- Prompted by the death of a teenager in a medical trial last
year, federal health officials are investigating whether lush financial rewards
earned by some researchers may affect patient safety and public health.

   In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said Tuesday
that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers might earn
millions through stock deals with drug companies, had raised serious questions
about scientific integrity and threatens public confidence in medical research.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   She said the death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test
subject in a gene therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions
to take a close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers
have with companies that are financing their research.

   " Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and
whether these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made,"
Henney said.

   Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California-San
Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers included
reporting only good results in a drug trial, making claims not justified by the
evidence and "outright fraud."

   Federal officials called the conference to gather information that may later
be used to write new federal regulations controlling oversight of conflict of
interest in medical research.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             275 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                August 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 502 words

HEADLINE: U.S. Weighs Rule Changes On Conflicts In Drug Study

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md., Aug. 15

BODY:

   The huge influx of money into biomedical research is creating unacceptable
conflicts of interest for scientists and is eroding the public's trust in the
data, scientists and officials said today at a government conference.

   The meeting was convened by the Department of Health and Human Services to
consider strengthening guidelines on conflict of interest in medical research.

    Dr. Jane E. Henney, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, said
some researchers testing drugs or therapies have profitable arrangements with
companies financing the research, raising the question of whether the data is
unbiased. Citing the death of a patient in a gene-therapy experiment last year,
Dr. Henney warned that "if a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects
no longer feel safe, then medical research will grind to a halt."

   David Korn, a senior vice president at the Association of American Medical
Colleges, warned that if medical researchers and professional associations did
not establish guidelines on research involving human subjects, the federal
government would do it for them.

   Dr. Korn said a decade ago, the government tried to impose rules on how and
when scientists could accept money or stock while working on a company's
products. But researchers successfully lobbied against the proposal. Instead,
there is a rule that suggests that if a scientist has such a conflict, it should
be reported, confidentially, to the university.

   Now, he said, such disclosure was probably not enough to keep the public's
confidence.

   Thomas S. Bodenheimer of the University of California at San Francisco and a
contributor to The New England Journal of Medicine, said today that he had spent
a year reviewing literature and interviewing researchers and drug officials.

   Dr. Bodenheimer said he found that when drug companies paid for a trial of a
new drug, 89 percent of the time the studies found that the new drug was better
than those it was replacing.

   But when tests were conducted by scientists not paid by the company, the new
drug received good marks only 61 percent of the time.

   He said he also found that some articles published in medical journals were
written not by the researchers who conducted the studies but by ghost writers at
the companies whose drugs were being studied. In other cases, he said,
well-known doctors were hired to be guest authors on studies they had not
conducted.

   Dr. Bodenheimer cited a survey of six major medical journals in 1996 that
found that of the 809 articles, 29 percent had guest authors, ghost authors or
both. He said he concluded that "biases can be, and have been, intentionally
introduced that favor the company funding the study."

   "How often this takes place we do not know," Dr. Bodenheimer said. "The
evidence I have shown makes a reasonable case that scientific misconduct does
take place in clinical drug trials, that conflict of interest is a risk factor
for scientific misconduct, and that something must be done about it."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             276 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                 AUGUST 16, 2000 Wednesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: DO PATIENTS PAY THE PRICE?

BYLINE: Paul Recer, Associated Press

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

   Federal health officials are investigating whether lush financial rewards
garnered by some researchers may affect patient safety and public health.

   In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said
yesterday a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may earn
millions through stock deals with drug companies, has raised questions about
scientific integrity.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   She said the death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test
subject in a gene therapy trial, caused the government to take a close look at
research financing arrangements.

   "Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and whether
these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made," said
Henney.

   Gelsinger died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene
therapy program led by Dr. James Wilson. It later was learned that a company
founded by Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc.,
later was sold to a bigger company and Wilson got a reported $13.5 million in
stock.

   Penn's gene therapy research has been suspended by the FDA.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California,
said financial conflict of interest among researchers could "impact the practice
of tens of thousands of physicians" who are guided by the research in treating
millions of patients.

   Most drug trials, he said, are paid for by drug companies or conducted by
researchers with a financial interest.

   For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the
drugs to be safe, while among experts with no drug company connections only 37
percent said the drugs were safe.

   When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own pain
relievers, said Bodenheimer, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.

   Among other examples of conflict he cited:

   * Private physicians may be paid $1,000 to $5,000 for each patient recruited
for a drug trial. This leads to doctors sometimes enrolling patients who don't
belong in the drug trials and may not even have the disease being studied.

   * Drug companies own the data from drug trials and sometimes release only
results that make their drug look good "and bury data on less favorable"
results.

   * In at least two cases, said Bodenheimer, drug companies threatened
researchers who attempted to publish company-paid studies that put their drug in
a poor light.

   *

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             277 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      AUGUST 16, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 663 words

HEADLINE: ROLE OF PROFITS IN MEDICAL RESEARCH STUDIED

BYLINE: Paul Recer, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

   Prompted by the death of a teenager in a medical trial last year at the
University of Pennsylvania, federal health officials are investigating whether
lush financial rewards earned by some researchers may affect patient safety and
public health.

   During a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said
yesterday that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may
earn millions through stock deals with drug companies, had raised serious
questions about scientific integrity and threatened public confidence in medical
research.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   She said the death in September of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, a test subject in a
gene-therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions to take a
close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers have with
companies that are financing their research. "Questions were raised about
financial interests of investigators and whether these interests clouded their
judgment in decisions that were made," Henney said.

   Gelsinger, who was receiving a gene-therapy drug designed to treat an
inherited liver disorder, died in an experiment at Penn's gene-therapy program
led by James Wilson. It later was learned that a company founded by Wilson
funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc., has since been sold
to a bigger company and Wilson reportedly received $13.5 million in stock.

   The FDA suspended Penn's gene-therapy research, in part, because the agency
found that researchers did not report two other serious reactions from it.

   Wilson has not commented publicly on violations cited by the FDA, but will
have an opportunity to challenge the agency's findings. He did say of Gelsinger:
"We may have activated his immune system very early."

   Tests showed that there was a swift rise of immune system proteins, just as
there were with other patients who had been involved in the therapy. But for
Gelsinger, the proteins never receded.

   Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California, San
Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers risked
scientific misconduct that could "impact the practice of tens of thousands of
physicians" who are guided by the research in treating millions of patients.

   "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

   Bodenheimer said such bias included reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence, and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

   Most drug trials, he said, are financed by drug companies. Other trials are
conducted by researchers with a financial interest in the companies. For
instance, he said, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a heart drug found
that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the drugs to be safe,
while only 37 percent of experts with no drug company connections said the drugs
were safe.

   When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own pain
relievers, Bodenheimer said, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.

   Among other examples of conflict of interest he cited:

   Private physicians may be paid $1,000 to $5,000 for each patient recruited
for a drug trial. That sometimes leads to enrollment of patients who do not
belong in the trial.

   Drug companies own the data from drug trials. Bodenheimer said that in some
cases companies release only results that make their drug look good "and bury
data on less favorable" results.

   Many research studies are written by "ghost" authors, usually hired by a drug
company. The company then pays a prominent researcher to be named as the author
"though they contributed nothing except their prestige," Bodenheimer said.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             278 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               August 16, 2000, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A16

LENGTH: 638 words

HEADLINE: IS MONEY TAINTING MEDICAL RESEARCH?;
AGENCIES SEEK ANSWERS AFTER DEATH OF TEEN DURING TEST;
COMPANY-FUNDED STUDIES OF DRUGS ARE FOUND TO PRODUCE FAVORABLE RESULTS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, MD.ROCKVILLE, MARYLAND; DEBATE; RESEARCH DOLLARS; MONEY
RISK; HEALTH; SURVEY; STUDY; MEDICAL RESEARCH; MEDICINE SCIENCE; TREATMENT

BODY:


   Prompted by the death of a teen-ager in a medical trial last year, federal
health officials are investigating whether financial rewards earned by some
researchers may affect patient safety and public health.

   Officials said Tuesday that the new economics of biotechnology, which can
reward researchers with millions of dollars in drug company stock deals, has
raised serious questions about scientific integrity and threatens public
confidence in medical research.

   "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration. She spoke at a conference at
the National Institutes of Health.

   She said the death last September of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, a test subject in a
gene therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions to take a
close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers have with
companies that are financing their research.

   "Questions were raised about financial interests of investigators and whether
these interests clouded their judgment in decisions that were made," said
Henney.

   Gelsinger died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene
therapy program led by Dr. James Wilson. It later was learned that a company
founded by Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc.,
later was sold to a bigger company, and Wilson got a reported $ 13.5 million in
stock.

   Penn's gene therapy research has been suspended by the Food and Drug
Administration.

   Dr. Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California
at San Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers risks
scientific misconduct that can "impact the practice of tens of thousands of
physicians" who are guided by the research in treating millions of patients.

   "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

   Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

   Most drug trials, he said, are paid for by drug companies. Other trials are
conducted by researchers with a financial interest in the companies.

   For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company connections
found the drugs to be safe, while among experts with no drug company
connections, only 37 percent said the drugs were safe.

   When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own pain
relievers, said Bodenheimer, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.

   An analysis of company-funded studies published in peer-reviewed journals
found that results of the studies favored the company's products 98 percent of
the time.

   "The take-home message of these studies is that company-funded trials have a
high likelihood of favoring the company's products," said Bodenheimer.

   Bodenheimer also noted that private physicians may be paid $ 1,000 to $ 5,000
for each patient recruited for a drug trial. This leads to doctors sometimes
enrolling patients who don't belong in the drug trials. Some doctors have even
enrolled patients who don't even have the disease being studied.

   He also said that many research studies are written by "ghost" authors,
usually hired by a drug company. The company then pays a prominent researcher to
be named as the author, "though they contributed nothing except their prestige,"
said Bodenheimer.

   Federal officials called the conference to gather information that may later
be used to write new federal regulations controlling oversight of conflict of
interest in medical research.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo Headshot - (Jesse) Gelsinger, Died in September

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             279 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           August 16, 2000 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 762 words

HEADLINE: U.S. probing rewards for health researchers

DATELINE: ROCKVILLE, Md.

BODY:

   Prompted by the death of a teenager in a medical trial last year, federal
health officials are investigating whether lush financial rewards earned by some
researchers may affect patient safety and public health.

    In a conference at the National Institutes of Health, officials said
yesterday that a new era of biotechnology economics, in which researchers may
earn millions through stock deals with drug companies, has raised serious
questions about scientific integrity and threatens public confidence in medical
research.

    "If a crisis in confidence develops, if research subjects no longer feel
safe, then medical research will grind to a halt," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

    She said the death last September of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger, a test
subject in a gene therapy trial, caused the government and research institutions
to take a close look at the highly profitable arrangements that some researchers
have with companies that are financing their research.

    Gelsinger died in an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's gene
therapy program led by James Wilson. It later was learned that a company founded
by Wilson funded part of the Penn research. The company, Genovo Inc., later was
sold to a bigger company and Wilson got a reported $13.5 million in stock.

    Penn's gene therapy research has been suspended by the FDA.

    Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the University of California,
San Francisco, said financial conflict of interest among researchers risks
scientific misconduct that can "impact the practice of tens of thousands of
physicians" who are guided by the research in treating millions of patients.

    "Investigators who allow bias or error to infect their work are practicing
scientific misconduct," he said.

    Bodenheimer said such bias includes reporting only good results in a drug
trial, making claims not justified by the evidence and "outright fraud with
fabrication of evidence."

    Most drug trials, he said, are paid for by drug companies. Other trials are
conducted by researchers with a financial interest in the companies.

    For instance, said Bodenheimer, an analysis of 70 studies on the safety of a
heart drug found that 96 percent of authors who had drug company ties found the
drugs to be safe, while among experts with no drug company connections only 37
percent said the drugs were safe.

    When drug companies pay for research into the effectiveness of their own
pain relievers, said Bodenheimer, 100 percent find their drug superior to a
competitor's.

    An analysis of company-funded studies published in peer-reviewed journals
found that results of the studies favored the company's products 98 percent of
the time.

    "The take-home message of these studies is that company-funded trials have a
high likelihood of favoring the company's products," said Bodenheimer.

    Among other examples of conflict of interest cited by Bodenheimer:

    Private physicians may be paid $1,000 to $5,000 for each patient recruited
for a drug trial. This leads to doctors sometimes enrolling patients who don't
belong in the drug trials. Some doctors have even enrolled patients who don't
even have the disease being studied.

    Up to 75 percent of people enrolled in cancer studies are younger than 65
because older people respond more poorly to chemotherapy. Yet, 63 percent of
cancer patients in the United States are over 65. Excluding older people can
make it appear that a drug works better than it really does.

    Drug companies own the data from drug trials. Bodenheimer said in some cases
companies release only results that make their drug look good "and bury data on
less favorable" results.

    In at least two cases, said Bodenheimer, drug companies threatened
researchers who attempted to publish company-paid studies that put their drug in
a poor light.

    Many research studies are written by "ghost" authors, usually hired by a
drug company. The company then pays a prominent researcher to be named as the
author "though they contributed nothing except their prestige," said
Bodenheimer.

    And, yet, said Bodenheimer, thousands of doctors rely upon the results of
these studies to make treatment decisions for their patients.

    He said the data show "that scientific misconduct does take place in
clinical drug trials, that conflict of interest is a risk factor for scientific
misconduct and that something must be done about it."

   Federal officials called the conference to gather information that may later
be used to write new federal regulations controlling oversight of conflict of
interest in medical research.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             280 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                   August 16, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 601 words

HEADLINE: Drug researchers fear ethical conflicts of interest

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   BETHESDA, Md. -- In a federally sponsored meeting Tuesday, health
officials explored growing concern over researchers' financial
stakes in the medical studies they perform on human participants.

   The increased visibility of the issue brought out an unexpectedly
large numbers of health officials, researchers and pharmaceutical
industry representatives for the two-day Conference on Human Subject
Protection and Financial Conflict of Interest, held at the National
Institutes of Health.


   "Conflicts of interest are virtually ubiquitous in clinical drug
trials because so many are industry-funded," said Thomas Bodenheimer
of the University of California at San Francisco, who spoke at
the meeting. He described research showing that industry-funded
studies often favor the sponsor's drugs, frequently by wide margins,
compared with publicly funded research. In addition, he described
"scientific misconduct" reflected in a 1999 study in the Journal
of the American Medical Association. In that study, he said,
the authors found instances in which a competitor's intravenous
drug was instead given orally, then compared with the sponsor's.

   "Financial conflicts of interest involving investigators and
sponsors of new drug products are becoming increasingly complicated,
more visible and more carefully scrutinized," said Jane Henney,
commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration.

   Along with other speakers, she warned that inappropriate financial
incentives to researchers threaten to compromise the safety of
study volunteers helping to evaluate new drugs, which might be
taken by millions of people.

   "Public trust erodes when researchers fail to address conflict-of-interest
concerns," she said.

   Interest in the topic increased after the death last year of a
University of Pennsylvania volunteer, Jesse Gelsinger, participating
in a gene-transfer experiment that the FDA has investigated for
questionable financial conflicts.

   Since then, the NIH has found that few gene therapy researchers
were reporting patient side effects as required.

   At past events, Henney has described a change in medicine in which
investigators and their institutions take larger financial stakes
in new treatments. Many of the speakers addressed sometimes competing
concerns: the need to inform potential volunteers of researchers'
financial ties to drugs and the necessity of not scaring participants
out of taking part.

   "Conflicts of interest are ubiquitous in all areas of life,"
said David Korn of the Association of American Medical Colleges.
"They're not necessarily equated with scientific misconduct."
He noted that researchers may bias their research more for advancement
or acclaim than money.

   "I suspect the residuals of today's meeting will be new regulations
we'll be forced to implement for the rest of our lives," said
Steven Peckman of the University of California at Los Angeles.

   About 41,000 clinical trials -- medical experiments that use human
volunteers -- are going on nationwide, according to CenterWatch,
a Boston-based industry data firm. Of those, the NIH lists only
5,000 on its Web site as receiving its funding.

   So-called institutional review boards, or IRBs, handle conflicts
of interest in research universities. In afternoon conference
sessions, speakers described a plethora of different IRB procedures
for handling conflicts.

   Today's sessions will condense the discussions, an effort that
will feed the direction of future regulations governing institutional
oversight of conflicts of interest.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             281 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                   August 16, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: Companies' Influence on Medical Studies Is Feared

BYLINE: Robert O'Harrow Jr.  , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   The more that medical researchers accept money from private companies, the
more the credibility of science is likely to suffer--unless universities,
professional groups or federal authorities step in to prevent or at least
"manage" conflicts of interest.

   That was the message yesterday at the National Institutes of Health, where
some 700 government officials and academic leaders struggled over how to cope
with the impact of stock, consulting fees and other largess from drug and
biotechnology companies on research involving human subjects.

   David Korn, the former dean of Stanford Medical School, warned the packed
conference room that a crackdown by federal regulators might occur if financial
conflicts continue unchecked.

   "If our leading academic medical centers and professional societies cannot
come to reasonable agreement in defining the kinds and limits of financial
interests that are prima facie acceptable in research involving human subjects .
. . we are inviting cognizant federal agencies, as well as Congress, to step in
prescribe those limits for us," he said.

   The conference follows the death last year of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger,
who volunteered for an experiment at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute
for Human Gene Therapy. The lead investigator in that clinical trial, James M.
Wilson, was a major stockholder in the company that sponsored the research,
Genovo Inc.

   Since then, there has been a series of revelations about questionable
financial ties between medical researchers and companies with an interest in the
outcome of their work, a trend that has alarmed authorities and academic
officials.

   "If people lose confidence in human trials, we could shut off our ability to
translate basic scientific breakthroughs into actual medicine and products that
make real people's lives better," said Wendy Baldwin, deputy director for
extramural research at the NIH.

   Thomas Bodenheimer, a clinical professor at the medical school of the
University of California at San Francisco, said that financial ties sometimes
result in rosier results in clinical trials and more upbeat articles in
professional journals.

   Bodenheimer cited several studies, including one that found that over a
nine-year period, nearly every company-sponsored study published in a
peer-reviewed journal or presented at a professional symposium favored the
company's drug.

   "The evidence I have . . . makes a reasonable case that scientific misconduct
does take place in clinical drug trials, that conflict of interest is a risk
factor for scientific misconduct, and that something must be done about it,"
Bodenheimer said.

   "Pharmaceutical companies--with a little help from their friends in academia
and the NIH--have created products of great benefit to the world. This activity
must continue," he said. "But to reduce the risk of scientific misconduct,
investigators and authors need greater independence from their funders."

   Researchers who work for the federal government have to disclose their
financial holdings and consulting relationships with private business.
University policies governing conflict of interest vary widely. Harvard
University, for example, recently proposed loosening its rules to allow
professors to have more lucrative contacts with corporate researchers, but it
backed down after criticism.

   The conference is not expected to yield any immediate policy changes. But
officials said they are closely examining what federal regulators might do to
temper the influence of industry money on academic medical research. That
scrutiny will include universities that stand to benefit from financial ties
with companies funding on-campus research.

   "If a crisis in confidence in how clinical trials are being conducted
develops, particularly if research subjects no longer feel safe or protected,
then new product development will grind to a halt," Jane E. Henney, commissioner
of the Food and Drug Administration, said in prepared remarks.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000


                             282 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     August 15, 2000 Tuesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04A

LENGTH: 540 words

HEADLINE: Nerve cells from bone marrow could aid neurological healing;
Study suggests neurons can be produced from adult stem cells, and perhaps used
in regeneration

BYLINE: SHANKAR VEDANTAM Knight Ridder News Service

BODY:

   Philadelphia -- In a new twist to the exciting field of stem cell research,
scientists say they have shown that they can produce neurons in the laboratory
by using stem cells drawn from bone marrow.

   If the finding is borne out, they say, it might one day enable doctors to
treat a variety of neurological disorders by taking cells from a patient's bone
marrow, turning them into nerve cells and then injecting them into patients'
brains and spinal cords.

   A wide variety of illnesses, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's
disease, spinal cord injury and stroke result from the loss or death of neurons.

   An account of the technique was published Monday in the Journal of
Neuroscience Research. The research at the University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey and MCP/Hahnemann University in Philadelphia was funded in part by
the Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation, which also spread word about the
paper in the little known journal.

   Scientists caution that the research will have to be borne out by further
studies and with tests in animals. It could be years before the technique is
tested in humans. Numerous scientific hurdles must first be overcome.

   For example, there are many kinds of neurons in the brain and it is as yet
unclear whether laboratory-produced neurons will adapt to particular functions
in the brain or can be designed to do so.

   "Clearly it is important to generate neurons from other tissues," said Ronald
McKay, a neuroscientist at the National Institutes of Health. "That has
important implications."

   Referring to Monday's paper, he said, "we have to demonstrate that these
cells will perform those specific functions. It would be wonderful if we could
demonstrate that."

   Stored in various organs, stem cells naturally grow into the specific types
of cells needed by those organs.

   Stem cells from fetal tissue can grow into virtually any type of cell; the
latest study and other research suggest that, given the right environment, the
same might be true for adult stem cells.

   The scientists who developed the technique hope it could eliminate the need
to dig deep in the brain to get at neural stem cells or to get stem cells from
fetal tissue -- which were thought to be the only sources for neurons.

   Getting at the neural stem cells carries medical risks. Use of the fetal
cells is surrounded by ethical controversy; harvesting the stem cells kills the
human embryo.

   "The advantage of this strategy is that we can get the cells from the patient
being treated," said Darwin Prockop, director of the center for gene therapy at
Tulane University medical school, who co-authored the research while at
MCP-Hahnemann Medical School.

   "We can grow an unlimited number of these cells," said Prockop. "So we are
using cells that are easily obtained from a patient to treat that patient."

   The scientists said they had begun to test whether the lab-grown neurons
worked in animals. Human tests could follow.

   McKay, the NIH scientist, who has been trying to create brain cells that
produce dopamine, a chemical lost in Parkinson's disease, cautioned that the new
technique was preliminary, and should not be interpreted to mean that embryonic
and fetal tissue research should be abandoned.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2000


                             283 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       AUGUST 15, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 734 words

HEADLINE: LOCAL SCIENTISTS' STEM-CELL STUDY SHOWS PROMISE, RESEARCHERS SAY THE
FINDING COULD HELP THOSE SUFFERING FROM ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE, PARKINSON'S
DISEASE, OR SPINAL-CORD INJURIES.

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In a new twist in the exciting field of stem-cell research, local scientists
say they have shown that they can produce neurons in the laboratory by using
stem cells drawn from bone marrow.

   If the finding is borne out, they say, it might one day enable doctors to
treat a variety of neurological disorders by taking cells from a patient's bone
marrow, turning them into nerve cells, and then injecting them into patients'
brains and spinal cords.

   A wide variety of illnesses, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's
disease, spinal-cord injury, and stroke, result from the loss or death of
neurons.

   An account of the technique was published yesterday in the Journal of
Neuroscience Research. The research, conducted at the University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey and MCP Hahnemann University, was funded in part by the
Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation, which also spread word about the paper's
appearance in the little-known journal.

   Scientists caution that the research will have to be borne out by further
studies and with tests in animals. It could be years before the technique is
tested in humans. Numerous scientific hurdles must first be overcome.

   For example, there are many kinds of neurons in the brain, and it is not yet
clear whether laboratory-produced neurons would adapt to particular functions in
the brain or could be designed to do so.

   "Clearly it is important to generate neurons from other tissues," said Ronald
McKay, a neuroscientist at the National Institutes of Health. "That has
important implications."

   Referring to yesterday's paper, he said: "We have to demonstrate that these
cells will perform those specific functions. It would be wonderful if we could
demonstrate that."

   Stored in various organs, stem cells naturally grow into the specific types
of cells needed by those organs.

   Stem cells from fetal tissue can grow into virtually any type of cell; the
latest study and other research suggest that, given the right environment, the
same might be true for adult stem cells.

   The scientists who developed the technique hope it could eliminate the need
to dig deep in the brain to get at neural stem cells or to get stem cells from
fetal tissue - which were thought to be the only sources for neurons.

   Getting at the neural stem cells carries medical risks, and the use of fetal
cells is surrounded by ethical controversy.

   "The advantage of this strategy is that we can get the cells from the patient
being treated," said Darwin Prockop, director of the center for gene therapy at
Tulane University's medical school, who coauthored the research while at MCP
Hahnemann School of Medicine.

   "We can grow an unlimited number of these cells," Prockop said. "So we are
using cells that are easily obtained from a patient to treat that patient."

   The scientists said they had begun to test whether the lab-grown neurons
worked in animals. Human tests could follow.

   "Can they actually improve function in these different disorders in the live
animal and the live human?" asked Ira Black, one of the authors of the study and
chair of the department of neuroscience and cell biology at Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School in Piscataway. "That is obviously a central question."

   Black said he was optimistic that the neurons would adapt to their proper
function in the brain.

   "In the brain we have about a trillion nerve cells, and they belong to a wide
variety of sub-populations," he said. "When nerve cells are transplanted to
specific areas of the brain, the microenvironment of that area transforms the
cells" to the appropriate function.

   Neuroscientist McKay, who has been trying to create brain cells that produce
dopamine, a chemical lost in Parkinson's disease, cautioned that the new
technique was preliminary and should not be interpreted to mean that embryonic
and fetal-tissue research should be abandoned.

   "So far, the only cells we can use to produce dopamine-producing neurons are
from the fetal brain or mouse embryonic stem cells," he said.

   Susan Howley, director of research of the Christopher Reeve Paralysis
Foundation, agreed.

   "The one thing we know about science is that it is not a straight course,"
she said. "It behooves us to continue to pursue all avenues of stem-cell
research until we know that this is the definitive way to go."

   Shankar Vedantam's e-mail address is svedantam@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             284 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    August 15, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: NERVE CELLS GROWN FROM ADULTS' MARROW

BYLINE: SHANKAR VEDANTAM, THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA --

BODY:


   In a new twist to the exciting field of stem cell research, scientists say
they have shown that they can produce neurons in the laboratory by using stem
cells drawn from bone marrow.

   If the finding is borne out, they say, it might one day enable doctors to
treat a variety of neurological disorders by taking cells from a patient's bone
marrow, turning them into nerve cells, and then injecting them into patients'
brains and spinal cords.

   A wide variety of illnesses, including Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's
disease, spinal cord injury and stroke, result from the loss or death of
neurons.

   An account of the technique was published yesterday in the Journal of
Neuroscience Research. The research at the University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey and MCP/Hahnemann University in Philadelphia was funded in part by
the Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation, which also spread word about the
paper in the little known journal.

   Scientists caution that the research will have to be borne out by further
studies and with tests in animals. It could be years before the technique is
tested in humans. Numerous scientific hurdles must first be overcome.

   For example, there are many kinds of neurons in the brain and it is as yet
unclear whether laboratory-produced neurons will adapt to particular functions
in the brain or can be designed to do so.

   Stored in various organs, stem cells naturally grow into the specific types
of cells needed by those organs.

   Stem cells from fetal tissue can grow into virtually any type of cell; the
latest study and other research suggests that, given the right environment, the
same might be true for adult stem cells.

   The scientists who developed the technique hope it could eliminate the need
to dig deep in the brain to get at neural stem cells or to get stem cells from
fetal tissue -- which were thought to be the only sources for neurons.

   Getting at the neural stem cells carries medical risks and use of the fetal
cells is surrounded by ethical controversy.

   "The advantage of this strategy is that we can get the cells from the patient
being treated," said Darwin Prockop, director of the center for gene therapy at
Tulane University medical school, who co-authored the research while at
MCP-Hahnemann Medical School. "We can grow an unlimited number of these cells,"
said Prockop. "So we are using cells that are easily obtained from a patient to
treat that patient."

   The scientists said they had begun to test whether the lab-grown neurons
worked in animals. Human tests could follow.

   "Can they actually improve function in these different disorders in the live
animal and the live human?" asked Ira Black, one of the authors of the study and
chair of the department of neuroscience and cell biology at Robert Wood Johnson
Medical School in Piscataway. "That is obviously a central question."

   Black said he was optimistic that the neurons would adapt to their proper
function in the brain.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000


                             285 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        August 15, 2000 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 09

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: CELLS TO FIGHT NERVE DISEASES STUDIED;
TULANE SCIENTISTS TAP INTO BODY'S BONE MARROW

BYLINE: By John Pope, Staff writer

BODY:

   Small cells in the bone marrow can be made to become nerve cells, forming
what could prove to be a boundless reservoir for people suffering from diseases
that batter the nervous system, two Tulane University researchers have found.

    These cells, known as stem cells, could help treat such degenerative
afflictions as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and Lou Gehrig's
disease.

   Just an ounce of marrow, withdrawn from the bone above the patient's hip, can
provide more than a billion stem cells, or about as many cells of all other
kinds that are in the average adult, said Darwin Prockop, one of the scientists,
who is director of Tulane's Gene Therapy Center.

    Besides being easily available, these cells can be used without the ethical
controversy that has surrounded the injection of stem cells from aborted
fetuses, the scientists wrote in the current issue of the peer-reviewed Journal
of Neurological Research.

    So far, the investigators have been working with rats. Experiments with
humans are not likely for at least 18 months, Prockop said.

    There are two types of stem cells in bone marrow: one that forms blood cells
and another that has the potential to develop into cells for bone, cartilage,
fat, muscle or the nervous system.

    Working with the latter group, scientists injected the cells into brains of
rats in which Parkinson's disease had been induced. The cells, which had been
treated in culture, developed into many kinds of nerve cells, Prockop said, and
the rats improved within a week.

    Prockop and Emily Schwarz, who is working toward degrees in medicine and
public health at Tulane, started this project at Hahnemann University in
Philadelphia. Their collaborators are two scientists from UMDNJ-Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School in Piscataway, N.J.

    Terry Heiman Patterson, the head of Hahnemann's division of neuromuscular
disease, said their results are "promising...but still very premature."

    "If you can keep the line going and induce them to create the types of nerve
cells you want...and take over the job of the damaged cells, that would be
extremely promising," said Patterson, whose specialties include Lou Gehrig's
disease.

    "There are a lot of things to be overcome," she said, including making sure
that the cells reach their destination and keep doing what they're supposed to
do.

    Prockop said he wants to be sure the cells become mature, functioning nerve
cells, or neurons.

    "There's concern that we haven't gone all the way toward (being) functioning
neurons," Prockop said.

    If they become mature neurons, "they should last 30 to 40 years," he said."

    Even though the stem cells have come from ailing rats, there has been no
indication that the disease damaged them, he said.

    Moreover, he said, they seem to home in on damaged cells to repair them.


LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2000


                             286 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 14, 2000 Monday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-01

LENGTH: 1564 words

HEADLINE: Tighten up those flabby brains! Mental-fitness exercises require
pumping irony, lifting weighty concepts

BYLINE: By Karen Auge, Denver Post Medical Writer,

BODY:

   ENGLEWOOD - Across the hall, jazzy music blared while a  handful of seniors
stretched and bent, twisted and flexed.

   Over in Bonnie Fuller's class at the Malley Senior Center,  they were
exercising, too. But it wasn't squishy thighs and  bulging tummies the
participants were shaping up.

   It was their brains.

   The 10 women and one man, most in their 70s, had been  promised a five-hour
course that would show them how to buff up  their brains. Pumping cerebellum, as
it were.

   'A brain impoverished by lack of stimulation will atrophy,'  Fuller said in
her opening pitch. 'But a brain stimulated will  grow.'

   That's the theory behind classes like Fuller's, which are  popping up all
over the country. And while nobody is promising  that these brain-fitness
regimens will prevent Alzheimer's, the  hope is they can at least curtail the
more common, garden-

   variety muddleheadedness that aging can bring, or at best hold  off the
devastating symptoms of dementia.

   The class Fuller teaches, 'Growing Dendrites Forever,' was  the brainchild,
so to speak, of longtime educator Cynthia Short.  There's no evidence that the
techniques in Short's course actually  produce new brain cells. But for simply
keeping the mind fit, the  regimen Short's own brain conjured up five years ago
out of her  experience and her intuition is lately finding sustenance in
science.

   Accepted science used to be that the brain was wired forever  by age 5. Those
brain cells you killed off with all that beer in  college were, conventional
wisdom held, gone forever. And mental  decline in later years was, for many,
inevitable. Those who  remained sharp as septuagenarians or even octogenarians
could  simply thank good genes or clean living.

   But in the last couple of years, science has been rethinking  that.

   The brain, it seems, can rewire itself. Research in the last  few years
indicates that the brain can regenerate itself enough to  create new pathways.
And it can use those new pathways to send  messages that bypass damaged cells
and arrive at intact ones.

   'In just the last few years, studies in humans and primates  and rodents
indicates there is something called neurogenesis in  adulthood - that new nerve
cells are born even into older  adulthood,' said Molly Wagster, who holds a
doctorate in  psychology and is program director for the neuropsychology of
aging for the National Institute of Aging.

   In one of those studies, published last September,  researchers at the
University of California at San Diego were able  to use gene therapy to revive
and restore brain cells in aging  monkeys to nearly their vital, young-brain
state.

   Scientists now are working on ways - other than gene therapy  - to make
neurogenesis happen. Or, simply put, how to grow those  new cells.

   'There has been work done recently - at least in animal  models - where
they've been able to stimulate neurogenesis by  learning a new task,' Wagster
said.

   And, in some studies, lab mice have grown new brain cells  after being put
into stimulating environments, where they were  surrounded by objects of varied
shapes and sizes and textures, and  plenty of things they could poke and push
and jump over, she said.

   Those studies have hopeful implications for victims of stroke  and other
brain injuries. And there is good news, too, for people  who just want to
remember where they put the car keys.

   A number of recent studies seem to indicate that using your  brain is a good
way to keep from losing it.

   Dr. Robert Friedland, a professor of neurology at Case  Western Reserve
University in Cleveland, studied more than 500  elderly people, nearly 200 with
Alzheimer's and the rest free of  the disease.

   He found that people who were less active - both mentally and  physically -
outside their regular jobs as young adults were more  than three times as likely
to get Alzheimer's later on.

   'I think the brain is an organ like any other organ that ages  in regard to
how its used. Just as physical exercise increases the  work of the heart and
helps to maintain heart function in older  people, the same is true of the
brain,' Friedland said. He has  authored a study finding that people who had
mentally taxing jobs  were less likely to suffer from Alzheimer's.

   For decades, the School Sisters of Notre Dame have been  taxing their brains
relentlessly.

   And for 14 years, University of Kentucky researchers have  been picking the
brains - literally - of those aged nuns from  Minnesota.

   At the request of professor David Snowdon, who is  investigating the causes
of Alzheimer's, 678 of the sisters agreed  to bequeath their brains to science
when they die. In the  meantime, the sisters, whose average age is 85, agreed to
submit  each year to tests of their reasoning and brain function, and to  open
up their medical records to the research team.

   What is as remarkable about the nuns as their longevity is  their mental
agility. Many of them taught school well into their  70s; even after retiring,
they do crossword puzzles, quiz each  other, hold lively debates on current
events.

   And, Snowdon has reported, they are less likely than their  aged counterparts
to exhibit Alzheimer's symptoms.

   Snowdon wouldn't comment on whether he's found evidence  linking their
lifetime of activity to their continued mental  clarity. He is working on a book
about the nun study and doesn't  want to reveal any conclusions before the book
comes out, he said  through a spokeswoman.

   In any case, what Fuller is about, then, is to create  satellite School
Sisters convents, full of intellectually lively  and curious seniors, around the
Denver metro area.

   If there is a theme to the Growing Dendrites class, it is  variety: Do
something new, meet someone new, learn something new.

   In the class, presented through Centura Health's Senior  Select Program, she
gets that message across first by insisting  participants take class notes not
on white paper, not with blue or  black ink, and not by writing left to right.
She hands out  fuschia, lime green and lemon yellow unlined paper and colored
magic markers, and tells them to take notes starting in the center  of the
paper, then fan out.

   'You grow dendrites by learning something new, unfamiliar,'  Fuller told her
class. 'If you square dance, you may want to learn  to ballroom dance. If you
play the cello, like Barbara does,' she  said, pointing to a class member,
'learn to play the piano. As we  get older - and I'm old enough to know this -
it is easier to get  into a rut.'

   'You have no idea,' one class member interjected.

   'The intense concentration it takes when you're learning  something new, that
makes us grow dendrites,' she told them.

   Dendrites are threadlike growths that extend from brain cells  to receive
messages from other neurons. Axons, which extend from  the opposite end of the
cells, relay the messages to other neurons.

   Fuller's directions about learning something new sounded a  lot like
Friedland's recommendations: 'Learn to plan the piano;  learn Portuguese; study
ballroom dancing; volunteer to teach  English to prisoners.'

   Just do something, Friedland said. And watching television,  unless it's
'Jeopardy!' or something else educational, doesn't  count as doing something.

   'I think a 70-year-old shouldn't go bungee jumping, and a  90-year-old should
not do ice-skating jumps. But otherwise it's  never too late to start,' he said.

   But he did have one caveat: You've got to keep at it.

   'If the local Y has a series of three seminars where you do  crossword
puzzles, that's nice. But it doesn't make much  difference. Activities have to
be done consistently, over a  lifetime.'

   Accordingly, before she dismissed the class from its first  session, Fuller
assigned homework.

   Find a place at home and designate it your mental fitness  spot, she said.

   Then, devote 20 minutes each day to exercise your senses, she  told them.
Listen to a different kind of music than usual, or  listen to traffic going by
and identify which are cars and which  are trucks. Find figures in clouds. Go to
the grocery store and  buy something you've never eaten before.

   Her goal, Fuller said, is 'for them to come up with stuff they  can do on
their own and will do.'

   What Fuller was talking about made sense to Barbara Anderson,  the cello
player.

   Anderson, 77, said she volunteers at Centura Porter Adventist  Hospital, and
recently spent weeks 'really stretching my brain,'  learning the hospital's
computer system.

   She said she sometimes goes to Loveland, where her daughter  lives, and helps
out at the senior center. 'And I see these people  sitting around, and they're
about my age, and I say, 'Do I look  like that?''

   To which Anderson said her daughter replies, "No, mom,  you're active.''

   Staying sharp

   Try something new. Meet new people. Learn to play an instrument.

   Do something active. Watching TV doesn't count.

   Exercise your senses. Listen to traffic and try to discern cars  from trucks.
Look for figures in clouds. Eat something different.

   Keep at it. Just like physical exercise, brain exercise must be  a lifelong
habit.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Denver Post/Craig F. Walker Joan Davis of Denver stretches
to improve her blood circulation during a recent class on brain fitness at the
Malley Senior Center in Englewood. Bonnie Fuller, senior membership services
coordinator for Porter hospital, sprays a lemon scent around the room in a
brain-fitness class at Malley Senior Center in Englewood.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2000


                             287 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 13, 2000 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D-25

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: Heska attempting to make fleas flee via genetic code

BYLINE: By John Aguilar, Special to The Denver Post, POST TOP 100,

BODY:

   One of Colorado's top-performing companies is attempting to  map the genetic
code of a flea.

   Fort Collins-based Heska Corp., a veterinary health-products  developer,
hopes to use the information to rid dogs and cats of  the insect.

   And it is trying to firmly position itself in the eyes of  veterinarians
around the world as a critical player in the $ 3  billion animal health
prescription products business.

   'We are very focused on the companion animal health market,'  said CEO Robert
Grieve. 'Our future is limited to helping dogs,  cats and, to a lesser extent,
horses.'

   Heska, with 375 employees worldwide and revenues of $ 52  million last year,
markets more than 30 products to vets.

   It ranked No. 87 on The Denver Post Top 100.

   Eyedrop vaccines for cats

   Heska manufactures diagnostic equipment to screen dogs for  heartworm
disease, it produces vaccines in the form of eyedrops  for cats with common
viral infections, and it develops cancer and  gene therapy treatments for pets.
It scored one of its biggest  successes with the development of a nasal mist
vaccine that  combats a tenacious equine influenza.

   'They are a cutting-edge, new-concept company, and they are  ahead of the
competition,' said Tom Miller, a board member of the  Colorado Biotechnology
Association. 'But the competition has  better distribution capabilities, and it
has large marketing  forces out there already.'

   The competition includes pharmaceutical giants with animal  health divisions,
such as Pfizer, American Home Products, Bayer  and Novartis.

   Heska is joining forces with the competition to reach  consumers it might not
otherwise have the ability to reach on its  own. Currently, it is teaming with
Ralston-Purina to bring to  market a cat food formula for diabetic cats.

   'We've carved out some areas where we're collaborating with  certain
strategic investors,' Grieve said. 'We have an ongoing  relationship with
Novartis.'

   Novartis owns 11 percent of Heska.

   Miller says Heska will need to expand its business strategy  if it wants to
survive in a tough marketplace.

   Direct to consumers

   'What Heska needs to do is follow a pattern that is happening  in the
pharmaceutical industry and offer products directly to the  consumer as well as
the vets,' he said.

   Grieve said his company already recognizes the power of the  consumer.

   'It's a very educated consumer these days. The vets are the  channels for our
sales, but the consumer is the one spending their  money on their pets, and they
influence the vets more than ever,'  he said.

   Recently, Heska began offering e-commerce solutions on its  Web site to vets
looking for more convenient ways of buying  equipment and medicines.

   h Ripe for buying

   Miller says he thinks the consolidation wave in the industry  will eventually
swallow Heska too.

   'In three to five years, it is likely that one of the big  boys will buy up
Heska,' Miller predicted.

   The name Heska, a Lakota word for white mountains, was chosen  to reflect the
company's home at the edge of the Rockies in Fort  Collins and its presence in
Europe near the Alps in Switzerland,  Grieve said.

   Heska has a third location in Des Moines, Iowa, where much of  its
manufacturing takes place.


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2000


                             288 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       August 13, 2000 Sunday 2D EDITION

SECTION: SCN; Pg. L-12

LENGTH: 983 words

HEADLINE: Take a walk on wild side at the zoo

BYLINE: Joanne Davidson,

BODY:

   Take a walk on the wild side - and help raise money for the  Rocky Mountain
Multiple Sclerosis Center - by attending Enchanted  Evening II     At the Zoo.
The $ 150-a-ticket event takes place  Aug. 24.

   Guests will arrive at the Denver Zoo, starting at 6:30 p.m.,  for a gala
under the stars that is expected to raise $ 299,000 for  research and patient
services at the Englewood center.

   An Elegant Evening is an event of The Denver Post Charities  and will feature
a silent auction, entertainment and dinner  catered by K-M Concessions.
Reservations can be phoned to Barbara  Howie, 303-788-4030, ext. 102.

   Chairwomen are Dr. Sandra Arkin, Ilona Dwoskin, Sandy Unrein  and Phyllis
Wicklund. Builder Cal Cox is leading the corporate  committee with Denver Post
Publisher Jerry Grilly and his wife,  Bonnie. Physician chairmen are the
Grillys' neighbors, Drs.  Carolyn and Rick Tillquist.

   Committee members are Ruth Bowling, Barbara Burke, Laurel  D'Antoni, Mary
Edwards, Susan Endre, Gladys Fischer, Viola  Flowers, Olga Hay, Cheryl Jewett,
Pat Lambert, Tineke Lodder,  Marie Marsalisi, Jane Masterson, Joan Mateskon,
Mary McNicholas,  Ginny Messina, Zoe Morgese, Beth Perischitte, Greta Pollard,
Pat  Redmond, Jean Shepperly, Jeanne Shroyer, Judie Stromberg, Cheri  Tsiguloff,
Tracy Ulmer, Sandee Walling, Barbara Weiskopf and  Deborah Weister.

   Sponsors include Calcon Constructors, American Century, the  Galloway Group
and Compass Bank.

   Coming up

   Monday: Representatives from the Metropolitan Life Foundation  will be at the
George M. Wilfley Branch of the Boys & Girls Clubs  of Metro Denver this
afternoon to present a $ 90,000 check to help  offset operational expenses for
the coming year. Sibyl Jackson,  the foundation's president and chief executive
officer, will turn  over the check as club members, their families and Snoopy,
the  MetLife mascot, look on.

   Tuesday: The sixth annual Gala in the Garden, benefiting the  Trails and Open
Space Coalition, begins at 5:30 p.m. at Rock Ledge  Ranch near Garden of the
Gods in Colorado Springs. There will be  food from the Blue Star restaurant,
music by the Mountain Road  Ceili Band, a silent auction and the opportunity to
explore the  1860s Galloway Homestead. Tickets are $ 35. Call 303-633-6884.

   Tuesday: Denver City Councilwoman Joyce Foster and community  leaders Marion
Gottesfeld and Marlene Siegel will be honored at  the Road to Discovery Dinner
put on by Denver chapter of Hadassah.  Chairwomen Dorothy Parris and Norma
Sierota note that festivities  begin at 6:15 p.m. in the Donald R. Seawell Grand
Ballroom. Dinner  is at 7, followed by a musical revue of Broadway favorites
performed by Penny Alfrey and Paul Dwyer of the Country Dinner  Playhouse.
Tickets are $ 50, plus a minimum $ 300 donation to the  Hadassah Medical
Organization's Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene  Therapy in Jerusalem.
Reservations can be phoned to 303-355-3276.

   Tuesday: Today is the deadline for making reservations for an  Aug. 28
luncheon honoring Elizabeth Grady, a 50-year member of the  Jefferson County
Women's Republican Club. Her son, George L.  Priest, a professor at Yale
University Law School, will speak at  the 11:30 a.m. event held at Mount Vernon
Country Club. Call Judy  Roseborough, 303-233-8051.

   Wednesday: Historic Denver is having an open house at its new  headquarters,
1536 Wynkoop St. Members and friends are invited to  drop by from 6:30 to 8 p.m.
There is no charge, but reservations  are requested. Call 303-534-5288, ext. 11.

   Thursday: Donors to the Samantha Loewi Fund at the Muscular  Dystrophy
Association are invited to attend the annual Sammy's  Friends thank-you fete,
held at the Denver home of Drs. Mary Kohn  and Ben Honigman. Starting at 5:30
p.m. there will be food from  Chinook Tavern, Mel's Bar and Grill, Piatti,
Restaurant Kevin  Taylor and Restaurant Rue Cler, music by the Swing Street Band
and  children's entertainment by 'mad scientist' Steve Nutt. Samantha,  the
daughter of attorney Andy Loewi and his wife, Pat, executive  director of
Special Olympics Colorado, was diagnosed with muscular  dystrophy at the age of
18 months. Eight years ago her parents  established a fund to help pay for
research on congenital muscular  dystrophy, the form with which their daughter
is afflicted. To  date, $ 350,000 has been contributed. For details, call
303-691-3331.

   Saturday: Dani's R.A.V.E. (Research to Achieve Victory and  Empowerment over
Cancer) begins at 5:30 p.m. at the Westin Tabor  Center. Sponsored by Dani's
Foundation, the event is designed for  people of all ages and includes music,
dancing, youth art  performances, tattoo-painting, a silent auction and an art
unveiling. Tickets are $ 50 for up to age 40 and $ 100 for everyone  else.
Dani's Foundation honors the memory of Daniele (Dani) Stell,  who died of
Ewing's sarcoma, a form of bone cancer, when she was  19. Dani's mother, Michele
Ashby, started the foundation to help  beat pediatric cancer. A portion of the
R.A.V.E. proceeds go to  The Children's Hospital cancer research lab. For
tickets, call  Ashby at 303-825-0834.

   Saturday: Friends of the University of Colorado Division of  Pulmonary
Sciences and Critical Care Medicine gather at the Denver  Performing Arts
Complex for a benefit dinner and performance of  the Tony Award-winning musical,
'Fosse.' Tickets start at $ 225 and  include a cocktail reception at 5:30 p.m.,
followed by dinner in  the Boettcher Bistro. The show, in neighboring Buell
Theatre, is  at 8. Proceeds go to the CU Lung Research Endowment Fund. Call
303-766-8347 or 303-315-7047.

   Denver Post Society Editor Joanne Davidson's column appears  every day except
Saturdays. E-mail her at jmdpost@aol.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2000


                             289 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     August 13, 2000, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 2425 words

HEADLINE: Trying to crack cancer's code;
Identifying the hundreds of errant genes that cause cancer is just the first
step. Scientists then have to learn how those genes go bad so they can find ways
to stop or prevent it.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Maura Lerner; Staff Writers

BODY:

   Every month, it seems, there's another headline about scientists discovering
a gene linked to cancer. This month, it's the gene that makes skin cancer spread
to other parts of the body, where it turns deadly. Before that, it was a gene
for colon cancer . . . breast cancer . . . bladder cancer . . . .

        "People hear that this gene is being discovered and that gene," said
David I. Smith, of the cancer genetics program at the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center
in Rochester, Minn. "They are justified in asking, 'So what? When are they going
to find a cure for cancer?' "

        Researchers are, in fact, making unprecedented progress at getting to
the molecular roots of cancer. And they are tantalizingly close to gene-based
strategies for diagnosing, preventing and treating the dreaded condition. But
cancer is actually hundreds of genetic diseases, not just one, and there almost
surely isn't one magic-bullet cure that will emerge from the research.

        Experts agree that it will be several years before most cancer patients
start to see the payoffs from this whirlwind of discoveries.

         "People really want to have an answer to an immediate problem," said
Dr. Thomas Amatruda, director of the Minnesota Cancer Genetics Program, a
genetics counseling program at North Memorial and Abbott Northwestern hospitals
in the Twin Cities metro area. "We're not there yet."

          So far, after two decades of intense research, scientists have
identified more than 100 cancer genes, according to the National Cancer
Institute. And they estimate there are at least another 100 left to find.

        One of the best known is a gene for early-onset breast and ovarian
cancer, known as BRCA1, which was identified in 1994. It's also one of the first
to make a real difference to patients, Amatruda said.

        Doctors now use that gene _ and a sister gene, BRCA2, discovered in 1995
_ to help identify women at especially high risk for breast cancer. Some of
those women are using the information to make treatment decisions _ for example,
to take tamoxifen, an anticancer drug, in hopes of lowering their risk. Others
have gone further, having healthy breasts removed before the disease can
develop. At the very least, the discoveries have put affected families on alert
to the need for early screening.

       "There are thousands of people who have been helped by the BRCA1 and 2
genes," Amatruda said. "In those families, cancer has been turned from a killer
to a treatable chronic disease."

        Yet such fortunate patients or would-be patients remain a minority. Most
people who get breast cancer have no inherited risk factor. And not everyone
among those who inherit a cancer gene will get the disease, Amatruda said.
"There's nothing that dooms you to getting it, even in the families where you
can identify an exact mutation in the gene," he said. "There's probably 15 to 20
percent who don't get the cancer."

         The fact is, only a small fraction of all cancers are caused by genetic
mutations that are passed on from parent to child, said Brian Van Ness, head of
the University of Minnesota's Cancer Genetics program.

   .

   Bad habits or bad luck?

       The vast majority of cancer-causing mutations occur during our lifetimes,
partly as a result of the way we live: bad habits (smoking), bad environment
(chemicals, radiation, too much sunlight), bad diets (fatty foods) and, as Van
Ness put it, "bad luck."

        Experts say that in most cases, there is no single culprit. Scientists
believe that most if not all cancers are caused by a string of errant genes, not
just one. "That's why every time a new gene comes out, it's just one more piece
of a complex puzzle," Van Ness said.

        Take the case of the colon cancer gene discovered by Mayo Clinic
geneticist Gloria Petersen and her former colleagues at Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions.

        Their quest began in the 1980s. The researchers, led by Dr. Bert
Vogelstein, screened medical records of patients with links to the disease,
assembled family medical histories and drew blood samples for DNA analysis.

        After years of work, the Johns Hopkins team and other researchers
reported in 1991 they had discovered a gene that, when damaged, leads to one
form of colon cancer. News reports at the time stressed the potential benefit to
the approximately 150,000 Americans who are found to have colorectal cancer each
year.

        But that was only one of the genes involved in colon cancer. The team
discovered more of them in the 1990s. It wasn't until late in the decade that
significant numbers of patients saw practical benefits of widely available tests
for identifying the flawed genes.

        Although genetic research moves faster now, the lesson still holds,
Petersen said. The news that a gene has been discovered, she said, generally
means that scientists have learned where the gene resides on one of the 23 pairs
of human chromosomes.

        It's an important beginning, but it has little practical value until
researchers spell out the gene in precise chemical language, copy it, and study
its behavior, especially in concert with the behavior of other genes. Only then
can the discovery _ or set of discoveries _ be translated into better drugs or
new tests for patients.

   .

   The payoff begins

        In the next three years, patients should start seeing the first
widespread practical results of such discoveries, said Smith, who heads Mayo's
cancer genetics program. For example:

   - Early detection: Genetic tests will spot cancer when it is first starting
to develop. The result, Smith predicted, will be comparable to the development
of the Pap smear test, which dramatically cut the death rate from cervical
cancer by detecting it early.

   - Screening tumors: These tests will look for differences in individual
tumors to help identify the best treatment. "That's really important
information," said Dr. Jack Roth, a cancer genetics researcher at M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center in Houston. Some people, for example, have aggressive lung cancers
that don't respond to ordinary treatment. Genetic testing, he said, will help
reveal those secrets early enough to change the course of treatment.

        The ultimate goal is to design drugs to prevent or stop the cancer genes
from doing any damage.

        One way is to interrupt the chain of events that makes a cell turn
cancerous and grow out of control. The other, known as gene therapy, literally
fixes the genetic mistake that caused the trouble in the first place.

        That science is still in its infancy. But the first of these drugs is
already in widespread use _ a breast-cancer drug called Herceptin _ and others
are being tested in labs and cancer clinics across the country.

        Herceptin, which has been on the market for only two years, was the
first drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration to target a specific
cancer gene. It's aimed at the 25 to 30 percent of breast-cancer patients who
have an overactive gene called HER-2, which produces a protein that spurs the
growth of cancer. Studies show that the drug, designed by Genentech, helped
reduce the tumors in some patients by suppressing that protein.

        "That's where there's a huge amount of interest," Van Ness said.
"Changing what the genes are doing without changing the genes themselves."

        Others are in fact trying to change the genes _ although that has proven
trickier. Roth has injected a kind of doomsday gene called p53 into the tumors
of liver cancer patients. Its job: to tell cancer cells when to die.

        The idea, he said, is to replace a "genetic pathway" that has gone awry.
Normally, cells know when to die; but in cancer, that genetic message isn't
working. "If we restore one of those pathways, say, with p53 . . . that cancer
cell will die," he said.

        So far, Roth said, the early results have been encouraging. "We know it
works, we know it can shrink tumors" in a patient for up to two years. But the
testing is still going on to find out whether it's "better than existing
treatments."

        No one can say which cutting-edge efforts will ultimately pay off, and
how soon. But overall, researchers are optimistic. "Various aspects of this . .
. are going to move very rapidly," said Roth, while some "will evolve over
years."

        Smith, of Mayo, agrees. "It's an absolute revolution in knowledge and
understanding," he said. But, he added, "We are going to chip away at it
slowly."

   .

   Why are genes getting so much attention?

        Cancer is a disease of genes gone awry, according to the National Cancer
Institute.

        Genes in the nucleus of each cell hold the instructions that tell the
cell how to divide and make copies of itself. The damage often begins when such
genes mutate and start working out of control, as if their copying capabilities
were stuck at the "on" position. Other "tumor suppressor" genes, which should
pull the plug on a renegade biological copy machine, can malfunction too and
allow growth to go unchecked. Finally, the runaway cells find pathways to spread
into neighboring tissue and invade other parts of the body.

        Although all cancers are triggered by altered genes, only a small
portion of cancer is inherited _ in the form of a mutation passed from one
generation to the next. Most cancers come from random mutations that develop in
body cells during one's lifetime _ either as a mistake when cells are dividing
as part of the body's normal function or else in response to injuries from
environmental agents such as smoking, radiation or chemicals.

   .

   Gene discoveries

        About 100 genes related to cancers have been discovered. But identifying
a gene is only one step toward learning what to do when it malfunctions and
triggers the beginning of cancer. Here's a time line showing the discovery of
some genes that, when they mutate, are known to be associated with cancer:

   1970s

        - Scientists discover the family of "oncogenes," which can mutate and
set off wild _ malignant _ growth. Further research has linked one type, the
HER-2 gene, to cancers of the breast, salivary gland and ovary.

   1987 and 1988

        - Research sheds light on mutations in another oncogene group _ the Ras
genes _ which have been detected in lung, ovarian, colon and pancreatic cancers.

   1991

        - A "gatekeeper" gene, which fails to do its job of suppressing tumors
when it mutates, is linked to a form of colon cancer.

   1993

        - Researchers identify a gene that plays a role in cancers of the colon,
uterus, ovary, stomach, small intestine, gall bladder, urethra, pancreas and
kidney.

        - Another gene is observed to play a role in both benign and malignant
tumors of the kidney, retina, central nervous system, pancreas and adrenal
gland.

   1994

        - The BRCA1 gene, which plays a role in early onset breast and ovarian
cancers, is identified.

        - Another gene related to colon, uterine and ovarian cancers is
discovered.

   1995

        - BRCA2, a second breast-cancer gene, is identified.

        - A gene that plays a role in several cancers _ including pancreas,
stomach and breast cancer _ is identified as well.

   1997

        - A gene involved in tumors of the endocrine system and a type of
pancreatic cancer is discovered.

   2000

        - Scientists find a gene that is present in lung cancer, especially in
women.

   .

   The view from the lab

   .

        "This might be the most profound and significant time in biology and
medicine. It's not a gradual change, not an evolution. It's an absolute
revolution . . . in knowledge and understanding. But I think we are going to
figure it out, like little pieces of a huge puzzle."

        _ David I. Smith, Ph.D., head of the cancer genetics program at the Mayo
Clinic Cancer Center

   .

   "Right now there's probably about 100 genes that have been implicated in the
cancer process. That number will probably double or maybe triple."

        _ Dr. Jack Roth, professor and genetics researcher, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston

   .

        "Let's imagine it takes five genes to go bad to give you a cancer cell.
What happens if you turn one of them off? That may be enough to turn off the
cancer."

        _ Brian Van Ness, Ph.D. director, cancer genetics, University of
Minnesota Cancer Center, Minneapolis

   .

        "Ultimately . . . we could identify exactly what's wrong in that cell,
what's making the cell grow abnormally, and stop it in the cell. That's the
dream. But we're not really that close to it."

        _ Dr. Thomas Amatruda, cancer specialist, Minnesota Cancer Genetics
Program, Abbott Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis and North Memorial Medical
Center, Robbinsdale

   .

        "When we look back on the research that has happened in the last five
years, we will say, 'Wow! We have advanced a lot.' "

        _ Gloria Petersen, Ph.D, Geneticist, Mayo Clinic and formerly Johns
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore

   .

   .

   What is cancer

   Fundamentally it's a genetic disease. All cancers are diseases of genes gone
awry.

   .

   Major types of genes that underly cancer:

   Oncogenes: A type of gene that is tumor producing, the "stuck accelerator"
gene. After mutating the oncogene causes runaway cell growth.

   .

   Tumor supressor gene: The genes with "the brakes." When cells divide, these
genes shut down the process of normal cell reproduction. When cancer forms, "the
brakes" go out on the process of cell reproduction and cells reproduce
unchecked.

   .

   What triggers cancer?

   - Mistakes or mutations that happen by chance during a cell's normal
reproduction in the body.

   - Inherited mutation in a cell. Happens in about 5 to 10 percent of all
cancers. The first mutation is passed from parent to child who can exhibit the
cancer later.

   - Exposure to cancer causing substance which can trigger cell mutation such
as smoking, radiation or some types of chemicals.

        .

   - The damage sustained by the cell in the formation of cancers occurs in a
single cell's genetic code, or DNA. The damage, or mutation, is then passed on
to other cells during the life of the individual.

   .

   What's next?

   - Identify arrays of genes that get involved in the cancer.

   Find the pathways that cancer takes as it grows and spreads throughout the
body.

   - Find the pathways that cancer takes as it grows and spreads throughout the
body.

   - Translate the genetic discoveries into practical tests and therapies that
can be applied to people with cancer or who have a risk of getting it.

   .

   .

   Source: National Cancer Institute


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION; PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2000


                             290 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     August 10, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 034

LENGTH: 446 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS IN BRIEFCASE

BODY:

   McData shares open with jump

   Shares of McData Corp., a Colorado company controlled by Hopkinton-based data
storage giant EMC Corp., more than tripled yesterday in their first day of
trading.

   EMC controls about 97 percent of the voting power of McData's stock, but
plans to distribute its McData holdings to shareholders within the next six to
12 months.

   McData, which makes switches and software for storage, raised $ 350million by
selling 12.5 million shares at $ 28 apiece.

   McData shares rose yesterday to $ 85.57 on the Nasdaq exchange.

   - HERALD STAFF

   Radview stock falls

   Shares of Radview Software Inc. of Burlington fell on their first day of
trading. The company is incorporated and does research and development in
Israel, but maintains its executive offices in Burlington. It raised $ 40
million by selling 4 million shares at $ 10 each, but the shares fell yesterday
to $ 9.03.

   - HERALD STAFF

   Sapient eyes Texas firm

   Sapient Corp., a Cambridge Internet-commerce consultancy, agreed yesterday to
buy closely held Human Code Inc. of Austin, Texas, for $ 103.8million in stock
to add expertise in interactive media strategy and creative services.

   Sapient said the acquisition will allow it to offer clients sound, video and
three-dimensional interactive programs via the Internet.

   Shares of Sapient, which have risen fivefold this year, fell $ 8 to $ 137.50
in Nasdaq trading. The deal was announced after the close of trading.

   - BLOOMBERG NEWS

   Janus loses manager

   Barely seven weeks after a bitter spinoff from its parent, Janus Capital
Corp. yesterday said Jim Craig, one of the key executives behind the mutual fund
company's success in recent years, was leaving to manage his family's charitable
foundation.

   The departure of Janus' chief investment officer and director of research,
who until the end of last year was the sole portfolio manager for the Janus
Fund, is another blow to the high-flying mutual fund company, analysts said.
Janus has lost some of its sheen in recent times because of its exposure to
high-tech stocks, some of which have taken a beating.

   - REUTERS

   Biogen ups Seattle link

   Biogen Inc. of Cambridge announced yesterday a new gene therapy research
collaboration with Targeted Genetics Inc. of Seattle. The new program, valued at
as much as $ 125 million, expands an agreement Biogen had with the privately
held Genovo Inc., which is being aquired by Targeted Genetics for $ 69 million.

   When the transaction closes in about a month, Biogen will have a 9percent
stake in Targeted Genetics and Biogen's former senior vice president of
research, Joseph M. Davie, will have a seat on the board.

   - HERALD STAFF


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2000


                             291 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                             All Rights Reserved
                             The Indianapolis Star

                  August 10, 2000 Thursday City final Edition

SECTION: EXTRA; Pg. 01E

LENGTH: 666 words

HEADLINE: A Groovy movie break;
Ashton Kutcher of 'That '70s Show' parlays talent, luck and hard work into a
role on the big screen.

BYLINE: BY MARC D. ALLAN STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif. -- On a gorgeous Saturday afternoon, when he should
have been outside enjoying the advantages of being a hot young actor, Ashton
Kutcher instead found himself in a cage.

   The star of TV's That '70s Show -- and one of People magazine's 50 Most
Beautiful People -- was in a Universal Studios soundstage shooting Dude, Where's
My Car?, a comedy due out in December. He stars as Jesse, a "stoner" type in the
mold of Bill (of Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure) or perhaps Wayne (of
Wayne's World). In this scene, he and his buddy Chester have been captured by a
crazed French ostrich farmer who suspects them of poaching.

   The jail cell is in a farmhouse -- two cages housed within temporary walls.
The captive in the next cage is Mark, played by Andy Dick (formerly of TV's
NewsRadio), wearing the matted hair and beard of someone who's been held captive
for three years, five months and 17 days.

   Dick's loopy antics crack up the cast and crew for the next four hours as
they shoot the scene repeatedly from different angles. Dick never says his lines
the same way twice, and Kutcher has the tough job of trying to keep a straight
face.

   Actually, even more difficult, he has to act afraid.

   "That's the toughest part," the 6-foot-3-inch actor, whose given name is
Christopher, says during a brief break. "But I think if you get into the
character and realize that, in this particular scene, we're stuck in a dungeon
with a freaky guy, you wouldn't really be laughing. You'd be scared. So when you
live through what the character's going through, it's not funny anymore."

   That's an amazingly mature approach, especially for a 23-year-old Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, native whose original career path had been something slightly more
sober -- genetic engineering. His twin brother needed a heart transplant when
they were 13 -- a virus had broken down the tissue in his heart, Kutcher
explains -- so "my goal was to figure out a way to stop that virus from
replicating through gene therapy."

   His brother is healthy now, living in Iowa, working at a bank and getting
ready to graduate from college. His recovery freed Kutcher to pursue his other
interest -- acting.

   In 1997, he won a Fresh Faces of Iowa contest, the top prize in which was a
trip to New York. He loved New York's energy, called home and said he was
staying.

   For eight months, he "tramped around the world" modeling, and then moved to
Los Angeles. On his first day in Southern California, Kutcher landed his role as
Kelso on That '70s Show, which begins its third season this fall.

   Sounds easy, doesn't it? "I think you can do anything if you work hard enough
and have dedication toward what you're doing," he says.

   From the beginning, Kutcher says, he knew That '70s Show would be a hit. He
credits the people involved -- it's produced by Carsey-Werner, the people who
brought us The Cosby Show and Roseanne -- and the writing.

   "When I read the script, I thought: It's original, it's good. If it doesn't
work, it's going to be my fault," he says.

   Philip Stark, who's sitting nearby, would be glad to hear that. Stark writes
for That '70s Show and also did the script for Dude, Where's My Car?

   "Ashton's great," Stark says. "In fact, after Dude sold, I said Ashton would
be great for this part. He read the script early on, and while we were working
on the show, between takes he'd come over and act out a scene from the movie.
I'm really glad it worked out for him to be in it."

   As for the next season of That '70s Show, Stark says the story lines will
concentrate on the relationships among the teen-agers, Red getting a job and
family finances.

   Like Kutcher, Stark thought the show would succeed.

   "The work environment is so great, everyone gets along so well and what we're
doing really makes us laugh," he says. "When you're doing a comedy, you have to
make yourselves laugh first."

   Marc D. Allan is The Star's TV/radio editor. Reach him at (317) 633-9398 or
by e-mail at mallan@starnews.com.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2002


                             292 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            August 10, 2000 Thursday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EXTRA; Pg. E1

LENGTH: 658 words

HEADLINE: A Groovy movie break

BYLINE: By, MARC D. ALLAN STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UNIVERSAL CITY, Calif. -- On a gorgeous Saturday afternoon, when he should
have been outside enjoying the advantages of being a hot young actor, Ashton
Kutcher instead found himself in a cage.

   The star of TV's That '70s Show -- and one of People magazine's 50 Most
Beautiful People -- was in a Universal Studios soundstage shooting Dude, Where's
My Car?, a comedy due out in December. He stars as Jesse, a "stoner" type in the
mold of Bill (of Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure) or perhaps Wayne (of
Wayne's World). In this scene, he and his  buddy Chester have been captured by a
crazed French ostrich farmer who suspects them of poaching.

   The jail cell is in a farmhouse -- two cages housed within temporary walls.
The captive in the next cage is Mark, played by Andy Dick (formerly of TV's
NewsRadio), wearing the matted hair and beard of someone who's been held captive
for three years, five months and 17 days.

   Dick's loopy antics crack up the cast and crew for the next four hours as
they shoot the scene repeatedly from different angles. Dick never says his lines
the same way twice, and Kutcher has the tough job of trying to keep a straight
face.

   Actually, even more difficult, he has to act afraid.

   "That's the toughest part," the 6-foot-3-inch actor, whose given name is
Christopher, says during a brief break. "But I think if you get into the
character and realize that, in this particular scene, we're stuck in a dungeon
with a freaky guy, you wouldn't really be laughing. You'd be scared. So when you
live through what the character's going through, it's not funny anymore."

   That's an amazingly mature approach, especially for a 23-year-old Cedar
Rapids, Iowa, native whose original career path had been something slightly more
sober -- genetic engineering. His twin brother needed a heart transplant when
they were 13 -- a virus had broken down the tissue in his heart, Kutcher
explains -- so "my goal was to figure out a way to stop that virus from
replicating through gene therapy."

   His brother is healthy now, living in Iowa, working at a bank and getting
ready to graduate from college. His recovery freed Kutcher to pursue his other
interest -- acting.

   In 1997, he won a Fresh Faces of Iowa contest, the top prize in which was a
trip to New York. He loved New York's energy, called home and said he was
staying.

   For eight months, he "tramped around the world" modeling, and then moved to
Los Angeles. On his first day in Southern California, Kutcher landed his role as
Kelso on That '70s Show, which begins its third season this fall.

   Sounds easy, doesn't it? "I think you can do anything if you work hard enough
and have dedication toward what you're doing," he says.

   From the beginning, Kutcher says, he knew That '70s Show would be a hit. He
credits the people involved -- it's produced by Carsey-Werner, the people who
brought us The Cosby Show and Roseanne -- and the writing.

   "When I read the script, I thought: It's original, it's good. If it doesn't
work, it's going to be my fault," he says.

   Philip Stark, who's sitting nearby, would be glad to hear that. Stark writes
for That '70s Show and also did the script for Dude, Where's My Car?

   "Ashton's great," Stark says. "In fact, after Dude sold, I said Ashton would
be great for this part. He read the script early on, and while we were working
on the show, between takes he'd come over and act out a scene from the movie.
I'm really glad it worked out for him to be in it."

   As for the next season of That '70s Show, Stark says the story lines will
concentrate on the relationships among the teen-agers, Red getting a job and
family finances.

   Like Kutcher, Stark thought the show would succeed.

   "The work environment is so great, everyone gets along so well and what we're
doing really makes us laugh," he says. "When you're doing a comedy, you have to
make yourselves laugh first."

   Marc D. Allan is The Star's TV/radio editor. Reach him at (317) 633-9398 or
by e-mail at mallan@starnews.com

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 2009


                             293 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                August 10, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
TARGETED GENETICS TO ACQUIRE GENOVO, A RIVAL

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   The Targeted Genetics Corporation, a maker of gene- and cell-therapy
products, agreed yesterday to buy a rival, Genovo Inc., for $67 million in
stock, gaining drugs in development and access to agreements with other
biotechnology companies. Targeted Genetics also agreed with Biogen Inc., a major
shareholder in closely held Genovo, to develop as many as four gene-therapy
products and assist on an existing Biogen product. That accord, replacing one
Biogen had with Genovo, is valued at as much as $125 million. Targeted Genetics
will issue 6.63 million shares for Genovo, which is based in Sharon Hill, Pa.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2000


                             294 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      AUGUST 10, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1169 words

HEADLINE: RIVAL TO BUY LOCAL BIOTECH PIONEER GENOVO THE SHARON HILL FIRM WAS THE
MAJOR CORPORATE BACKER OF GENE THERAPY RESEARCH AT PENN. THOSE TIES WILL END.

BYLINE: Andrea Knox and Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   A Seattle rival is buying the local pioneering biotechnology company that
until June 30 was the major corporate financial backer of gene therapy research
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Targeted Genetics Corp. will acquire Genovo Inc., of Sharon Hill, which
provided 20 percent of the funding for Penn's prestigious but problem-plagued
Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Targeted Genetics, a publicly held company, said yesterday it would buy
privately held Genovo in an all-stock deal valued at $89.9 million based on the
closing price of Targeted Genetics stock. The stock closed yesterday at $13.56 a
share, up $3.44.

   Merging Genovo with its stronger gene-therapy rival will create a more solid
base to develop what scientists say are several promising Genovo approaches to
correcting genetic disorders.

   By severing the Penn institute's close financial ties to a for-profit
company, the deal also will remove the conflict-of-interest concerns that have
dogged the gene therapy program since last year, when an Arizona teenager died
in a gene therapy trial.

   On the other hand, the acquisition means the Philadelphia area stands to lose
the prestige and economic gains that might ultimately flow from the pathbreaking
work that began here when Genovo's founder, James M. Wilson, came to Penn in
1993.

   It also marks the end in Philadelphia of what was once a visionary idea: the
marriage of campus-based research and a for-profit company. That marriage was
sealed by Penn in an era when most of private industry wasn't ready to jump into
the gene-therapy field. The university saw itself as a champion that could push
the field forward.

   Peter C. Erichsen, Penn's general counsel, said the university's gene-therapy
program was not likely to suffer from the loss of its largest corporate donor
because the bulk of its $25 million annual budget came from other sources such
as the federal government. In addition, he said the program had been reorganized
and scaled back in the wake of the problems stemming from the death on Sept. 17
of Jesse Gelsinger, 18.

   Since Gelsinger's death, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has suspended
the institute's human gene therapy trials, and found its animal laboratories in
violation of federal guidelines.

   Wilson declined yesterday to comment on the future of the institute, but said
in a prepared statement that he would continue as a full professor at Penn and
director of its gene therapy program. He also said he had no role in the merger
decision.

   Targeted Genetics will issue 6.63 million shares of its stock to Genovo
shareholders, who include Wilson, the University of Pennsylvania, and Biogen
Inc., of Cambridge, Mass.

   Biogen will receive $50 million worth of Targeted Genetics stock, and become
a 9 percent owner of the company. Wilson will receive just under 1 million
shares, worth about $13.5 million at yesterday's close. Penn will receive shares
worth about $1.3 million.

   Targeted Genetics said it would not renew Genovo's funding agreement with
Penn because it has research collaborations with other universities, including
the University of Washington in Seattle, Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore,
and the University of North Carolina.

   However, the Seattle company said that, at least for the time being, it would
maintain Genovo's Sharon Hill facility and its 20-person workforce.

   After the FDA suspended Penn's human gene therapy trials in January, Genovo
said it might move its research funding elsewhere. At the time, Genovo said its
search for "alternative sites" was unrelated to the institute's problems.

   People familiar with Genovo said it has been plagued by management problems.
In recent years, the company lost three chief executives in rapid succession,
and apparently had not made as much progress on developing gene therapy
techniques as investors had hoped.

   Biogen, which holds two of the four seats on Genovo's board, would not
comment yesterday on its role in crafting the acquisition.

   However, in a prepared statement, Biogen chief executive officer James C.
Mullen described the deal and a related research agreement between Biogen and
Targeted Genetics as ". . . the next chapter in Biogen's long-term commitment to
gene therapy." The collaboration "leverages Biogen's early research investment
in . . . Genovo," he said.

   Genovo has yet to produce a product. However, Targeted Genetics said the
Sharon Hill company's assets include:

   Programs to develop gene therapies for three diseases, including hemophilia.

   A collaboration with Genzyme Corp., of Cambridge, Mass., on products to treat
a class of inherited disorders, including Tay-Sachs disease.

   Patents covering certain methods and materials used in gene therapy.

   In a prepared statement, Genovo chief executive officer Eric Aguiar called
Targeted Genetics "the premier gene therapy company," and said Genovo was
pleased to be joining a firm with clinical and commercial manufacturing
capabilities.

   "We determined that we could more quickly realize the value of our programs
by joining forces" with Targeted Genetics, his statement said.

   The merger announcement came six weeks after Genovo and Penn ended a
financial relationship that had raised conflict-of-interest concerns in both the
academic community and Congress.

   Under a five-year agreement that expired June 30, Genovo was granted
exclusive rights to license patents resulting from Wilson's research at Penn's
gene therapy institute. In exchange, the company provided about $21 million to
help finance the research.

   Such arrangements are commonplace in academia, but issues arose around the
unusual fact that Wilson had founded Genovo and was allowed to hold a relatively
large stake - up to 30 percent of nonvoting stock - in the firm. Penn's rules
generally allow campus researchers to hold no more than 5 percent of stock in
companies financing their work.

   Erichsen, the Penn counsel, said yesterday that neither Genovo nor the
university had sought to renew the agreement.

   Wilson will hold less than 2.5 percent of Targeted Genetics. "There's no
question that one effect of this transaction will be to eliminate the
[perceived] conflict of interest," Erichsen said.

   Gelsinger, who suffered from an inherited liver disorder, died after having
an adverse reaction to the disarmed viruses used to deliver a corrective gene to
his cells.

   His death was believed to be the first directly resulting from gene therapy.
Besides the FDA freeze on further gene trials at Penn's institute, the death has
prompted widespread soul-searching in academia and industry about the safety of
gene therapy and the need to assure that it is properly monitored. It has
resulted in stricter regulations at Penn and at other institutions that are
continuing to perform gene therapy trials using federal funds.

   Andrea Knox's e-mail address is aknox@phillynews.com

   * Inquirer staff writer Harold Brubaker contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             295 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 10, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. E01

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: DIGEST

BODY:


   More than 86,000 telephone workers remained on strike against Verizon
Communications, the dominant local telephone carrier from Virginia to Maine, as
negotiators continued to try to reach agreement on new contracts. The unions,
the Communications Workers of America and the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers, are chiefly seeking greater job security and limits on
forced overtime. The workers have been on strike since their old contracts
expired at midnight Saturday. Hopes that the strike might be settled quickly
dimmed further yesterday, as the two sides dug in on their positions, according
to sources with knowledge of the talks.


   Visa USA has come up with a new card aimed at capturing the growing teenage
market. Visa, the bank-owned association that runs the nation's largest
credit-card system, says children 13 to 17 can use its Buxx card to make
purchases on the Internet or at the local mall, as well as get cash from ATMs.
Parents will set a spending limit and prepay that amount into a special account;
they can then monitor the child's spending online or via a toll-free telephone
number.



   United Airlines and its pilots are making progress toward resolving a
months-long contract impasse but remain far apart as a Labor Day target date for
settlement approaches, a pilots' official said. Meanwhile, United spokesman Joe
Hopkins said 130 of its 2,400 daily flights were canceled yesterday as of
midafternoon. That's a significant improvement over the 274 called off the
previous day and 350 each on Saturday and Sunday, but still well above industry
standards.


   Handspring, a maker of hand-held personal organizers, plans to use Qualcomm's
technology to put services such as Internet access and stock quotes on its Visor
device. The wireless technology could give Handspring an advantage over Palm and
Microsoft in the race for sales of mobile data communications. Palm offers
wireless data services on its Palm VII organizer.


   Dow Corning, which has operated under Chapter 11 of the bankruptcy laws since
1995, said it will cut as many as 800 jobs, or as much as 8.4 percent of its
work force, to reduce costs. The cuts, to be made throughout its offices, are
expected to save the maker of silicone-based products at least $ 50 million a
year.


   Sears said it will buy back up to $ 1 billion of its stock over an
unspecified time in an effort to reverse a 25 percent drop in its share price
over the past year. The buyback represents about 9 percent of Sears's stock
outstanding, which was 343 million shares as of July 1. Its stock closed
yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange at $ 31, down 87 1/2 cents, or 2.8
percent.


   INTERNATIONAL


   The International Monetary Fund said in its first quarterly report on
investments in emerging markets that private investment in Asia, Latin America
and Eastern Europe could drop during the next year because of concern about a
possible U.S. economic slump and stock-market decline. The report said the
almost 30 percent plunge in the U.S. Nasdaq stock index from March through May
prompted investors to also pull out of stock and bond markets in emerging
economies, leading many developing nations to cut back on the sale of new bonds.


   Deutsche Telekom has decided to reschedule the initial public offering of its
mobile-phone unit, T-Mobile International, after its $ 55.7 billion acquisition
of U.S. phone operator VoiceStream Wireless. The deal makes preparation of the
listing prospectus for T-Mobile considerably more complex, and investors are
setting tougher requirements regarding the presentation of Deutsche Telekom's
mobile communications business, the company said. Germany's largest phone
company had planned to list T-Mobile at the start of the fall. A final decision
on the date has yet to be made.


   EARNINGS


   Federated Department Stores, which runs upscale retail stores such as
Bloomingdale's and Macy's, said second-quarter profit was down 54 percent, to $
63 million, because of larger bad-debt reserves required to cover credit
delinquencies at Fingerhut, the No. 2 U.S. catalogue retailer, which Federated
bought in 1999.


   Wal-Mart Stores, the nation's biggest retailer, said it earned $ 1.6 billion
for the three months ended July 31, compared with $ 1.25 billion in the quarter
a year ago. Sales increased to $ 46.1 billion from $ 38.5 billion.


   LOCAL BUSINESS


   Three Washington area public relations firms will merge to form a new company
called Qorvis Communications. Coming together are the Poretz Group, which
specializes in investor and public relations for technology companies;
Weber/Merrit, which focuses on public affairs; and JAS Communications, a public
relations company. Qorvis will have 22 employees. Law firm Patton Boggs is a
strategic investor in the new company, with both firms cross-selling packages of
legal and public relations services to one another's clients. Terms of the deal
were not disclosed.


   Celsion announced it has secured an option agreement with Duke University for
the rights to gene technology that could help cancer patients by using focused
heat to induce, or "turn on," gene therapy. The agreement extends the
relationship between the Columbia-based medical research firm and Duke, which
agreed in 1999 to an exclusive licensing agreement for the use of heat-sensitive
liposomes in the targeted delivery of drugs. Duke scientists recently published
research that demonstrated how, by using heat to increase the production of
certain cytokines, or protein messengers, scientists were able to delay tumor
growth and reduce the formation of new blood vessels in animals.


LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2000


                             296 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 9, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: PRINCE WILLIAM EXTRA; Pg. V11

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: A Real Dose of Science At Summer Academy; Students Face Ethical,
Policy Issues

BYLINE: Chris L. Jenkins , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   As a high school student in South Korea, Jeong Seok Yu was always told that
science was best taught from a book. Everything one needed to know about biology
and chemistry--the equations, the explanations, the theorems--could be found
between the covers of a textbook.

   That notion was flipped on its head this summer, thanks to an intensive
three-week science and public policy program for Northern Virginia high school
students. Yu, who moved to Fairfax County with his parents last fall and now
attends Centreville High School, and 16 other teenagers attended the Northern
Virginia Summer Academy, an interdisciplinary program that takes textbook
science and applies it to the real world of public policy and ethical dilemmas
facing scientists today.

   "It's been like seeing the world through different eyes," Yu, 17, said as he
prepared for an oral presentation of his research last week. "We saw, we
touched, we smelled. We talked and debated. I learned a whole new way of looking
at science."

   The Summer Academy, now in its fifth year, exposes participants to a host of
opportunities not available to most high school students, including DNA
fingerprinting analysis and a visit to a Rockville laboratory at work on
deciphering the human genetic code.

   During the 15 days of classes, field trips and discussion groups, the
students meet with scientists, politicians, policymakers and scholars to talk
about health care issues and advances in biotechnology.

   "They've visited places that many other teenagers have never had a chance to
see," said Kathye Geary, the academy's executive director. "They're meeting
experts in all of the fields that we're covering and using equipment that they
may not have access to in high school."

   The curriculum also focuses on how difficult the application of science can
be in a changing world. Not only did the students conduct experiments--for
example, studying their own genetic blueprints by removing cells from inside
their cheeks and simulating HIV tests on the samples--they also researched how
scientific findings and discoveries should be used.

   There were ethical issues: Should scientists continue the use of gene therapy
in light of a recent death when using the procedure in Pennsylvania? What are
the boundaries of doctor-assisted suicide?

   And practical problems: Are there severe health risks if animal organs are
transplanted in humans? How does one provide accessible health care to
low-income children and families?

   As the students found, there are no easy answers.

   "I saw from all the things we talked about how science is never black and
white," said Donna McLaughlin, 17, who will be a senior at Chantilly High School
this fall. "It really showed the complexity of science."

   One of the livelier debates was over how--or whether--aborted fetuses should
be used when experimenting with stem cell therapy, used in some cancer
treatments. The students pondered the ethical boundaries: Should limits be set?
Who should set them?

   For one student, the discussion was unexpectedly revealing.

   "I was really surprised to see some people who may have been opposed to
abortion but they weren't opposed to stem cell research," said Chris Robinson,
17, who will be a senior at Chantilly. "It was really interesting to see how
people came up with their arguments."

   The academy is funded with private and public money, and students pay $ 700
to attend, after being chosen based on applications, interviews and
recommendations. Classes were taught by three high school teachers and a medical
student who led experiments and discussion groups.

   The academy makes its home on the Alexandria campus of Episcopal High School.
For the first two weeks, students attend during the day; they stay in campus
housing for the final week so they can work together on preparing and presenting
their research.

   Students were responsible for researching topics and outlining and advocating
their position to a group of teachers, community leaders and parents.

   "The most interesting thing has been seeing how [public] policy in a lot of
ways is really a compromise," said Banafsheh Khamesi, 16, who will be a junior
at Lee High School in Springfield. "We've really been able to see the conflict
of ideas and how they are worked out."

   Josh Hertel, 34, a social studies teacher at McLean High School who taught
the students public policy, said: "It's really been amazing to see how quickly
they are able to get the complexity of the issues. We didn't expect them to be
experts overnight, but they have initiated discussions that are very
sophisticated."

   For Yu, the academy was just the beginning. He wrote a paper on gene therapy
for his final presentation and cultivated an interest in learning whether
exposing parasites to ultraviolet light increases their growth rate and what the
consequences of that might be.

   "The most important thing for me was to see and to meet the scientists doing
all of this work," he said. "It shows what is possible and what can be done."


   For information on the Summer Academy, call 703-765-2395 or visit the
program's Web site at www.acps.k12.va.us/nvsa.


LOAD-DATE: August 09, 2000


                             297 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 8, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E3

LENGTH: 119 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS / STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN;
Stephen Reucroft and John Swain are experimental particle physicists who teach
at Northeastern University.;
ISLAND OF THE COLORBLIND

BYLINE: By STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   Oliver Sacks wrote a book with the same title as this item in which he
described the people of the Micronesian island of Pingelap on which one in 20
people cannot distinguish any colors at all and see the world in shades of gray.
Now Olof Sundin and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore have
managed to identify the gene responsible for this defect. When normal, the gene
prompts eye cells to create a protein needed in order to perceive color. The
possibility is now on the horizon that a treatment may be possible for this
disease using gene therapy. One cannot help but wonder what it would be like to
suddenly see color after a lifetime with none!

   ref: Nature Genetics, July 2000.


LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2000


                             298 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     August 8, 2000, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 9D

LENGTH: 1550 words

HEADLINE: Drug trials vex medical ethics Academic experts put testing by private
companies under a microscope

BYLINE: Dan Vergano

BODY:

   In the debate that raged after the death of Jesse Gelsinger, a
teenager who died during a gene-transfer study at the University
of Pennsylvania, one change went almost unnoticed: The university
decided to hire private companies to conduct future human experiments
deemed "to involve significant risk."

   Penn is not the only one.

   A recent report in The New England Journal of Medicine noted
that drugmakers are turning away from academic medical centers.
Instead, they are using contract research organizations (CROs),
private companies that now run the majority of the clinical trials
used to test drugs' effects before the Food and Drug Administration
approves their sale. And not everyone in medicine is happy about
the change.


   Unburdened by treatment and teaching responsibilities, a CRO often
provides a faster, cheaper way to launch a drug study than do
medical schools, says Kenneth Getz of CenterWatch, a Boston-based
industry watcher. That makes CROs attractive to companies with
drugs to test. But critics say that allowing CROs, which work
directly for drugmakers, to evaluate those same companies' products
sets off alarm bells, considering the CROs are beholden to the
companies for future contracts.

   "We certainly have to ask whose creatures they are," says Marcia
Angell, former editor of The New England Journal of Medicine.

   Like Thomas Bodenheimer of the University of California at San
Francisco, who authored the recent New England Journal of Medicine
report, Angell fears that some CROs, obligated to a particular
company for survival, might bury study results pointing to drug
side effects -- or initiate studies designed solely to win FDA
approval for a drug. Perhaps they would not fully check for risks,
endangering people's health when the product hits pharmacy shelves.

   Conflict-of-interest concerns

   This month, the Department of Health and Human Services plans
a conference to discuss conflict-of-interest concerns in clinical
trials. Bodenheimer will join federal officials in outlining areas
of concern, including CROs.

   Adding to worries over CROs' allegiances, researchers have found
evidence that funding sources affect research results.

   Last year, a Northwestern University study found that studies
sponsored by drug companies reported negative results with drugs
5% of the time, vs. 38% in efforts financed by other sources.

   Teaching hospitals focus on patient treatment and physician training,
along with research, Bodenheimer says. In contrast, private companies
exist to make money, period, he says. "CROs need contracts to
survive."

   And drugs need to run a gantlet of tests in humans to survive
the FDA approval process.

   After identification, toxicology tests and testing on animals,
the makers of a new drug seek the federal government's permission
to test it on humans.

   Subsequent Phase 1 trials generally test the drug for side effects
and safety in humans, not for beneficial effects. In Phase 2 and
Phase 3 trials, the drugs are tested in increasing numbers of
people, sometimes involving thousands of participants worldwide.

   When a company receives approval from the FDA to market a drug,
it may commit to Phase 4 studies, designed to measure the drug's
side effects in its customers.

   In April, the consumer group Public Citizen noted that in the
past 10 years, only 13% of the makers of new drugs met their commitments
to conduct Phase 4 studies.

   Billions spent on clinical trials

   Nationwide, private spending on clinical trials has expanded rapidly
in recent years, from $ 7.5 billion in 1998 to $ 9 billion today,
according to the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of
America (PhRMA). Regulatory demands for larger experiments designed
to ferret out drug side effects and increase medical knowledge
drive the spending, industry spokesmen say.

   As a result, ads for participants in clinical trials now fill
newspapers and radio broadcasts. And recently, organizations including
the National Cancer Institute have taken measures to increase
patient interest, putting a list of trials online. A recent inspector
general's report from the Department of Health and Human Services
documented instances in which doctors are paid to recruit their
own patients into trials in an atmosphere of rushed, possibly
dangerous efforts to enroll patients in studies.

   And despite the pharmaceutical industry's increases in clinical
trial funding, academic medical centers have seen their share
of industry money spent on large drug trials drop from 80% in
1991 to less than 40% today, CenterWatch's Getz says.

   Bob Danna of Beardsworth Consulting Group, a midsize CRO based
in Flemington, N.J., concedes that CROs may face a higher burden
of proving their freedom from bias, compared with academic researchers.
But Danna, like others, argues that Bodenheimer's health policy
report overstates the risk that CROs do bad research.

   "We're certainly aware of the conflict-of-interest risks that
our industry faces," Danna says. "It's a real concern, and researchers,
managers and reviewers have to know how to handle it."

   Academia's borders blurred

   Not even everyone in academia agrees with Bodenheimer.

   "I think he offers a bit of an incomplete perspective," says
Cynthia McGuire Dunn of the University of Rochester (N.Y.), who
argues that academic medical centers can compete in attracting
clinical trials. Such funding has tripled at her institution since
1996, when Dunn inaugurated a program to certify researchers on
the regulatory and ethical issues they face in conducting such
studies.

   In addition, the largest private research companies have hit hard
times in the past year and plan to lay off hundreds of workers,
notes Getz, a factor that makes them less of a threat to take
over drug research. Attempts by CROs to sell themselves as able
to develop a drug from identification to market have not been
successful, he adds.

   "They can't deliver the hands-on management they've promised,
unlike smaller firms," Getz says.

   Finally, most CROs simply act as middlemen between companies and
the academic researchers who run trials most efficiently, says
Bert Spilker of PhRMA. "They're the same academics conducting
research either way."

   But school officials such as Joseph Martin, dean of Harvard Medical
School, note that academic institutions can lose some control
over their researchers when they start working with CROs.

   In April, for example, the FDA sent a warning letter to Tufts
University researcher Jeffrey Isner, citing violations in his
conduct of a gene therapy trial that included "failure to protect
the welfare of subjects." But the letter didn't mention Tufts,
naming instead trial sponsors Isner, St. Elizabeth's Hospital
in Boston and Vascular Genetics of Durham, N.C.

   The last sponsor, a gene therapy firm, was founded in 1997 by
Human Genome Sciences Inc., Isner, St. Elizabeth's and Cato Holding,
a Durham-based CRO.

   "Academia ought to take back some of its share in clinical research,"
Martin says. "I view the whole responsibility of our institution
as going from (lab) bench to bedside." Spurred by a recent debate
at Harvard over how large a financial interest researchers may
hold in drug companies, he hopes to convene a meeting of major
medical institution heads to begin discussing national standards
this year.


   Volunteers should ask lots of questions

   Patients considering entering a clinical trial should ask their
physicians how it will affect their care, says Cynthia McGuire
Dunn of the University of Rochester (N.Y.).

   "When you volunteer, you're no longer a patient. You're a study
participant," she says. "The researcher-subject relationship
focuses on answering bigger questions than individual care."

   Questions to ask your doctor, she says, include:

   * How will my treatment differ from what I would normally get?

   * What are the risks of joining?

   * Would the study prevent me from taking other medications?

   * Will I control medical information generated about myself?

   * Will I control my tissue samples after the study?

   Although some researchers suggest study that participants receive
free, better-than-average care with regular checkups and access
to expensive tests, others caution that people hoping to gain
access to a fancy new drug may end up in the placebo end of a
trial.

   In that case, they would receive the current standard of care
for an ailment or, in some cases, a placebo treatment in which
the pill they take or the care they get is intentionally designed
to have no effect.

   The National Institutes of Health Web site offers information
about clinical trials at www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/gui.

   TEXT WITHIN GRAPHIC BEGINS HERE

   Private firms do most testing

   Drugmakers are increasingly turning away from academic medical
centers (AMCs) to private firms, often so-called contract research
organizations (CROs), to do the testing on drugs' safety and effectiveness.
A look at how the share or work on clinical projects has changed
over the past decade.

AMCsFor-profit research centers
199179%21%
199367%33%
199555%45%
199743%57%
199938%62%


GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Web Bryant, USA TODAY; GRAPHIC, Color, Julie Snider, USA
TODAY, Source: CenterWatch (BAR GRAPH)

LOAD-DATE: August 08, 2000


                             299 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      August 7, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 3; View Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words

HEADLINE: CAPSULES;
 COMPELLING NEW EVIDENCE ON THE BENEFITS OF QUITTING SMOKING

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II

BODY:


   You've heard plenty about the health benefits of quitting smoking. Now
British researchers have provided more compelling evidence of just how
significant those benefits can be.

   Researchers at Oxford University found that people who quit smoking before
age 35 can reduce their risk of developing lung cancer by more than 90%. And
giving up smoking even late in life eliminates most of the risk.

   While previous studies of quitting have shown the effect on lung cancer rates
can be dramatic, the Oxford report in Saturday's British Medical Journal
(http://www.bmj.com) gives the clearest evidence yet.

   The project, led by Sir Richard Peto, also provides the first prediction of
the number of tobacco-related deaths that will occur worldwide in the next 100
years if smoking patterns persist--1 billion deaths, contrasted with 100 million
in the last century.

   Peto's research found there already are 1 billion smokers in the world and
that, by 2030, another billion or so young adults will have started to smoke. If
current smoking patterns continue, tobacco-related deaths worldwide will rise
from 4 million a year now to about 10 million a year around 2030, an increase of
about 100 million a decade, he estimated.

   If trends continue, he predicted that about 15% of all adult deaths worldwide
in the second half of the 21st century will be due to tobacco.

   No matter how early in life a smoker quits, some of the damage done is
irreversible and the risk of lung cancer never declines to normal. Recent
research has shown that starting smoking before age 18 is particularly harmful
to the lungs.

   The Oxford study found that only 2% of those who quit by age 30 developed the
disease by age 75, compared to a 0.4% chance for people who have never smoked.
It also found that 10% of those who quit at 60 will die of lung cancer, and that
continuing to smoke into old age results in a 16% risk.

   Abuse Tied to Stress and Depression in Women

   Women who were sexually or physically abused as children have abnormally
elevated hormonal responses to stress, a chemical imbalance that predisposes
them to mood and anxiety disorders, according to researchers from Emory
University in Atlanta. The scars of their childhood persist throughout life,
according to Dr. Charles B. Nemeroff, leaving them vulnerable to a wide variety
of psychiatric disorders.

   The Emory team studied 49 adult women, age 18 to 45 years, who were divided
into four groups: those who were sexually or physically abused as children and
were diagnosed with depression in adulthood; those who were abused in childhood
but had not developed depression; depressed women who had not suffered child
abuse; and a control group of women with no history of either abuse or
depression.

   The women underwent a variety of stress tests during which levels of
hormones, such as cortisol and ACTH, were measured. The researchers reported in
Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Assn. (http://jama.ama-assn.org)
that both groups of women who were abused in childhood showed exaggerated stress
responses, with those who were depressed showing the greatest increase. On some
measures, their output of stress hormones was six times as great as that of the
control group. The women who were depressed but had no history of abuse showed
the same hormone response as the control group, however. The team is now looking
for ways to minimize that elevated response.

   Dual Therapy Tests Well on Head, Neck Cancers

   A combination of chemotherapy and gene therapy has proved effective in
preliminary trials on a group of patients with head and neck cancers, which are
particularly hard to treat, according to researchers from the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Clinic in Houston. Dr. Fadlo Khuri and his colleagues reported in the
August Nature Medicine (http://www.medicine.nature.com) that the treatment
caused tumors to shrink in 25 of 30 patients tested. Conventional chemotherapy,
in contrast, normally produces results in only 30% to 40% of similar patients,
they said.

   The Khuri team used a genetically engineered virus called ONYX-015, which
destroys cells containing a mutated tumor suppressor gene called p53. That gene
occurs in as many as 70% of head and neck cancers. The virus was injected
directly into the tumor. Patients also received the anti-cancer drugs cisplatin
and 5-fluorouracil.

   Hand Disorder Most Common Among Whites

   Contrary to previous belief, the disabling hand disorder Dupuytren's disease
does affect African-Americans, but it is much more common in whites, according
to researchers at St. Louis University. Dupuytren's occurs when the fibrous
tissue under the skin of the hand becomes scarred and thickened, causing fingers
to be stuck in a bent position. The cause is unknown, but it is most common in
people over the age of 60 and is more likely to occur in patients with medical
conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, and in smokers. Researchers had
previously believed it did not affect blacks.

   Dr. Alesia P. Saboeiro and associates studied 10,000 people who had been
treated for Dupuytren's disease by hospitals in the Department of Veterans
Affairs system over a 10-year period. They report in the current issue of the
journal Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery that they found a substantial number
of African-American patients who were treated for the disorder, although the
disease was six times more common in whites. In severe cases, the disease is
treated by surgery to allow the fingers to straighten.

   Study Looks at Prostate Cancer Recurrence

   Even though a radical prostatectomy--removal of the prostate--is the most
effective surgical treatment for prostate cancer, the disease recurs in nearly
30% of the men who undergo the procedure, according to researchers from the Mayo
Clinic in Rochester, Minn. Men who undergo the surgery and their physicians
should be especially vigilant in watching for such a recurrence, said Dr. Horst
Zincke. That vigilance should include routine use of the PSA test for detecting
levels of a protein associated with the disease.

   Zincke and colleagues studied the records of more than 2,700 men who had
undergone the surery between 1987 and 1993. They reported in the August Journal
of Urology that 29% of the men had a recurrence. The recurrences were most
likely in the first three years after surgery, but some were seen as many as 10
years after surgery. Overall, however, 90% of the men who had the surgery were
still alive 10 years later.


   *

   The Associated Press contributed to this report.

   * Medical writer Thomas H. Maugh II can be reached at
thomas.maugh@latimes.com.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2000


                             300 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      August 6, 2000, Sunday, Home Edition

SECTION: Reader; Pg. 5F

LENGTH: 1035 words

HEADLINE: Death rates trigger gun debate;
 Health Watch: THE WEEK'S TOP MEDICAL STORIES

BYLINE: Staff

SOURCE: AJC

BODY:
A new study finds that murder and suicide rates did not drop any faster in
states that toughened firearms laws to comply with the 1994 Brady Act, but that
fewer people 55 and older used guns to kill themselves after the act took
effect.

   The National Rifle Association claimed the research, in the Journal of the
American Medical Association, supports the notion that gun regulations like the
Brady Act have no effect on crime. Advocates of stricter gun laws said the study
is not an appropriate measure of the success or failure of the Brady Act.

   The findings follow research presented by the Center to Prevent Handgun
Violence, which estimates that 9,368 lives were saved between 1994 and 1998
because guns were less available to criminals. The head of the center, Sarah
Brady, is married to James Brady, for whom the act is named.

   The Brady Act required licensed dealers to perform background checks and
observe a five-day waiting period before selling handguns.

   Incomplete cancer care: Many women over 80 may not be getting full treatment
for early stage breast cancer. A new study found such women were 16 percent less
likely than younger women to be referred to a radiation oncologist upon the
discovery of breast cancer. In cases where a lumpectomy was performed, women
over 80 were 3.4 times less likely to receive follow-up radiation therapy, the
study indicated. Women who do not receive radiation therapy after a lumpectomy
have a 40 percent chance of a cancer recurrence within 10 years, researchers
said. The study of 718 female patients was conducted by the Lombardi Cancer
Center at Georgetown University Medical Center and included researchers from 29
hospitals. It was financed by the federal Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality and published in the journal Cancer.

   Diabetes check: Doctors aren't doing enough to test patients for diabetes,
says a new government call for more aggressive diabetes screening and care --- a
call that urges at-risk Americans to demand their physicians check them. The
National Diabetes Education Program, a federal initiative to improve diabetes
care, said its new call to action is important because too many people don't
realize how serious diabetes is. More than 16 million Americans have the
disease, and experts say at least a third don't know it. It's a leading cause of
blindness, kidney failure and limb amputations.

   Drug costs rising: Older Americans are paying twice as much for their
prescription drugs as they did in 1992, and prices are expected to soar over the
next decade, says a group that advocates drug coverage by Medicare. Families
USA, in a new study, argued that unless national policy-makers get these costs
covered by Medicare, prescription drugs will be even less affordable for people
over 65, many of whom have to get a dozen prescriptions filled a week. The
Families USA study found Americans 65 and older pay an average of $ 1,205 a year
for prescriptions --- up from $ 559 in 1992 --- and will shell out $ 2,810
apiece by 2010.

   CryoLife pressing ahead: CryoLife, Inc., a Kennesaw company that has
developed a tissue-engineered customized heart valve, has applied to the Food
and Drug Administration to conduct human clinical trials in the United States.
The valve, called a SynerGraft heart valve, is created by stripping the cells
from a pig's heart valve and reseeding it with cells from a patient's body. The
process reduces the chances of rejection by the patient and could also relieve
the need for human heart valves, which are in chronic short supply. Last year,
human trials were conducted with six Australian patients. All are doing well and
the valves are functioning. The SynerGraft heart valves are also under review by
European regulatory authorities for general distribution. The company has
provided more than 35,000 heart valves for transplants since it was founded in
1984.

   New drug test: Worldwide Medical Corp. of Irvine, Calif., has won approval
from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to sell three take-home tests for
drug abuse without prescription. The tests, sold under the brand name First
Check, are designed to detect marijuana, cocaine and methamphetamines in urine.
Worldwide said a fourth test, which would also check for opiates such as heroin,
awaits FDA approval. The tests are available at Rite-Aid drug stores.

   Gene therapy advance: A combination of gene therapy and drugs is showing
promise in treating head and neck cancers, researchers in Texas report. If borne
out in further trials, the findings could point the way to more effective
treatment of almost 500,000 people who suffer head and neck cancers annually.
Scientists at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Clinic in Houston report that the
combination therapy caused tumors to shrink in 25 of 30 patients tested. Their
findings are reported in the August issue of the journal Nature Medicine.

   Safety crackdown: The government has completed new standards to ensure that
disposable medical devices are safely resterilized and rehabilitated before
being reused. Recycling such devices as cardiac catheters and angioplasty
balloons, intended to be used once and thrown in the trash, is a growing but
controversial medical practice that largely has gone unregulated. The Food and
Drug Administration's own research has uncovered problems with some reused
disposables, such as angioplasty balloons stretched out of shape by the cleaning
process. The FDA said it would require hospitals and resterilizing companies to
meet standards proving they recycle safely.

   TB programs lacking: Some of the nation's tuberculosis programs, including
Fulton County's, are missing chances to detect TB and thus potentially
encouraging the spread of the disease, according to a new study by the
Atlanta-based Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The problem arises
because the programs, which check all the close contacts of TB patients to see
who else is infected, are failing to check which of them are also HIV- positive,
which both worsens the TB infection and can mask it from traditional TB tests.
Any contact who is HIV-positive should be put on a preventive drug regimen to
keep TB in check, the agency recommends.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2000


                             301 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 5, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1712 words

HEADLINE: Academic Research Under the Microscope; Faculty Members' Business
Interests Stir Controversy

BYLINE: Robert O'Harrow Jr., Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   It is hard to know just where to find pioneering microbiologist Roy Curtiss
III on any given day.

   Sometimes he's in his labs at Washington University in St. Louis, overseeing
the work of researchers as they develop new vaccines. Other times, he's nearby
at Megan Health Inc., a company he founded seven years ago to market his
discoveries about genes and the workings of bacteria.

   After years of quietly making a name for himself in academia, Curtiss now has
a chance to strike it rich with Megan in the go-go world of biomedicine. But
there's a price--his finances are subject to strict oversight by Washington
University. Any ethical missteps threaten to undermine faith in his science--and
in the university.

   "I wear many hats, and they have a right to know which hat I have on," said
Curtiss, whose dual role is reviewed annually by a committee set up to monitor
him. "I have to let people know whether I'm Roy Curtiss the university inventor
or . . . Roy Curtiss the major shareholder and founder of Megan Health."

   As increasing numbers of researchers cut private deals with industry or form
their own biotech companies, universities have stepped up their work as ethics
police. Some schools are finding that old restraints limiting a faculty member's
financial gain from university-sponsored research must be revised or scrapped to
keep star talent.

   But the surge of money onto campuses and into ambitious researchers' pockets
has also ignited a national debate about the conflicts posed by such
arrangements. Some academics argue that researchers should be trusted to
maintain a firewall between their academic and corporate interests. Others
question whether researchers can truly be expected to render disinterested
judgments when stock options, consulting fees or corporate profits are at stake.

   "It's okay to invest in something. It's okay to have equity. But it should
never bring into question what you say," said Harvard University cardiologist
Donald S. Baim, associate director of the Center for Innovative Minimally
Invasive Therapy at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston. Baim has
conducted pioneering studies of devices to prevent heart attacks and said he
would never accept money or stock from a company for which he is conducting
clinical evaluations.

   Yet Baim is starting several of his own companies for which he will do no
research. "Part of the academic mission is to speak authoritatively about
results, not financial interests," he said.

   Many universities now are walking a "tightrope" on the issue, said Mildred
Cho, a senior scholar at the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics. On the one
hand, schools increasingly encourage collaborations between researchers and
private industry--partly because the institutions themselves often reap
royalties from discoveries made in their laboratories.

   Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts University professor who studies scientific ethics,
said schools are caught up in "an enormous intellectual property gold rush" to
patent and profit from every meaningful discovery.

   But criticism of such arrangements has intensified, particularly after
patients died in risky university-sponsored gene therapy experiments and details
surfaced about pharmaceutical industry funding for medical research.

   This spring, in a scathing editorial, the editor of the New England Journal
of Medicine blasted these financial ties. "When the boundaries between industry
and academic medicine become as blurred as they now are, the business goals of
industry influence the mission of the medical schools in multiple ways," wrote
Marcia Angell, whose tenure ended July 1.

   Federal officials also are wrestling with the issue. This month the National
Institutes of Health is to sponsor a conference to help researchers manage
conflicts "so that research subjects are appropriately informed" and results are
"analyzed and presented objectively."

   Later this year leading research schools and industry officials are to debate
the same issues in Boston. Harvard officials proposed the sessions after
enduring intense criticism for an aborted proposal to weaken its medical
school's conflicts policy.

   The university had been preparing for months to loosen its restrictions after
some researchers complained that they were unfairly deprived of profits from
biomedical discoveries. Under its 10-year-old policy, considered among the
nation's toughest, Harvard medical researchers may accept no more than $ 10,000
in consulting fees or $ 20,000 in stock from companies with a stake in their
research's outcome.

   But on May 25, Joseph Martin, dean of Harvard's medical school, killed the
proposal, calling for a national dialogue. He said that "conflicts of interest,
real and perceived, will continue to be an immensely important issue for
academic medicine in the foreseeable future."

   Money was at the heart of the scandal a decade ago that prompted Harvard to
clamp down on conflicts. Scheffer C.G. Tseng, a fellow at the
university-affiliated Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, was found to have
manipulated clinical trial data to show the effectiveness of a dry eye
medication he discovered. Both he and his supervisor owned stock in the eyewash
company. By the time his activities became public, stock owned by Tseng and his
family had increased in value by more than $ 1 million.

   Tseng, now an ophthalmology professor at the University of Miami,
acknowledged the conflict but said Harvard was partly to blame because its
policy was unclear.

   "It's a procedural issue," said Tseng, adding that he gave his stock to a
church and never profited from it. "It's not like scientific fraud."

   Ethics policies came under question last September with the death of Jesse
Gelsinger, an 18-year-old volunteer in an experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. The experiment was run by
researcher James M. Wilson, who--in addition to his academic work--is a major
stockholder in Genovo Inc., a company he helped found to commercialize liver and
lung-related gene therapies. Genovo, in turn, backed Wilson's research and had
given the university an equity stake.

   Wilson at first claimed that he had no contacts with Genovo about the
experiments and did not stand to gain from them. But after Gelsinger's death, a
tangle of potential conflicts unraveled. Genovo officials said Wilson had been
in close contact with the company when Gelsinger was dying and was concerned
about the impact.

   The University of Pennsylvania commissioned an independent review in
February. Without mentioning Wilson's business ties specifically, the panel's
report concluded that equity positions by investigators or the university are
"ill advised." University officials said they would consider changes.

   "Our clinical research programs at the University of Pennsylvania must meet
the highest possible standards for academic excellence," Penn President Judith
Rodin said.

   Ties between universities and businesses have become common since 1980, when
Congress passed the Bayh-Dole Act enabling universities to own and patent
discoveries from federally funded research. Before then, universities received
about 250 patents each year. By the mid-1990s, the number was 10 times higher,
according to one survey.

   Now, medical researchers routinely form their own companies, often with
financial backing from the same university officials responsible for overseeing
their work.

   For example, Boston University biomedical researcher Charles R. Cantor helped
start Sequenom Inc., a human genetics company. The company funded four
researchers to help with Cantor's work at the school. The university, in turn,
was an early Sequenom investor.

   The investment paid off in February, when Sequenom made a public stock
offering. The university's share is now worth about $ 30 million. Cantor is on
leave from BU, serving as a Sequenom's chief scientific officer.

   Boston University officials insist that in a quarter-century of industry
collaboration, there has never been an improper conflict.

   "It's the way the world works. Rather than being an ivory tower, we're
embracing the world around us," spokesman David Lampe said.

   Cantor agrees. "It was never a significant issue, as long as everyone knew
what was happening," he said.

   David Blumenthal, a professor of medicine and health policy at Harvard who
studies academic-industry cooperation, argues that bonds between corporations
and universities offer "fairly clear benefits to both parties."

   Universities that encourage cross-pollination retain faculty more easily than
schools with strict rules, Blumenthal said, and researchers who accept industry
money publish more frequently in prestigious journals.

   At the same time, money flowing into university labs and researchers' pockets
affects the conduct of science, he said.

   In a 1996 survey of life science company executives, Blumenthal's team found
that relationships with universities "may pose greater threats to the openness
of scientific communication than universities generally acknowledge." More than
80 percent of executives said they had required researchers to keep some
information secret, pending a patent application.

   Arnold S. Relman, a former editor of the New England Journal of Medicine,
believes free-market thinking is distorting the mission of the medical
researcher as "a reliable, trustworthy source of information about the safety
and effectiveness of new methods and new products."

   "Is everything, including health care, just a market commodity? I believe the
answer is obviously no," said Relman, professor emeritus of medicine at Harvard.

   Some major research institutions such as Stanford, Johns Hopkins and
Washington universities do not spell out restrictions but prefer to "manage
conflicts" through peer review and annual disclosure.

   The special committee to monitor Curtiss was established in 1993, the same
year he stepped down as chairman of the biology department to minimize his
conflicts.

   Curtiss acknowledges he's poised to cash in if Megan Health's vaccines do
well. His stock and options are worth about $ 4 million.

   Curtiss said he welcomes scrutiny. "I want to keep things clear. I want to
keep things aboveboard."

LOAD-DATE: August 05, 2000


                             302 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     August 4, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: TKT PARTNER AVENTIS SEEKS OK OF DISPUTED DYNEPO

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Aventis SA yesterday said it filed for approval in the United States and with
the European Union for its version of erythropoietin, the anemia-fighting drug
it is developing with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. of Cambridge.

   If approved, the drug, which goes by the trade name Dynepo, would compete
against Epogen, developed by Amgen Inc., which first commercialized
erythropoietin. Together with its licensee Johnson & Johnson, which markets the
drug under the name Procrit, they have made it the world's best selling biotech
drug with total annual revenues of $4 billion.

      Dynepo is also the reason Amgen has gone to US District Court in Boston
and sued Aventis and TKT for patent infringement. That case, before Judge
William Young, is now in recess until Sept. 5. Amgen hopes to block the
introduction of Dynepo claiming it violates its Epogen patents. TKT and Aventis
insist Dynepo is made differently and does not violate Amgen patents.

   Aventis, in submitting its approval application to the US Food and Drug
Administration, said it will pay TKT, its partner since 1994, a $3.5 million
milestone payment. If Dynepo is approved, it would be TKT's first product.

   A TKT spokeswoman said clinical data from more than 1,300 patients with
anemia related to chronic renal failure was presented to the FDA. Worldwide,
there are about 700,000 patients with end-stage renal failure who experience
anemia - the reduction in oxygen-carrying red blood cells.  Erythropoietin
stimulates red blood cell production.

   The same data was also presented to the European Agency for the Evaluation of
Medicinal Products.

   Aventis' request for approval helped boost TKT shares which closed at $30.25,
up $1.125. Amgen shares closed at $70.1875.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2000


                             303 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       August 4, 2000 Friday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 029

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: Firm hopes to sell despite drug lawsuit

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. and partner Aventis SA have filed for approval
to sell Dynepo, an anemia treatment at the heart of a bitter court battle over
patent rights.

   Rival biotech company Amgen Inc. has charged the two companies with violating
patents for its biggest product, an anemia drug called Epogen.

   With the lawsuit on hold for several weeks, Transkaryotic, based in
Cambridge, and Aventis, based in France, have filed for approval to sell Dynepo
in the U.S. and Europe.

   "It could be a big product for Aventis, but there are still massive
questions" concerning the outcome of the legal dispute, Deutsche Bank analyst
Susan Haylock told Bloomberg News. She predicted it could be a $ 1 billion drug.

   Analysts expect the Amgen drug, also sold as Procrit by Johnson & Johnson, to
have sales of about $ 4 billion in the U.S. alone this year.

   Transkaryotic's legal battle with Amgen is scheduled to resume in September
in U.S. District Court. No matter what the outcome is, the losing side is
expected to appeal.

   Yesterday's application triggered a $ 3.5million milestone payment from
Aventis to Transkaryotic, which the company keeps regardless of whether the drug
goes on sale.

   An Aventis spokeswoman declined to comment on whether the company will
introduce the anemia drug if it wins Food and Drug Administration approval while
the court battle continues.

   If Amgen prevails in the trial, it would probably be able to obtain an
injunction preventing Aventis from selling Dynepo, he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 04, 2000


                             304 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    August 3, 2000, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: MONEY; Pg. 8B

LENGTH: 1448 words

HEADLINE: Passionate publisher chronicles biotech revolution Entrepreneur finds
a niche, leaps to fill it

BYLINE: Adam Shell

DATELINE: LARCHMONT, N.Y.

BODY:

   LARCHMONT, N.Y. -- Ever hosted a dinner party and sent guests
home with a white, cottony strand of their own DNA? Or written
a note to President Clinton offering to lend him money for a down
payment on his house? Or walked into an angry crowd protesting
genetically modified crops, to get that side of the story?

   Probably not, but you're not Mary Ann Liebert. The Larchmont,
N.Y.-based entrepreneur has done all of the above. The powerful
medical publisher worships scientists, throws her weight and money
around on Capitol Hill, and identifies with people who have scaled
Mount Everest.

   "Mountain climbers are fixated on reaching the summit," she
says. "They understand risk. They don't let negative thoughts
interfere or let anything get in their way. I'm the same way."


   Liebert equates the thrill of launching an important medical journal
with scaling the highest mountain. Her flagship publication, Genetic
Engineering News, is considered the world's most powerful
biotechnology publication. The four-color biweekly is read by
50,000 scientists, researchers and analysts worldwide. Liebert's
hometown newspaper, The Journal News, recently dubbed her
"Genetic Genius."

   In brainy company

   Liebert's privately held company, Mary Ann Liebert Inc., was born
March 1, 1980, in her living room on East 85th Street in New York
City, funded partly with $ 18,000 of her savings. Today, her 100-employee
firm publishes more than 60 journals, books and newsletters on
topics ranging from human gene therapy and viral immunology to
AIDS and cloning. Subscriptions range from $ 55 for a bimonthly
subscription to Alternative & Complementary Therapies to
$ 1,119 for 18 issues a year of Human Gene Therapy. To celebrate
the company's 20th birthday, Liebert recently threw a black-tie
bash for employees, editors and friends at Tavern on the Green
in New York City's Central Park.

   "I love hanging out with scientists," Liebert says. "They are
not nerds. They are visionaries who are changing the world."

   Like the Ph.D.s with high IQs who edit her journals, Liebert has
played a key role in the past two decades boosting funding for
medical research and increasing the profile of rare diseases.
"These publications are all journals of record," she says, pointing
proudly to a 1993 photograph in her office of the late Princess
Diana grasping a copy of Pediatric AIDS & HIV Infection.

   What's the secret to Liebert's success? She identifies untapped
niches and gets there first. Liebert was the first to publish
journals focusing on AIDS, gene therapy and cloning. Launched
last year, Cloning is edited by Ian Wilmut, the researcher
who cloned Dolly the sheep. Next year, she plans to launch four
journals, including Astrobiology, and Vector-Borne and
Zoonotic Diseases, which will focus on infections from mosquitoes,
such as the potentially fatal West Nile virus. She's branched
out with journals on Internet gambling and skating rink management.
She also publishes The Westchester Wag, a free tabloid
that chronicles the social scene in upscale Westchester County.
Her publications have a total circulation of 250,000.

   "Her greatest gift is she has the uncanny knack of spotting trends
and new fields," says John Sterling, managing editor of Genetic
Engineering News, who has worked for Liebert since 1984.

   "She practically willed the biotech revolution," says David
Weiner, editor of DNA and Cell Biology. "Back in 1983,
biotech was science fiction. There were two or three companies,
no products, and the technology was still a pipe dream. But she
was talking about it as though it had already happened, as if
the industry was already established like Procter & Gamble."

   Family ties

   Liebert's passion for medicine is intensely personal. Her late
father, LeRoy, suffered from Parkinson's disease, a neurological
affliction that has struck boxer Muhammad Ali and actor Michael
J. Fox. While majoring in journalism at Northwestern University,
Liebert interned at the American Medical Association, where she
spent her days scouring literature looking for a cure for her
dad. "I didn't find it, but it ignited my interest in medicine,"
she says.

   Liebert, who likens starting a new journal to a love affair, denies
being an activist. Still, she says, "I'll do anything I can to
ensure that any new health care policy will include coverage for
biotech-related" treatments. Finding common ground with critics
of biotech, cloning and other emerging technologies is also a
top priority. "Overcoming fear is critical," she says.

   Employees describe Liebert as an upbeat, idea-generating machine
with a contagious, can-do attitude. Liebert doesn't disagree:
"I have a 12-cylinder mind that's always revved up and running,"
she says.

   Longtime editor Sterling recalls the time a competitor announced
plans in 1992 to launch a biweekly alternative to Genetic Engineering
News, which was a monthly at the time. Recognizing a threat,
Liebert met with her staff and decided to take GEN biweekly. "Once
the basic information is presented, she makes decisions immediately,"
says Sterling. "There are no committee meetings and no memos."

   Liebert is very persistent. In an attempt to persuade the very
best scientists to edit her publications, Liebert has a reputation
for pursuing top talent with the same zeal New York Yankees owner
George Steinbrenner exhibits when wooing top free agents to the
Bronx. "She is so persistent that it's easier to say yes than
no," says Jeffrey Laurence, editor of AIDS Patient Care and
STDs.

   Romancing top talent is all part of the job. Liebert recalls how
she persuaded a reluctant Thomas Hornbein, a Seattle-based doctor
who wrote a book about climbing Mount Everest's West Ridge, to
join the editorial board of her newest publication, High Altitude
Medicine & Biology.

   "I was on vacation in Palm Desert (California) and was e-mailing
and calling him myself," Liebert says. "I thought I was pretty
convincing but he still said no. Finally, I read his book and
sent him another e-mail that said, 'Tom, your book was fabulous.
I admire your persistence and determination that enabled you to
conquer the West Ridge. Tom, you are my West Ridge.' He wrote
back and said, 'I surrender.' "

   Well-kept secrets

   What's Liebert's publishing empire worth? One can only speculate
because she refuses to say, just as she refuses to divulge her
age. But she claims 18% to 20% annual revenue growth the past
five years.

   She also says the major publishers have courted her and tried
to woo her into selling. On a wall in the reception area of her
17,000 square-foot Larchmont office hangs a photo of billionaire
corporate raider and friend Carl Icahn. In Icahn's handwriting
are the words: "Dear Mary Ann, I want to buy your company. Happy
Birthday. Love, Carl."

   While she says Icahn's request was made in jest, she's turned
down all legitimate suitors, no matter how deep-pocketed. Says
Liebert: "Why would I sell? What would I do with myself? I'm
having fun."


   <>Among Liebert's publications<>

   Trade magazines:

   Genetic Engineering News

   Natural Pharmacy

   Rink Magazine

   Journals:

   AIDS Patient Care and STDs

   AIDS Research and Human Retroviruses

   Alternative & Complementary Therapies

   Biotechnology Law Report

   Biotechnology Software and Internet Journal

   Cancer Biotherapy and Radiopharmaceuticals

   Cloning

   CyberPsychology and Behavior

   Disease Management

   DNA and Cell Biology

   Emergency and Office Pediatrics

   Gaming Law Review

   Genetic Testing

   Human Gene Therapy

   In Vitro & Molecular Toxicology

   Journal of Addictions Nursing

   Journal of Aesthetic Dermatology and Cosmetic Surgery

   Journal of Anti-Aging Medicine

   Journal of Biomolecular ScreeningJournal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology

   Journal of Clinical Laser Medicine & Surgery

   Journal of Gynecologic Surgery

   Journal of Medicinal Food

   Journal of Ocular Pharmacology and Therapeutics

   Journal of Women's Health & Gender-Based Medicine

   Microbial & Comparative Genomics

   Millennium Medicine

   Molecular Urology

   Pediatric Asthma, Allergy & Immunology

   Regenerative Medicine

   Telemedicine Journal

   Thyroid

   Tissue Engineering

   Viral Immunology

   Newsletters:

   Internet Gaming International

   Premier Hospital Services Report

   Spa Business Monthly

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Color, Stephen Schmitt, The (Westchester, N.Y.) Journal News;
PHOTO, Color; PHOTO, Color; Driven: Mary Ann Liebert, whose company publishes
more than 60 medical journals, books, and newsletters, says she finds scientific
publishing exhilarating.

LOAD-DATE: August 03, 2000


                             305 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    August 3, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: WEEKLY - VA - FAIRFAX; Pg. V01

LENGTH: 863 words

HEADLINE: Science Anew; Kids Face Dilemmas, Public Policy Issues

BYLINE: Chris L. Jenkins , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   As a high school student in South Korea, Jeong Seok Yu was always told that
science was best taught from a book. Everything one needed to know about biology
and chemistry--the equations, the explanations, the theorems--could be found
between the covers of a textbook.

   That notion was flipped on its head this summer, thanks to an intensive
three-week science and public policy program for Northern Virginia high school
students. Yu, who moved to Fairfax County with his parents last fall and now
attends Centreville High School, and 16 other teenagers attended the Northern
Virginia Summer Academy, an interdisciplinary program that takes textbook
science and applies it to the real world of public policy and ethical dilemmas
facing scientists today.

   "It's been like seeing the world through different eyes," Yu, 17, said as he
prepared for an oral presentation of his research last week. "We saw, we
touched, we smelled. We talked and debated. I learned a whole new way of looking
at science."

   The Summer Academy, now in its fifth year, exposes participants to a host of
opportunities not available to most high school students, including DNA
fingerprinting analysis and a visit to a Rockville laboratory at work on
deciphering the human genetic code.

   During the 15 days of classes, field trips and discussion groups, the
students meet with scientists, politicians, policymakers and scholars to talk
about health care issues and advances in biotechnology.

   "They've visited places that many other teenagers have never had a chance to
see," said Kathye Geary, the academy's executive director. "They're meeting
experts in all of the fields that we're covering and using equipment that they
may not have access to in high school."

   The curriculum also focuses on how difficult the application of science can
be in a changing world. Not only did the students conduct experiments--for
example, studying their own genetic blueprints by removing cells from inside
their cheeks and simulating HIV tests on the samples--they also researched how
scientific findings and discoveries should be used.

   There were ethical issues: Should scientists continue the use of gene therapy
in light of a recent death when using the procedure in Pennsylvania? What are
the boundaries of doctor-assisted suicide?

   And practical problems: Are there severe health risks if animal organs are
transplanted in humans? How does one provide accessible health care to
low-income children and families?

   As the students found, there are no easy answers.

   "I saw from all the things we talked about how science is never black and
white," said Donna McLaughlin, 17, who will be a senior at Chantilly High School
this fall. "It really showed the complexity of science."

   One of the livelier debates was over how--or whether--aborted fetuses should
be used when experimenting with stem cell therapy, used in some cancer
treatments. The students pondered the ethical boundaries: Should limits be set?
Who should set them?

   For one student, the discussion was unexpectedly revealing.

   "I was really surprised to see some people who may have been opposed to
abortion but they weren't opposed to stem cell research," said Chris Robinson,
17, who will be a senior at Chantilly. It was really interesting to see how
people came up with their arguments."

   The academy is funded with private and public money, and students pay $ 700
to attend, after being chosen based on applications, interviews and
recommendations. Classes were taught by three high school teachers and a medical
student who led experiments and discussion groups.

   The academy makes its home on the Alexandria campus of Episcopal High School.
For the first two weeks, students attend during the day; they stay in campus
housing for the final week so that they can work together on preparing and
presenting their research.

   Students were responsible for researching topics and outlining and advocating
their position to a group of teachers, community leaders and parents.

   "The most interesting thing has been seeing how [public] policy in a lot of
ways is really a compromise," said Banafsheh Khamesi, 16, who will be a junior
at Lee High School in Springfield. "We've really been able to see the conflict
of ideas and how they are worked out."

   Josh Hertel, 34, a social studies teacher at McLean High School who taught
the students public policy, said: "It's really been amazing to see how quickly
they are able to get the the complexity of the issues. We didn't expect them to
be experts overnight, but they have initiated discussions that are very
sophisticated."

   For Yu, the academy was just the beginning. He wrote a paper on gene therapy
for his final presentation and cultivated an interest in learning whether
exposing parasites to ultraviolet light increases their growth rate and what the
consequences of that might be.

   "The most important thing for me was to see and to meet the scientists doing
all of this work," he said. "It shows what is possible and what can be done."

   For information on the Summer Academy, call 703-765-2395 or visit the
program's Web site at www.acps.k12.va.us/nvsa.



LOAD-DATE: August 03, 2000


                             306 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                   August 2, 2000, Wednesday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 4; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: CLASS NOTES;
 LAB PROGRAM TURNS THEORY INTO REALITY

BYLINE: ALLISON COHEN, SPECIAL TO THE TIMES

BODY:


   Summer's been well-spent for five San Fernando Valley high school students
who have been holed up for five weeks in UCLA research labs splitting DNA,
evaluating mutant fruit flies and seeing if Chinese herbs affect mouth bacteria.

   The students are part of a new program, funded by a Howard Hughes Pre-College
Education grant that pairs high school students and their science teachers each
summer with UCLA professors and research students.

   The student-teacher teams from the Valley are Rana Sharif, 17, of Reseda High
School and teacher Barbara Levi; Shalom Kim, 17, of Polytechnic High School in
Sun Valley and teacher Donna Vaughan; Malika Chowdhry, 16, of Reseda High School
and teacher Vicki Arnold; Andrea Steely, 16, of Grant High School in Valley Glen
and teacher Mel Stave; and Adam Nagoshiner, 16, of Monroe High School in North
Hills and teacher Marjorie Weitkamp.

   Students gain experience working on studies that may lead to a cure for
cancer or the HIV virus, for example. High school teachers gain up-to-the-minute
scientific knowledge, too.

   Reseda High science teacher Arnold plans to take what she and Malika learn
this summer and use it in classroom lectures next year.

   " My other students can't all be in the lab, but I can try to bring these
experience back to them," she said. "By doing that , it shows them that what
they are learning is real."

   On a recent day, Malika peered into a microscope to evaluate changes in the
internal organs of crossbred mutated fruit flies. Such research can lead to a
better understanding of human gene development and provide insight into
preventing birth defects and colon cancer.

   "What Malika is doing now, I would have loved to have done when I was her age
," said Judith Lengyel, a UCLA professor of molecular, cell and developmental
biology overseeing the fruit fly research.

   Malika has collected and cataloged flies, recorded data and learned the inner
workings of a college research lab, where concepts she's only read about in
textbooks come to life.

   "I studied it in school, but not nearly what I've learned here," said Malika,
who will be a senior in the fall.

   The student-teacher pairs work five days a week, often from morning until
night.

   Andrea of Grant High School is currently manipulating DNA for use in gene
therapy. She often puts in 10-hour days.

   Andrea looks at home in the college lab using a pipette--a hand-held
dispenser--to insert liquids into a plastic vial containing DNA.

   "I've learned a lot in a short time here," she said. "I know this experience
will prepare me for the future."

   Andrea and teacher Stave plan to continue the DNA research one-on-one at
their high school lab in the fall.

   Program director and founder Dan McDonnell said he saw the benefits of a
teacher-student collaborative program in 1997, when one of his students from
Sherman Oaks Center for Enriched Studies in Reseda assisted him with DNA
research, also at UCLA.


   *

   The collaboration went so well that McDonnell convinced UCLA professor Ronald
Stevens to fund the program, using part of a $ 475,000 grant from the Howard
Hughes Medical Institute.

   "When these students go back to school and other students see what they've
done over the summer, it'll show their peers that they have the ability to do
this too," McDonnell said.

   Los Angeles Unified School District students must be between their freshman
and junior year to apply for next year's program. Applications are due in
February. No minimum grade point average is required.

   "We're just looking for a level of enthusiasm and for students and teachers
that work well together," McDonnell said.

   For details, contact Dan McDonnell at dmcdonne@lausd.k12.ca.us or visit
http://www.immex.ucla.edu/HHMI.

   Class Notes appears every Wednesday. Send news about schools to the Valley
Edition, Los Angeles Times, 20000 Prairie St., Chatsworth 91311. Or fax it to
(818) 772-3338.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Andrea Steely, 16, of Grant High School in Valley Glen, conducts
DNA experiments as part of a five-week research program she attends at UCLA with
her science teacher.  PHOTOGRAPHER: LUIS SINCO / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: (B1)
CLASS NOTES: Five student-teacher teams from the Valley are participating in a
scientific research program at UCLA over the summer. Malika Chowdhry, 16, of
Reseda High School, works with crossbreeding of fruit flies, above.
PHOTOGRAPHER: LUIS SINCO / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000


                             307 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     August 2, 2000 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 04A

LENGTH: 392 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy shows promise in head, neck cancer

BYLINE: RANDOLPH E. SCHMID Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- A combination of gene therapy and drugs is showing promise in
treating head and neck cancers, researchers in Texas report.

   If borne out in further trials, the findings could point the way to more
effective treatment of almost 500,000 people who suffer head and neck cancers
annually.

   Scientists at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Clinic in Houston report that the
combination therapy caused tumors to shrink in 25 of 30 patients tested. Their
findings are reported in the August issue of the journal Nature Medicine,
published Tuesday.

   Cancerous tumors, some as large as 2 1/2 inches, disappeared in eight
patients, the scientists reported. In others, the tumors shrank by up to half.

   The positive findings are reported as gene therapy has come under close
scrutiny after the death of a patient undergoing experimental treatment last
September.

   The field has been criticized for too much hype and too few successes, said
W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California, who was not
involved in the newly reported research.

   But, Anderson added in an article accompanying the new paper, "Gene therapy
seems to be turning the corner after a very bad year."

   In the new paper, a team led by the Houston clinic's Fadlo Khuri used a
specially engineered virus called ONYX-015, which destroys cells with a mutated
tumor suppressor gene called p53. That mutated gene occurs in up to 70% of head
and neck tumors, the scientists noted. ONYX-015 does not damage normal cells.

   Along with the gene therapy, the team added the traditional chemotherapy
drugs, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil, in patients with recurrent squamous cell
cancer of the head and neck. These cancers are often associated with the use of
tobacco and alcohol.

   They reported that ONYX-015 in combination with chemotherapy was more
effective than either treatment alone.

   Current chemotherapy produces results in only 30% to 40% of patients, and
tumors often recur. By comparison, none of the responding tumors treated with
the combination therapy had reappeared after six months.

   In the trial, the ONYX- 015 was injected directly into the tumors. The
scientists suggested that future trials look into other methods of
administration and the possibility of using the gene therapy in combination with
other methods of treatment, including radiation and surgery.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000


                             308 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                August 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: COMPANY NEWS;
ONYX SHARES RISE ON GENE THERAPY TREATMENT

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:

   Shares of Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc. rose as much as 37 percent yesterday
after the company's experimental gene therapy treatment appeared to shrink tumor
growth in a small study of patients with head and neck cancer. Onyx shares rose
$4.06, to $14.9375. The findings, published in Monday's issue of Nature
Medicine, come from the second of three phases of study required by the Food and
Drug Administration for new drugs. The drug appeared to enhance the effects of
chemotherapy, and helped shrink tumors by at least half in 63 percent of the
cases evaluated in the study, according to an international team of researchers.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000


                             309 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     August 2, 2000 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: ARTS & LIFE; Pg. 10E

LENGTH: 514 words

HEADLINE: BIODEGRADABLE ARTERY COIL SHOWS PROMISE;

BYLINE: By LEE BOWMAN; SCRIPPS HOWARD

BODY:

   A new biodegradable artery patch has received positive results in a test run
in Japanese patients with clogged blood vessels, researchers report.

   The standard now for artery-opening surgery, or angioplasty, is a stent. It
is a wire mesh made of surgical-grade stainless steel used to prop open an
artery that has become partially closed due to fatty buildup.

   They're effective at keeping arteries open. But these wire stents, which are
meant to be permanent, have many complications.

   Dr. Hideo Tamai, a cardiologist at Shiga Medical Center in Japan, found that
a zigzag coil design made of a biodegradable polymer appeared to be both safe
and effective for 15 patients up to six months after surgery - the period when
reblockage and other complications are most likely.

   The study was published in the American Heart Association journal
Circulation.

   Only one patient had to undergo a second surgery during the follow-up period,
and no deaths, heart attacks or bypass surgeries were needed for any of the
patients, who received a total of 25 of the devices.

   Although the number of patients is considered too small to draw definitive
conclusions, Tamai and his colleagues said the rate of re-narrowing of arteries
in the patients was generally lower than what's seen with metallic stents. Tamai
said the results were highly encouraging and promising enough that a larger
trial of the stents is planned for several U.S. medical centers.

   "If this study supports our findings about the efficacy of biodegradable
stents, and if the Food and Drug Administration approves them, they could be in
general use in America in a few years," he said.

   "Since metal is a foreign material for humans, traditional stents can
sometimes cause inflammatory reactions in patients, and there are many long-term
safety concerns associated with metallic stents," Tamai said.

   Inflammatory response causes the body's immune system to pile up cells at the
edges of the stent, which can cause renewed narrowing.

   Moreover, the long-term effect of metallic stents remains uncertain. "Those
that remain in place for long periods may become obstacles for additional
treatments such as repeat angioplasty or bypass grafting," Tamai said.

   "This study represents the first move toward a new concept of coronary
stenting," said Dr. Antonio Colombo, an Italian cardiologist who wrote an
editorial accompanying the Circulation report. "It is a fresh departure from the
traditional idea of stents as permanent replacements for a part of the body."

   The new stents are fully absorbed and disappear within two years after
insertion, allowing medical science to "fulfill its mission and step away,"
Colombo said. He noted that the stents have an additional advantage as a vehicle
for administering drug or gene therapy at the site where the stent is inserted.

   Tamai said the coil design of the biodegradable stents allows them to expand
gradually for at least three months. This allows the cleared sections of the
arteries to fully expand more slowly, which may help explain the low rate of
repeat clogging.

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2000


                             310 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           August 2, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 890 words

HEADLINE: Virus may hold key for treatment for head, neck

BYLINE: Nicholas Wade; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 A novel form of cancer treatment, based on a defective virus that can grow only
in cancerous cells, has passed another milestone by showing promise in treating
patients with recurrent head and neck cancer.

   The treatment is based on a deep insight into the nature of cancer cells and
will, if it works, become one of the first practical contributions to cancer
therapy of the theoretical knowledge that has long been accumulating.

   The virus, known as Onyx-015, has been used in a Phase 2 clinical trial, a
test in which a small number of patients are treated.

   A larger number of patients are now being recruited for a final, Phase 3
trial, which will determine whether the treatment is effective enough for
clinical practice.

   The Phase 2 results, reported in Nature Medicine, involved 30 patients with
head and neck cancer, most of whom had already failed surgery or radiation
treatments.  Patients in whom this kind of cancer recurs are considered
incurable.

   In 63 percent of the patients treated with a combination of Onyx-015 and
chemotherapy, the tumors shrank by 50 percent or more, and in eight of these 19
responding patients the tumors disappeared altogether.

   "We treated patients at seven different centers and we all saw some pretty
striking results," said Dr. Fadlo R. Khuri of the University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, speaking for himself and the other physicians
involved in the trial.

   Khuri described himself as "cautiously optimistic" about the treatment, but
said a larger trial was necessary.  "Many things look wonderful in Phase 2 but
not in Phase 3," he added.

   The trial has confirmed that Onyx-015 grows and replicates in cancer cells
but apparently not in the ordinary cells of the body.

   But there are many features of the virus' behavior that remain to be
understood.  In Phase 1 tests, Onyx-015 given by itself had lasting effects in
only 15 percent of head and neck cancer patients.  The reason may be that the
cancers are solid tumors, infiltrated by normal cells, and in many cases
injections of the virus may not have reached all parts of the tumors.

   A lesson from the Phase 1 tests was that the virus was much more effective
when given in combination with chemotherapy.  In the Phase 2 trial, patients
received chemotherapy to the whole body while the tumors were injected directly
with the virus.

   The cause of death in most patients was from other tumors that could not be
injected.

   Dr. Everett E. Vokes, a head and neck cancer specialist at the University of
Chicago, said that the survival time of the patients in the study was "very
encouraging." Onyx-015, he added is a "very promising, intriguing, genetically
based agent."

   He suggested that the virus and the chemotherapy might be effective in
combination because the virus was killing the cells in the center of the tumors
while the chemotherapy was attacking those on the periphery, which the virus did
not reach.

   Another head and neck cancer specialist, Dr. David Pfister of Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said the Onyx-015 concept was important but that
a larger trial was necessary.

   Discriminating cells

   The use of the virus to attack tumors was conceived of by Dr. Frank
McCormick, now director of the University of California San Francisco Cancer
Center.  McCormick is a co-founder of a company, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, that
supplies the virus.

   The first trials were with head and neck cancer because the virus was
expected to work particularly well with that type of tumor.  McCormick now
believes the virus may be able to infect almost all types of cancer cells.
Other trials of Onyx-015 are now in progress with liver metastases, ovarian and
pancreatic cancer, and general advanced cancers, he said.

   Onyx-015 is an adenovirus, one of the causes of the common cold, with a
damaged gene.  In a normal adenovirus, this gene swings into action as soon as
the virus has entered a cell and makes a product that inactivates a vital cell
component called the p53 protein.  The role of p53 is to prevent a cell from
dividing if its DNA is damaged or if the cell is under viral attack.

   In many types of cancer cells, the p53 gene is damaged by mutation.
McCormick's insight was to realize that though Onyx-015 could not grow in normal
cells, because it could not inactivate their p53 protein, it could grow in
cancer cells that had already disabled their own p53 gene.

   In other words, the defective virus was in principle the long-sought agent
that could discriminate between normal and cancerous cells, killing only the
latter.

   A commentary in Nature Medicine hails the new Onyx-015 result as a victory
for the beleaguered field of gene therapy.  But the two concepts are quite
different.  In gene therapy new genes are inserted into cells, often using a
virus as the vector to deliver the genes.  Onyx-015 is not a vector and carries
no extra genes.  "It's not gene therapy, it's completely opposite," McCormick
said.

   The Phase 2 head and neck cancer trial is the most advanced of the various
tests of Onyx-015 now under way.  Though promising, the small number of patients
is not yet proof it works.  Still, the results were impressive to Khuri.  "I
work in an area where you don't cure many people.  You learn to relish the
victories and this one had a few more victories than usual."


LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2000


                             311 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

               August 2, 2000, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A8

LENGTH: 375 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY-DRUG COMBINATION SHRINKS, ELIMINATES TUMORS, RESEARCH
SHOWS;
RESULTS ON HEAD, NECK CANCER WERE BETTER THAN CHEMOTHERAPY TREATMENT

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTONGENETIC MANIPULATION; CANCER TREATMENT; STUDY RESULTS;
RESEARCH FINDINGS; HEALTH; MEDICINE

BODY:


   A combination of gene therapy and drugs is showing promise in treating head
and neck cancers, researchers in Texas report.

   If borne out in further trials, the findings could point the way to more
effective treatment of almost 500,000 people who suffer head and neck cancers
annually.

   Scientists at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Clinic in Houston report that the
combination therapy had caused tumors to shrink in 25 of 30 patients tested.
Their findings are reported in this month's issue of the journal Nature
Medicine, published Tuesday.

   Cancerous tumors, some as large as 2 1/2 inches, disappeared in eight
patients, the scientists reported. In others, the tumors shrank by up to half.

   The positive findings were being reported as gene therapy has come un der
close scrutiny after the death of a patient undergoing experimental treatment in
September. The field has been criticized for too much hype and too few
successes, said W. French Anderson of the University of Southern California. He
was not involved in the newly reported research.

   In the new paper, a team led by the Houston clinic's Fadlo Khuri used a
specially engineered virus called ONYX-015, which destroys cells with a mutated
tumor suppressor gene called p53. That mutated gene occurs in up to 70 percent
of head and neck tumors, the scientists noted. ONYX-015 does not damage normal
cells.

   Along with the gene therapy, the team added the traditional chemotherapy
drugs, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil, in patients with recurrent squamous cell
cancer of the head and neck. These cancers are often associated with the use of
tobacco and alcohol.

   They reported that ONYX-015 in combination with chemotherapy was more
effective than either treatment alone.

   Current chemotherapy produces results in only 30 percent to 40 percent of
patients, and tumors often recur. By comparison, none of the responding tumors
treated with the combination therapy had reappeared after six months.

   In the trial, the ONYX-015 was injected directly into the tumors. The
scientists suggested that future trials look into other methods of
administration and the possibility of using the gene therapy in combination with
other methods of treatment, including radiation and surgery.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000


                             312 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                August 01, 2000, TUESDAY, Final Markets Edition

SECTION: NEWS; NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 626 words

BODY:


   Daley alleges 'code of silence'

   A "code of silence" among gang members, their families and residents of
Humboldt Park prompted Chicago police to initially charge the wrong man in the
death of 12-year-old Miguel DeLaRosa, Mayor Daley said today. "Everybody should
have come forward. There's a dead child on the street. He's right on the curb.
He's right there next to the grocery store," Daley said. Instead, Daley said
Humboldt Park residents in general and gang members in particular kept quiet
until the initial arrest of 18-year-old Joseph L. Lopez. Only then did Chicago
Police get the cooperation and information they needed to release Lopez and
charge 27-year-old Miguel Figueroa with the child's murder.  DeLaRosa was riding
his bicycle on July 19 when he was struck in the chest and killed by a stray
bullet. Police initially charged Lopez with the murder after four witnesses
picked him out of a lineup and fingered him as the shooter. Those same witnesses
later expressed doubts they had chosen the right man.

   Postal service explores e-mail

   Fearing that e-mail could take a fatal bite out of first-class mail in coming
years, the U.S. Postal Service is testing a variety of e-services, including one
that would assign virtually everybody an e-mail address. The new service, postal
officials say, could notify customers by e-mail about an incoming bill or
package. Another proposal would allow customers to send e-mails to a post office
to be printed and delivered as first-class mail. A third program, already
available, lets customers pay bills online through the Postal Service's Web
site.

   Gene-drug treatment promising

   A combination of gene therapy and drugs is showing promise in treating head
and neck cancers, researchers in Texas report. Scientists at the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Clinic in Houston report that the therapy caused tumors to shrink in 25
of 30 patients tested. Their findings are reported in the August issue of the
journal Nature Medicine, published today. Cancerous tumors disappeared in eight
patients, the scientists reported. In others, the tumors shrank by up to half.
Almost 500,000 people suffer head and neck cancers annually.

   Elections loom in Israel

   Early elections over a peace treaty with the Palestinians are inevitable,
Ehud Barak's supporters and detractors alike said today, a day after the Israeli
prime minister's embarrassing double defeat in parliament. On Monday, Barak's
candidate for president, Shimon Peres, was defeated in an upset vote in
parliament, and the hawkish opposition won a no-confidence vote on Barak's peace
policies. The parliamentary challenges fell short of toppling the government,
but made it clear Barak will be unable to pass a peace treaty with the
Palestinians in this Knesset.

   Japan opens tallest roller coaster

   An amusement park in western Japan opened the world's tallest roller coaster
today following a ribbon cutting ceremony attended by the Guinness Book of
Records. Nagashima Spaland's Steel Dragon 2000 took thrill-seekers on a 1
1/2-mile course that scales a 320-foot hill, then races down a 68-degree slope,
the park said. The park is located about 200 miles west of Tokyo.

   African hunger warning

   The lives of more than 20 million people in the Horn of Africa could be at
risk because of food shortages if the current crisis "is allowed to spiral into
a true famine," a top U.S. foreign aid official said today. Leonard Rogers of
the Agency for International Development said the cause of the problem is
drought, but it is compounded by poverty and war. "Even in the best of times, we
estimate that over 250,000 children die in Ethiopia each year from causes in
which hunger and malnutrition are direct and contributing factors," Rogers said.

LOAD-DATE: August 02, 2000


                             313 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 August 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section F; Page 7; Column 1; Health & Fitness

LENGTH: 1050 words

HEADLINE: Treatment For Cancer Advances In Trials

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   A novel form of cancer treatment, based on a defective virus that can grow
only in cancerous cells, has passed another milestone by showing promise in
treating patients with recurrent head and neck cancer.

   The treatment is based on a deep insight into the nature of cancer cells and
will, if it works, become one of the first practical contributions to cancer
therapy of the theoretical knowledge that has long been accumulating.

    The virus, known as Onyx-015, has been used in a Phase 2 clinical trial, a
test in which a small number of patients are treated.

   A larger number of patients are now being recruited for a final, Phase 3
trial, which will determine whether the treatment is effective enough for
clinical practice.

   The Phase 2 results, reported in today's issue of Nature Medicine, involved
30 patients with head and neck cancer, most of whom had already failed surgery
or radiation treatments. Patients in whom this kind of cancer recurs are
considered incurable.

   In 63 percent of the patients treated with a combination of Onyx-015 and
chemotherapy, the tumors shrank by 50 percent or more, and in 8 of these 19
responding patients the tumors disappeared altogether.

   "We treated patients at seven different centers and we all saw some pretty
striking results," said Dr. Fadlo R. Khuri of the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, speaking for himself and the other physicians
involved in the trial.

   Dr. Khuri described himself as "cautiously optimistic" about the treatment,
but said a larger trial was necessary.  "Many things look wonderful in Phase 2
but not in Phase 3," he added.

   The trial has confirmed that Onyx-015 grows and replicates in cancer cells
but apparently not in the ordinary cells of the body.

   But there are many features of the virus's behavior that remain to be
understood. In Phase 1 tests, Onyx-015 given by itself had lasting effects in
only 15 percent of head and neck cancer patients. The reason may be that the
cancers are solid tumors, infiltrated by normal cells, and in many cases
injections of the virus may not have reached all parts of the tumors.

   A lesson from the Phase 1 tests was that the virus was much more effective
when given in combination with chemotherapy. In the Phase 2 trial, patients
received chemotherapy to the whole body while the tumors were injected directly
with the virus. The cause of death in most patients was from other tumors that
could not be injected.

   Dr. Everett E. Vokes, a head and neck cancer specialist at the University of
Chicago, said that the survival time of the patients in the study was "very
encouraging." Onyx-015, he added is a "very promising, intriguing, genetically
based agent." He suggested that the virus and the chemotherapy might be
effective in combination because the virus was killing the cells in the center
of the tumors while the chemotherapy was attacking those on the periphery, which
the virus did not reach.

   Another head and neck cancer specialist, Dr. David Pfister of Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, said the Onyx-015 concept was important but that
a larger trial was necessary.

   The use of the virus to attack tumors was conceived of by Dr. Frank
McCormick, now director of the University of California at San Francisco Cancer
Center. Dr. McCormick is a co-founder of a company, Onyx Pharmaceuticals, that
supplies the virus.

   The first trials were with head and neck cancer because the virus was
expected to work particularly well with that type of tumor. But Dr. McCormick
now believes the virus may be able to infect almost all types of cancer cell.

   Other trials of Onyx-015 are now in progress with liver metastases, ovarian
and pancreatic cancer, and general advanced cancers, he said.

   Onyx-015 is an adenovirus, one of the causes of the common cold, with a
damaged gene. In a normal adenovirus, this gene swings into action as soon as
the virus has entered a cell and makes a product that inactivates a vital cell
component called the p53 protein. The role of p53 is to prevent a cell from
dividing if its DNA is damaged or if the cell is under viral attack.

   In many types of cancer cells, the p53 gene is damaged by mutation. Dr.
McCormick's insight was to realize that though Onyx-015 could not grow in normal
cells, because it could not inactivate their p53 protein, it could grow in
cancer cells that had already disabled their own p53 gene.

   In other words, the defective virus was in principle the long-sought agent
that could discriminate between normal and cancerous cells, killing only the
latter.

   One puzzle with tests of Onyx-015 is that the virus kills cancer cells with
an intact p53 gene as well as its expected target, the cells with mutated p53
genes. Dr. McCormick believes he now knows the reason, which is that all cancer
cells have to inactivate the p53 protein in one way or another or the tumor
cannot grow.  Some tumor cells develop mutations in the p53 gene itself, but
others inactivate the p53 protein indirectly: they sabotage a second gene whose
product, called p14, is required by the cell to keep the p53 protein in active
state.

   "P14 now explains perfectly a major difficulty which we couldn't understand,"
Dr. McCormick said.  Onyx-015 may therefore be effective against a wide range of
tumor types, he believes.

   A commentary in Nature Medicine hails the new Onyx-015 result as a victory
for the beleaguered field of gene therapy. But the two concepts are quite
different. In gene therapy new genes are inserted into cells, often using a
virus as the vector to deliver the genes. Onyx-015 is not a vector and carries
no extra genes. "It's not gene therapy, it's completely opposite," Dr. McCormick
said.

   The author of the commentary, Dr. W. French Anderson, a gene therapist at the
University of Southern California, said he viewed the two methods as related
because they were handled by the same regulatory committee.

   The Phase 2 head and neck cancer trial is the most advanced of the various
tests of Onyx-015 now under way. Though promising, the small number of patients
is not yet proof it works. Still, the results were impressive to Dr. Khuri. "I
work in an area where you don't cure many people. You learn to relish the
victories and this one had a few more victories than usual."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000


                             314 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     August 1, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: FINDINGS

BODY:


   Virus Shows Promise

   In Cancer Treatment

   A virus that has been genetically engineered to home in on and destroy cancer
cells has shown strong and lasting effects against tumors in patients when
combined with standard chemotherapy, researchers reported yesterday.

   Twenty-five out of 30 patients with head and neck cancer saw their tumors
shrink after they were treated with Onyx Pharmaceuticals Inc.'s ONYX-015 along
with chemotherapy, researchers reported. Eight tumors disappeared.

   ONYX-015 is an adenovirus, a relative of common cold viruses, that has been
genetically engineered to attack cells that lack normal p53, a gene that helps
repair cancer-causing damage. This makes it technically a gene therapy drug,
although unlike other gene therapy approaches, ONYX-015 does not repair or
replace a faulty gene.

   Last year ONYX-015 showed remarkable effects in head and neck cancer
patients, but the effects did not last for long. So Fadlo Khuri and colleagues
at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, working with teams in Britain,
combined ONYX-015 with two common cancer chemotherapy drugs, 5-FU and Cisplatin.
They reported their results in the journal Nature Medicine.

   Needle Prescriptions

   And Legal Safeguards

   Most doctors and pharmacists in the United States can legally prescribe and
dispense needles to drug users, legal and medical experts said.

   The researchers, whose work was sponsored by the nonprofit Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation, said their findings should reassure doctors who had been
reluctant to give syringes to drug users for fear of legal penalties. The
practice not only helps prevent the spread of disease, including the AIDS virus,
but gives doctors a chance to counsel patients about the dangers of illegal drug
use, they said.

   The study, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, found that doctors
in 48 states can legally write such prescriptions. It found that pharmacists in
26 states can legally fill the prescriptions while pharmacists in 22 other
states have a "reasonable claim to legality" to fill them.

   Study Reveals Why

   Ebola Victims Bleed

   A protein that disrupts blood vessel walls explains why victims of the Ebola
virus suffer from ghastly and often deadly bleeding, and could offer a target
for a treatment for the disease, researchers said.

   The protein attacks the endothelial cells that line blood vessels, making
them leak. Blocking its action might be one way to treat Ebola infection, the
team at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the federal Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) said.

   A team led by Gary Nabel of the NIH's Vaccine Research Center looked at six
of seven genes in the tiny, threadlike virus. Genes cause the production of
proteins and when researchers put one of the proteins, called virion
glycoprotein, into human and pig arteries, it broke down the endothelial cells
and made the vessels leak. But when they altered the protein slightly, it did
not have this effect, they reported in the journal Nature Medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 01, 2000


                             315 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             July 30, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 1271 words

HEADLINE: CANCER GAINS RAISE HOPES FOR NEXT DECADE IN FIRST 10 YEARS, JAMES
HOSPITAL HAS SEEN STEADY PROGRESS

BYLINE: David Lore, Dispatch Science Reporter

BODY:


   When the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital opened at Ohio State University in
1990, surgery, chemotherapy, radiation -- and prayer -- were the only answers
for the dreaded and often-deadly disease.

   Chemo and radiation were debilitating, gene therapy was science fiction and
only a few researchers in Boston believed in killing tumors by removing their
blood supply.

   Ten years later, researchers and clinicians at the James -- one of only 10
free-standing cancer specialty hospitals in the nation -- have made great
strides in understanding and treating cancer.

   Between 1990 and 1997, the incidence and death rates for the top 10 types of
cancer declined in the United States, according to the National Cancer
Institute. (During the same period, though, the number of cases and deaths from
skin cancer increased, as did the mortality rate for women with lung cancer.)

   Based on the promising possibilities, scientists think the progress of the
1990s will pale compared with what lies ahead.

   Richard Klausner, director of the cancer institute, calls cancer genetics "
an area of extraordinary opportunity."

   Dr. David E. Schuller, director of the James, cites gene research as his top
priority for the next 10 years.

   OSU has invested heavily in top geneticists and the latest equipment. Earlier
this month, the university became one of the first five to sign up for access to
the Celera human genome database.

   The information will be used to diagnose cancers and design treatment and
prevention programs, said Paula Gregory, the molecular biologist who oversees
the hospital's outreach and education programs.

   "It's tough to tell what all 100,000 genes do, but we don't need to know all
of them," she said. "We only need to know what the cancer genes are . . . and
that could be as few as 100 genes."

   Someday, clinicians might be able to routinely treat patients by swapping
good genes for bad ones -- a procedure that so far has succeeded with only a few
patients nationwide.

   "If you think about what chemotherapy does to you -- we poison the person,
adjusting the amount of poison to kill more of the cancer cells than the good
cells," said Dr. Judith Westman, associate dean of the OSU College of Medicine.
"But that's a miserable way to treat an illness. . . . We need more appropriate
therapies."

   Schuller and Westman say the James for now will focus on learning more about
how genetics influences cancer rather than rush into experimental gene
therapies.

   "Gene therapy has been around for 17 years, but it's still in its infancy,"
Schuller said.

   Yet the hospital can use genetics today to help determine a person's risk of
contracting cancer.

   Gregory said that only 10 percent of cancers can be blamed on heredity,
although some experts place that figure as high as 30 percent.

   Still, more and more people -- not all of them patients -- want to know the
odds, either for themselves or for their children. Some 300 to 400 people
annually request such screening -- most for breast cancer, Gregory said.

   Genetics research also presents an opportunity to design cancer drugs for
each patient, Gregory said. Such an approach could determine which drugs would
prove most effective for an individual and which should be avoided because of
that person's genetic makeup.

   OSU is seeking funding from the cancer institute to train researchers for
this emerging field, called pharmacogenetics.

   "It's huge," Gregory said. "Pharmaceutical firms are doing a great amount of
this, but they don't have people trained specifically in this area -- they have
drug people and gene people."

   Scientific developments should help propel the hospital beyond what Dr.
Arthur G. James ever imagined when he first proposed a specialized cancer
hospital for Columbus in 1962.

   "Columbus and central Ohio needs such a facility since there is nothing like
it in this part of the country," James said at the time.

   An emeritus professor of surgery at OSU, James first proposed a $ 1.25
million hospital with 100 beds.

   Not for three decades, though, did the idea become reality with the opening
of the 160-bed, $ 61.4 million James.

   By that time, OSU already enjoyed a national reputation in cancer study
through its designation as a Comprehensive Cancer Center in 1976. Only 37 such
centers exist, and OSU's is one of the oldest.

   One key to retaining this designation, Schuller said, has been the James'
commitment to the cancer-genetics program, even though that effort took money
others wanted to spend on an expansion of the hospital's crowded physical
facilities.

   Recruiting the star players needed to build such a program takes big money.

   In 1997, OSU scored a triple play, hiring Dr. Albert de la Chapelle, a
leading cancer geneticist; Dr. Clara D. Bloomfield, a leukemia expert who now
directs the Comprehensive Cancer Center; and Dr. Michael A. Caligiuri, an
immunology expert who now directs clinical-research programs.

   De la Chapelle had been working in Finland; Bloomfield, who is de la
Chapelle's wife, was working with Caligiuri at the State University of New York
at Buffalo. The three came to OSU in a package deal that included not only the
researchers but also their lab staffs -- more than 50 people in all, Caligiuri
said.

   Ohio State's edge, he said, was its hunger for greatness and the money to
feed the appetite.

   "This can easily cost $ 5 million to $ 7 million for each major hire."

   The commitment, Caligiuri said, "was unusual -- almost unprecedented."

   Until the 1980s, OSU Medical Center had focused largely on patient care. Yet
even before the James, the university had "a long history of creative solutions
to the treatment of cancer," said Dr. Eric Kraut, an oncologist who began
developing cancer drugs at OSU in 1975.

   University physician-researchers, for example, pioneered the use of nuclear
medicine and radiation therapies, developed drugs for the treatment of hairy
cell leukemia and discovered the vaccine for feline leukemia.

   In the '80s, people died of hairy cell leukemia, Kraut said. "Today, it's no
big deal."

   Hodgkin's disease was incurable in the 1950s, but survival rates today are 60
percent to 70 percent because of new and more powerful chemotherapy drugs, he
said.

   Surgery remains the most effective way to attack many cancers, especially
when used with chemotherapy and radiation.

   "Seventy-five percent of those cured of cancer are cured by surgery alone,"
said Dr. William Farrar, chief of surgical oncology.

   More common now are combined treatments, doctors say, given the development
of chemotherapy drugs and radiation technologies that better target tumor cells
without injuring healthy cells.

   Until recently, attacking tumors with more than one weapon was considered too
hard on patients because of the severity of side effects, said Dr. Reinhard
Gahbauer, director of radiation oncology.

   During the next decade, Schuller also wants to turn OSU into a major player
in the promising area of angiogenesis, the process by which new blood vessels
form.

   Angiogenic drugs, first developed by OSU graduate Judah Folkman at Children's
Hospital in Boston, could be used either to promote blood-vessel growth for
heart and lung patients or to cut off blood supplies to tumors in cancer
patients.

   "There's no question this is an opportunity for us," said Schuller, given the
capabilities of the James and the planned OSU Heart and Lung Institute.

   As with genetics, recruiting top talent in this field will take a major
financial commitment from OSU officials.

   "I get the sense they are ready to do that," Caligiuri said.

GRAPHIC: Photo, Graphi, (1) Jeff Hinckley / Dispatch Dr. Michael A. Caligiuri,
outside the Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital (2) Graphic (3) Dr. Arthur G. James
(4) Dr. David E. Schuller (5) Dr. Judith Westma

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2000


                             316 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 9; Page 8; Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 241 words

HEADLINE: WEDDINGS;
Tamara Newman, Richard Elias

BODY:

   Dr. Tamara Suzanne Newman, a daughter of Susan Newman and Dr. Neil Newman of
Kingwood, Tex., was married in New York last evening to Dr. Richard Lawrence
Elias, a son of Carole Elias and Dr. Arthur Elias of Armonk, N.Y. Rabbi Renee
Goldberg officiated at the Lighthouse at Chelsea Piers.

   The couple met in 1998 while working at Massachusetts General Hospital in
Boston, where last month the bride, 29, completed her third year of residency in
general surgery and the bridegroom, 32, completed his final year of residency in
oral and maxillofacial surgery.

    Next month, the bride is to begin a year of gene therapy research at the
Institute of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery at New York University. She
graduated summa cum laude from Yale University and received a medical degree
from Johns Hopkins University. Her father retired as a chemical engineer in
Baytown, Tex., with the Exxon Chemical Corporation. Her mother, also retired,
was a computer applications teacher at Middlesex County Vocational Technical
High School in New Brunswick, N.J.

   The bridegroom recently opened his own practice in oral and maxillofacial
surgery in New York. He graduated from Lafayette College and received dental and
medical degrees from Harvard. His mother is a clinical social worker at Family
Centers, a family service agency in Stamford, Conn. His father, who is also an
oral and maxillofacial surgeon, has a private practice in New York.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Harold Hechler Associates)

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2000


                             317 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 6; Page 40; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4281 words

HEADLINE: Fuzzy Little Test Tubes

BYLINE: By Lawrence Osborne;  Lawrence Osborne, a frequent contributor to the
magazine, last wrote about Asperger's syndrome.

BODY:

   As the roof of their claustrophobic plastic shoe box is lifted, the worried
inhabitants look up and stare back at the enormous human faces peering down at
them. Their minuscule pink snouts quiver, and they bare their teeth. Inside, two
brown-coated mice are poring over a new litter of grublike pups. A lab
technician dips a pair of forceps into a tub of disinfectant and grabs one by
the tail. It is Papa, and he begins squeaking and wriggling as he is hoisted
above a pile of curled pine shavings and dung-colored feed pellets. "He's the
normal one," says Muriel Davisson, a prominent mouse genetics researcher. "It's
the female who's the mutant. Now look at her."

   The mother indeed looks unusual. Perpetually off balance, she stumbles around
her tiny offspring. Her coat is tatty, striated by pale lines, and her face is
distinctly lopsided. Her mousy gaze looks cross-eyed; she is also noticeably
puny. I scan the identification tag on the container: TS65DN.

    "DN' stands for Down syndrome," Davisson says quietly over my shoulder.
"We're mating her with a normal mouse to see how Down genes get passed on to
offspring. Have you ever seen a mouse with Down syndrome?"

   I have to admit that I have not. "That's not surprising," Davisson says.
"They're extremely rare in the wild. They get eaten in two seconds. But here,
they get to live and have pups -- Down syndrome pups."

   We pick up the Down mother and examine her twitching, compressed face. "She's
only a year old," says Joiel Davies, a research assistant. "But she already
looks like an old lady."

   What about the pups? Davisson points her forceps at two of them. "As you can
see," she goes on, "these two likely have Down as well. They're beginning to
twitch. Down, of course, is an entirely genetic disease. That's why these mice
are so crucial to us."

   In humans, Down arises as a result of a duplication of chromosome 21. In
mice, it is chromosome 16 that gets doubled. The proteins in human chromosome 21
and mouse chromosome 16 are very similar but not identical. Thus, the mice have
a disorder something like Down, if not corresponding exactly to it. "It's not
100 percent," Davisson admits. "But it's close enough. It's mouse Down."

   In fact, aspects of this mouse's disorder are so subtle that the syndrome
cannot always be detected by the human eye. To verify that TS65DN had a stag-

   gering gait, for example, its paws were dipped in black ink and its movements
tracked on a sheet of white paper. "It walked," Davisson says, "like a
drunkard." Meanwhile, mental retardation was assessed by making the mouse do a
fiendish I.Q. test called the Morris water maze, in which it has to find a
platform located within a pool. It took the Down mouse quite some time to
complete what a normal one can do in minutes.

   We are standing in one of the 47 "mouse rooms" of the Jackson Laboratory in
Bar Harbor, Me., one of the world's foremost facilities for breeding and
studying mice. This room alone holds 34,000 animals. The mice are stored in
racks of clear plastic containers, each one fitted with a curious exhaust pipe
that connects to the ceiling and siphons off used air. Each unit is equipped
with pine shavings, pellets and a horizontal bottle of water. Foam-covered
hepafilters, mushroom-shaped appliances that screen incoming air, protrude from
the sides. Every specimen, the staff says, is scrupulously decontaminated and
kept "pathogen free." Inside the transparent boxes sit every variety of mouse
imaginable: albino mice, black mice, bald mice, piebald mice, fat mice, thin
mice, bored mice, epileptic mice. There are more varieties of mice here than in
any natural ecosystem, and each one has a specific scientific use. For the
Jackson rodents are unwitting actors in cutting-edge research into the
relationship between genetics and human disease.

   "JAX mice," as the Jackson mice are known to scientists, are bred or tailored
to carry diseases that mirror those of humans. Through either crossbreeding or
genetic engineering -- that is, by adding or "knocking out" specific genes --
Jackson scientists produce "transgenic model mice." These rodents have been
programmed from birth to develop tumors, inherit glaucoma or reproduce milder
pathologies, like obesity.

   The genetically engineered mouse strains have become the hottest items on
most labs' shopping lists. In fact, although the use of animals as lab subjects
had been declining in recent decades, the boom in transgenic mice has reversed
that trend. The rise is wholly attributable to genetics research. Cheaper to
breed than primates yet genetically similar to humans, mice are playing a key
role in the development of gene therapies -- and figure centrally in research
aiming to pinpoint the genetic basis of human disease. Indeed, so valued is the
mouse that it is the only other mammal whose full genetic code is being parsed
by the National Institutes of Health and Celera Genomics, the team that recently
completed the Human Genome Project. (The mouse sequence is expected by
December.) Referred to as "fuzzy test tubes" by scientists, mice are now worth
their weight in gold. "The mouse," the journal Science recently trumpeted, "is
taking over in the lab as a model of human genetics."

   The jackson laboratory is the world's most diverse "mouse ranch." It
maintains 2,500 strains of mice for sale, of which 33 are produced in large
quantities. (Conveniently, mice reproduce once every three months.) Twenty-five
million mice are bred every year for lab research -- twice as many as in 1990.
"The mouse-wrangling business is booming," says Luther Young, a Jackson
official, using another term from the horse trade. Although Jackson, which had
$59 million in revenues last year, is a nonprofit institution, the overall mouse
industry is a $200 million affair. The leading commercial ranch, the Charles
River Laboratories in Wilmington, Mass., raked in $140 million in rodent sales
last year. It's no wonder, considering that mutant mice often cost hundreds of
dollars each. Sometimes the price is much higher. A strain known as TG2576,
genetically engineered by Karen Hsiao Ashe at the University of Minnesota to
develop Alzheimer's disease, reportedly costs $700,000 for a "package" of mutant
males.

   The mouse industry's astonishing growth has been accompanied by controversy.
For rather arbitrary reasons, the Department of Agriculture has long exempted
mice from the provisions of the 1966 Animal Welfare Act, which established
standards of care for lab animals. This loophole, critics say, has made it
possible for scientists to manipulate mice in vast numbers, cruelly or
otherwise. Curiously, the act contains a category known as Other Animals, which
includes ferrets, armadillos, spotted hyenas, chinchillas and woodchucks, but
not the common mouse. The U.S.D.A.'s lab-animal census therefore counts only 1.2
million animals in American institutions, whereas the real total is probably
closer to 50 million. And almost all of them are mice.

   Today's frenzied market for mice -- thousands of varieties, with prices that
can't be beat! -- might well change as a result of a lawsuit brought by animal
rights groups determined to bring mice under the umbrella of the 1966 law. Last
month, the U.S. District Court in Washington ruled for the Alternatives Research
and Development Foundation in its suit against the Department of Agriculture. If
the government does not file an appeal, the cost of caring for mice could
skyrocket by 30 percent.

   Such a development could put the brakes on the mouse industry. Some critics
would welcome just that. John McArdle, director of the group that brought the
lawsuit, says: "I'm sure Jackson has high standards, but it's the scale of the
thing that creeps me out. Overall, the mouse industry is a lucrative fad, driven
by money and by corporate greed."

   Carol Bult, a scientist at Jackson who specializes in turning genetic
research into databases, disagrees. Experiments on mutant mice, she argues,
"will yield an immense number of gene targets for pharmaceutical companies."
Indeed, criticism of the mouse-wrangling industry profoundly irritates most
scientists, including Davisson. "Our mice may be bored," she says, rolling her
eyes, "but mistreated? Look around you."

   The room is indeed spotlessly clean and calm. There is barely a sound from
the 34,000 inmates -- a solitary squeak here and there. (The room gets noisy at
night, I'm told, when the lights are shut off and the nocturnal creatures perk
up.) We dip into the next plastic container. Inside are two albino mice with
fragile pink eyes. As soon as the roof of their little world is lifted they
begin jerking their heads upward, tilting their ears from side to side and
sniffing. Davisson explains that these strains have an inborn defect of the
inner ear that unbalances them and causes them to cock their heads skyward
continually. The researchers, rather poetically, call them Stargazers. A few
containers down, another white specimen scoots around his pine shavings in a
relentless figure-eight pattern. He is known as a Waltzer. Below him, a black
mouse bangs his head against the plastic repetitively. This is a Punk Rocker.
And there are more, usually bearing names that express their genetic
dysfunction: Fidget, Fat, Shiver and so on. There is even an unfortunate
Hopgait, who jumps around like a rabbit. Deformities can range from square
bodies to emaciated jaws, from atrophied paws to craniofacial mutations. As
strange as these mice sound, most of these strains arise spontaneously in
nature; it's just that in the wild, mutants promptly become owl food. From time
to time, researchers conduct "a deviant search" to find new, unexpected
mutations among the millions of mice born on the premises.

   I ask to see Fat and am escorted to a container in which a grotesquely
overweight ball of white fur is sitting quietly in a corner. He stares back at
me sullenly. Being genetically programmed to be twice your normal body weight, I
surmise, is a somber destiny. "He can hardly move," Davies smiles. I think
dismally of the late-period Elvis.

   Next, she lifts Punk Rocker from his box. He seems frantic, his head whipping
to and fro. "He's fed up," she laughs.

   Davisson caresses his flanks with her forceps, murmuring to him as if he were
a child. But this mutant cannot be so easily lulled. He continues to wriggle
spastically.

   "Maybe," I offer facetiously, "you can calm him down by playing the Sex
Pistols."

   For centuries, people have bred mutant mice. The ancient Cretans admired
albinos and occasionally had them nest in their temples. Waltzers were cherished
by the ancient Chinese. In the West, eccentric "mouse fanciers" began keeping
mutants as pets in the 19th century. These hobbyists caught the attention of
scientists, who wondered if they might have more serious uses. In 1909, a young
Harvard researcher named Clarence Cook Little started up his own mouse colony.
Fascinated by inherited mutations among rodents, he became convinced that they
might offer a way to understand a genetic basis for cancer in humans. That year,
Little developed the first inbred mouse strain by mating brothers and sisters.
These inbreds did not have the mixed-colored pelts of wild mice; their
consistently brown pelts betrayed their artificiality. In 1921, scientists used
some of Little's mice to create a tumor-prone creature called the "A strain."
The era of the laboratory mouse was well under way.

   In 1929, Little founded the Jackson Laboratory. Cancer became the ranch's
principal focus. In an early experiment, females that were highly susceptible to
mammary tumors were crossbred with healthy strains to trace the tumor
inheritance in the offspring. At the same time as it began pioneering the
genetics of cancer, Jackson also began selling mice. By 1945, about 9,000 Swiss
white mice were being shipped out every week at 20 cents apiece. Last year,
Jackson shipped 1.7 million mice to 12,000 labs worldwide.

   Jackson's method for breeding all these mice begins with sundry specimens
donated from labs around the world. These are ordinary creatures who have to be
screened, cleaned and reproduced before they can be used by Jackson. They first
arrive at what's called the importation quarantine area. Ken Christian, who
oversees this area, warns, "Even the slightest contamination could be
scientifically disastrous." The new arrivals are housed in the same type of
plastic boxes used in the larger mouse room. But here the containers are also
provided with plastic sleeves, which enable Christian's staff to insert feed and
pine litter without touching anything with their fingers. Handling mice, I am
assured, is not as simple as it looks. Mice cannot sweat or shiver: they control
temperature by contracting their follicles. They easily get cold, so a too-cold
water bottle can unduly refrigerate them. And an accidental jostle will
temporarily suppress their breeding instinct.

   "Mice are so sensitive," marvels Judah Folkman, the Harvard scientist whose
success at shrinking tumors in mice has placed him at the forefront of cancer
research. "Their blood pressure easily goes haywire. They're like babies in that
respect. Continuous loud noise gives them stomach ulcers. That can seriously
interfere with scientific data." (The Jackson lab, it turns out, has a secret
playlist of "soothing" music piped into its breeding rooms 24 hours a day.)

   As a group of Jackson technicians takes me around the quarantine area, which
holds 600 mice at a time, we inspect some furry representatives from the outside
world. One technician, Tacy MacGregor, shows me three strains of Mus musculus,
or common mouse, just arrived from California. "We run our own tests," she says.
"We don't trust anyone's word that they're clean." The quarantine area actually
has three carefully separated sections: a dirty room, which is "compromised with
the outside world"; an intermediate limbo room; and a sterilized clean room.

   Breaking the chain of disease requires far more than mere disinfecting. The
cleansing process begins in the dirty room. First, a pregnant female's uterus
(complete with live fetuses) is surgically removed, then placed in a four-ounce
sterilized specimen cup. At this point, a technician carefully walks over to a
plastic window, slides it open, then hands the cup to his counterpart in the
limbo room. The cup then goes into a stainless-steel box that contains a
disinfectant dip-tank. After a red button is pressed, this box, known as a
"mousevator," slowly moves up a 20-foot shaft, transporting the pups to the
second-floor clean room. (Swifter pneumatic-tube technology was considered but
deemed likely to injure the pups.) In this sterile environment, the pups are
removed from the uterus and manually revived with Q-Tips. Their birth mother
having been killed, the newborns are given to a "pathogen free" mother, whose
own pups are subsequently euthanized to make room for the newcomers. "We'll
leave one or two of the original pups alive so that they can rub their smell
onto the new ones," Christian explains. "That way the mother will take to them."
The entire process guarantees the cleanest mice in creation -- pups that journey
from birth to death in a completely sterilized environment.

   As I peer into the containers of the common mice, I can't help remembering
Art Spiegelman's cartoon "Maus." In that dark account of the Holocaust, the Jews
are drawn as mice and the Germans as cats. And where do the Jewish mice end up?
In Mauschwitz. Of course, I remind myself calmly, mice are not people. "We're as
humane," Christian says quietly, "as we can be."

   As I walk through the lab's sunny upstairs corridors, where a mouse is never
seen except on a poster, I'm surprised at how airy and optimistically healthy it
feels -- almost like a Scandinavian spa. Through spacious windows, Frenchman Bay
appears, dotted with wooded isles and yachts. Inside, the wood-finished walls
are covered with cute prints of mice in idyllic settings. There is an adorable
Mus musculus crawling ecstatically over a chunk of Gouda instead of languishing
inside a Tupperware-like box. There is a Meriones americanus, or jumping mouse,
frolicking among stalks of maize. Another poster shows a small girl in a
hospital bed holding a teddy bear. "It's the animals you don't see," it says,
"that really helped her recover."

   In the library, I meet Ken Paigen, Jackson's director. Here there are glass
sculptures of mice as well as Hopi kachina dolls of mice and a bizarre print
showing quill-wielding mice laboring over Japanese calligraphy. It's a veritable
shrine. "Lovely, aren't they?" Paigen murmurs. "They're fascinating animals,
really."

   Paigen is a former Berkeley genetics professor who came to Bar Harbor in
1989. He is an ebullient man with spring-loaded curly hair and a permanent
smile. "What we're doing here is mapping out the underlying reasons why you and
I get sick," he says. "We're investigating the genetic pathways of illness,
unraveling the mysteries of the gene." Every disease, he points out, has
susceptible and resistant strains. "Why are there different outcomes in
different mice with the same disease? Because of their genes. We're out to find
these modifying genes."

   Each human, Paigen explains, has up to 100,000 different proteins in his or
her body. Most current medicines target only about 400 of them and work
according to inadequately blunt statistical averages. "Imagine a medicine
tailored to an individual's precise genetic makeup," he says, eyes twinkling.
"We could invent a whole new medicine! It's definitely the medicine of the 21st
century. And the mouse is the key."

   But why not the woodchuck or some higher mammal? For one thing, mice have a
long history in science; researchers know a great deal about them. "And then,"
he continues, "they breed so quickly that we can study three generations or more
a year. That's vital when you're studying inheritance." He pauses and twiddles
his thumbs. "They're also extremely cheap."

   Jackson's 33 staff scientists work on everything from diabetes to lupus. For
some maladies, an appropriate model mouse already exists in nature. (Blind mice,
after all, aren't just found in nursery rhymes.) But to create model mice for
many human diseases, healthy mice must be injected with potent drugs --
hormones, viruses, antibiotics -- that cause novel mutations. Such trickery is
growing ever more sophisticated. "Nowadays, we can even transfer genes across
species," Paigen says.

   Keen to see how this mutation actually works, I go to visit the
"microinjection room" nearby. It's a quiet, humdrum lab where Vance Dyer spends
his days patiently injecting mouse embryos with DNA. Dyer works with needles one
micron wide, wielding them by means of motorized arms connected to a microscope
equipped with a video screen. Glancing at his monitor, I see an embryo float
onto a suction pad, which holds it still for a moment. Then the needle
penetrates and the embryo contracts as DNA is pumped into it. This batch was
bred at 9 a.m. the previous day. "Oops, lost one," Dyer murmurs without missing
a beat. His needle has just accidentally yanked out the innards of an embryo.
"It's a numbers game," he says, still concentrating. "You're bound to lose about
25 percent of them." Thus altered, multiple embryos are then injected into
females, which after a 19-day pregnancy give birth to a litter of 8 to 10 pups.
A third of these will inherit the injected DNA.

   This is how Barbara Knowles, associate director of the lab, breeds cancerous
tumors in her Black 6 mice. ("A nice, docile mouse," she says. "Good breeder.")
To engineer her mutants, she injects embryos with a lethal monkey virus, Simian
Virus 40; it triggers cancerous tumors almost identical to those in humans.
"We're on the verge of understanding how tumors arise," she says. "The thing is,
these tumors will not grow in normal B6's. So we know that the B6 has a genetic
defense against them." By planting the tumor into the B6, then breeding it with
normal members of its own strain, Knowles can observe how the propensity to grow
or not grow tumors is transmitted by genes: over 10 or so generations, a
revealing pattern of resistance and nonresistance will emerge.

   Other researchers at Jackson follow similar paths to study mutations. Beverly
Paigen, a scientist and Ken's wife, has been using mice to study obesity in
humans. A mouse, it turns out, has a gene that lets it know when it is full. By
knocking that gene out, she has created mice that binge at every meal -- just
like some people.

   Of course, genes are not necessarily the principal basis for obesity. If they
are, why are French people slim and Americans fat? "That's true," Paigen admits.
"It's probably a mixture of genetics and environment." She then tells me that
recent findings suggesting that drinking red wine helps prevent heart disease
were also tested on mice, with the same results. In an even stranger experiment,
mice were fed a diet of beef fat, hydrogenated corn oil and butterfat to make
them duplicate a human heart condition. Sure enough, some strains became liable
to heart attacks while others did not. These two broad groups were then
interbred to see where the genes crossed.

   Such baroque experiments would be hard to conduct on other animals. "The
short life span of the mouse makes them incredibly useful," says Wayne Frankel,
who works on epilepsy with Fidget and Stargazer mice. Since a mouse lives only
2.6 years on average, the effects of a gluttony gene (or a good Burgundy) can be
studied over an entire lifetime. "Imagine," Frankel says, "trying to do that
with chimpanzees!"

   "A mouse reaches sexual maturity in six weeks," Knowles says as she shows me
gently around her lab. "Obviously, that makes it the ideal testing ground for
genetic pathways." We wander around some DNA thermal cyclers, where little bits
of genetic matter get cloned, and some rather fearsome-looking decontaminant
chambers. From what looks like a small fridge, Knowles plucks out a few jars
filled with a pale green solution. "Look," she says, tilting the jars back and
forth, "mouse pieces." Inside the jars, like tiny bits of mozzarella in olive
oil, osteosarcomas, or cancerous bone fragments, float against the light. The
remnants of rodent guests departed.

   "Does it make you squeamish?" she asks.

   "Not really," I say. But my tone is unsure.

   "Good! It doesn't make me squeamish, either." She pauses. "You know, we used
to have dogs here. But not anymore. I suppose dogs would make you squeamish,
wouldn't they?"

   "Probably," I admit. "I like dogs."

   Of course, none of this radiant scientific serenity cuts much ice with animal
rights advocates. "These are Frankenstein mice, pure and simple," says Dean
Smith of the American Anti-Vivisection Society outside Philadelphia. "These
animals are being programmed to die of cancer! It's horrendous. Basically,
they're cheap and there's no federal regulation covering them. You can do
whatever you want with them." Smith adamantly insists, moreover, that computer
simulations and models can replace animals one day. "Besides," he adds, echoing
a familiar refrain of animal rights advocates, "the health benefits of using
mice are exaggerated."

   "From my perspective, it's simple," Ken Paigen says. "It's mice or us,
basically. All modern medicine is based on animal experimentation. Computer
models are definitely inadequate."

   Harold Varmus, president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New
York, is also not impressed by the utopian possibility of dispensing with lab
mice. He admits, though, that gene experimentation will not yield wonder
medicines straight away. "Is the mouse oversold?" he says. "Sometimes. But
where's the exact line between pure research and medicine development? Actually,
the whole trajectory of cancer research is now away from cultures in the petri
dish toward what happens inside the live animal. Mouse and human genetics aren't
a perfect match, but they're close enough. It's a proven tool of huge value."

   Alan Goldberg, the director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Alternatives to
Animal Testing, sees transgenic mice as an improvement on the old days. "We have
to have animal models, and the public hates the idea of using companion pets
like dogs or rabbits," he argues. "They're too cuddly. We just don't have the
same feelings toward mice. And at the same time, manipulating their genes is
less cruel than many other things. I see it at least as a way of getting away
from primates. And these mice have a better life than they do in the wild!"

   Whether the mice have a better life or not is a moot point. The Waltzers,
Fidgets, Stargazers and Fats could hardly survive outside their antiseptic
plastic pens. They are man-made exotica, dependent on humans for their survival
and for their untimely and highly contrived deaths. Mercifully, it's a paradox
they're not aware of.

   Even so, I wonder if mice like Punk Rocker ever try to elude their fates. Do
Jackson's mice sometimes make a run for it? It happens, but it's rare. Jackson
has bigger problems with the field mice that crawl inside the lab during Maine's
brutal winters. (They soon end up in a plastic container, where they're used to
breed fresh pups.) Every so often, though, mutant inmates do break out. Leah Rae
Donahue, a Jackson scientist, says: "Once, an escapee ran over the computer
keyboard in my office! And sometimes they get into the outer grounds. We have to
hunt them down." Donahue smiles gently. "But our euthanasia is done strictly
according to the book. We take our standards very seriously."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: PIGMENTED NUDE: Used for research into skin and hair-texture
defects. $120 per breeder pair.; DOWN SYNDROME: Used for studying behavioral and
learning defects. $204.50 per breeder pair.; BLIND STERILE: Used for cataracts
research. $231.70 per breeder pair.; OBESE: Used for diabetes and
endocrine-deficiency research. $105 per breeder pair.; CURLY TAIL: Used for
skeletal-defects research. $108.70 per breeder pair.; RHINO: Used for immunology
and inflammation research. $83.60 per breeder pair. (Catherine Chalmers for The
New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 2000


                             318 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 30, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. E-2, LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 456 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY PITFALLS

BYLINE: MICHAEL A. GOLDMAN, PH.D.; PROFESSOR OF BIOLOGY; SAN FRANCISCO STATE
UNIVERSITY; SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   In "Creating a 'Genobility,' " (July 16), Post-Gazette Science Editor Byron
Spice considers some of the problems that arise when we are able to cure all
ills and enhance people through gene therapy. He raises the important point that
not everyone will be able to afford this, and that we must think of some
equitable way in which to avoid the creation of a genetic nobility. One of the
suggestions is that we have a lottery.

   I think the idea of genetic enhancement, or even the achievement of awesome
health, through gene therapy is far less realistic than most people understand.
While many appreciate that there are technical difficulties, most consider them
soluble.

   Other technical difficulties, however, will always leave us having to make a
correction that does not work all the time. While a 25 percent success rate
seems reasonably palatable, and can probably be achieved for single-gene
disorders corrected in utero, the "failure" rate for recessive genetic diseases
on their own is just 25 percent, and that for dominant genetic disorders is
about 50 percent. This means that we stand a 25 percent chance of correcting a
problem that wasn't even going to occur 50 percent to 75 percent of the time.

   Another critical issue is what sorts of traits we can realistically improve.
We all agree that higher intelligence is desirable, though we can argue that not
everyone needs enhanced intelligence, and that there is probably a point at
which we "know" too much. But intelligence isn't a simple genetic trait.

   While there is a genetic contribution, there is a tremendous influence of the
environment in the development of the trait we call intelligence. In fact,
environmental variables can completely swamp any genetic influence, except in
cases of the most debilitating of genetic disorders. The genetic influence is
not going to be easily manipulated, either. It likely involves dozens if not
hundreds of genes, each having a very small contribution to overall
intelligence. With each gene we must correct, we introduce new opportunities for
error or even catastrophe, and yet we make infinitesimally small progress toward
our goal of "enhancement."

   Many of the traits we consider important are, like intelligence, strongly
influenced by environment as well as a bewildering array of genes. Whether we
try to enhance these traits in somatic cells or in the germ line, we are not
likely to see impressive success. We could approach it better, and more
economically, through appropriate education and nurturing.

   Germ-line gene therapy will never be desirable and, in fact, may never be
practical either.

   MICHAEL A. GOLDMAN, Ph.D.

   Professor of Biology

   San Francisco State University

   San Francisco

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000


                             319 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 30, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. I-2

LENGTH: 393 words

HEADLINE: Gateway is a 'top pick' in PC stocks

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Among personal computer hardware stocks, "Gateway remains far and away our top
pick," says Richard Gardner of Salomon Smith Barney.

   Five companies account for more than 90 percent of the nation's retail PC
shipments, and Gateway is the most attractive in terms of price/earnings growth
ratio and earnings potential, Gardner says.

   Gateway also is the Analyst's Best Call at PaineWebber where Don Young says
the typical dealer channel for PCs is dying.

   However, the Store Within a Store concept at Gateway will prove to be a
winner, says the analyst, who has visited seven of the 35 concept test sites.

   Overall PC hardware profitability is declining, but Gateway's strategy can
more than offset industry conditions, Young says.

   Bernstein Research, which does an annual survey of PC sales, says all of the
growth in PC sales this year will come from affluent repeat buyers.  Half of the
nation's households have a PC, while 80 percent of affluent households have at
least one.

   Households without a PC are a difficult market to crack, but Gateway will be
the company that benefits from current trends, Bernstein says.

   Advanced Marketing

   Advanced Marketing Services, which distributes books to discount warehouse
clubs, will strike it rich with the newest Harry Potter book, says David N.
Allen of Granite Financial.

   Also, the company's 25 percent investment in Canada's Raincoast Books will
benefit from the Potter book, Allen says.

   Advanced Marketing should earn $1.45 a share for the year ending March 2001.
Allen is bullish on the stock.

   Locals

   Ken Stern & Associates sees problems in the stock market for the rest of the
year, though Stern does like some local stocks.

   Two of his favorite biotechs are Aurora Biosciences and Invitrogen, which
sells kits for gene therapy.

   "While we agree that mapping the gene code is big, the people that will make
money are the pick and shovel providers," Stern says.  "Invitrogen is profitable
(a rarity for biotech companies), has excellent ascending revenue and terrific
management."

   He also likes Qualcomm, despite recent news that has sent 1999's hottest
stock down sharply.

   "The temporary negative news appears to be just that: temporary," Stern says.
"While the stock will probably be depressed for at least one more quarter, we
will use the depressed prices as a buying opportunity."


LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2000


                             320 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 30, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. I-2

LENGTH: 387 words

HEADLINE: Gateway is a `top pick' in PC stocks

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Among personal computer hardware stocks, "Gateway remains far and away our
top pick," says Richard Gardner of Salomon Smith Barney. Five companies account
for more than 90 percent of the nation's retail PC shipments, and Gateway is the
most attractive in terms of price/earnings growth ratio and earnings potential,
Gardner says. Gateway also is the Analyst's Best Call at PaineWebber where Don
Young says the typical dealer channel for PCs is dying.

   However, the Store Within a Store concept at Gateway will prove to be a
winner, says the analyst, who has visited seven of the 35 concept test sites.
Overall PC hardware profitability is declining, but Gateway's strategy can more
than offset industry conditions, Young says. Bernstein Research, which does an
annual survey of PC sales, says all of the growth in PC sales this year will
come from affluent repeat buyers. Half of the nation's households have a PC,
while 80 percent of affluent households have at least one. Households without a
PC are a difficult market to crack, but Gateway will be the company that
benefits from current trends, Bernstein says. Advanced Marketing Advanced
Marketing Services, which distributes books to discount warehouse clubs, will
strike it rich with the newest Harry Potter book, says David N. Allen of Granite
Financial. Also, the company's 25 percent investment in Canada's Raincoast Books
will benefit from the Potter book, Allen says. Advanced Marketing should earn
$1.45 a share for the year ending March 2001. Allen is bullish on the stock.
Locals Ken Stern & Associates sees problems in the stock market for the rest of
the year, though Stern does like some local stocks. Two of his favorite biotechs
are Aurora Biosciences and Invitrogen, which sells kits for gene therapy. "While
we agree that mapping the gene code is big, the people that will make money are
the pick and shovel providers," Stern says.

   "Invitrogen is profitable (a rarity for biotech companies), has excellent
ascending revenue and terrific management." He also likes Qualcomm, despite
recent news that has sent 1999's hottest stock down sharply. "The temporary
negative news appears to be just that: temporary," Stern says.

   "While the stock will probably be depressed for at least one more quarter, we
will use the depressed prices as a buying opportunity."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             321 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 29, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 380 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief

BODY:

   Fidelity tops Janus in June

   Fidelity Investments, the biggest U.S. mutual fund company, was June's
best-selling fund group, ousting Janus Capital Corp. from the spot it has held
since August, according to a Boston-based mutual fund consulting firm.

   June also marks the first time since April 1996 that Fidelity has been the
best-selling fund group in a given month, according to Financial Research Corp.

   Janus remains the best-selling fund group for 2000 through June despite
slipping to third place for June behind MFS Investment Management.

   - BLOOMBERG NEWS

   Trial nears 3rd month

   The patent infringement trial pitting rival biotechnology firms Amgen Inc.
and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. against one another in a dispute over Amgen's
blockbuster anti-anemia drug ground toward its close yesterday.

   Analysts said the outcome is still very much in doubt.

   Testimony in the trial was expected to be completed Monday, lawyers said. It
will not end, however, until early September when Transkaryotic called its last
witness.

   - REUTERS

   Ruling hits eBay

   EBay Inc., the largest Internet auctioneer, lost a bid to dismiss a
counterclaim filed by Bidder's Edge Inc. of Burlington over the collection and
use of information on line.

   U.S. District Court Judge Ronald Whyte ruled eBay hadn't proven that Bidder's
Edge lacked antitrust standing for its claim. The closely held company's
countersuit contends eBay is attempting to monopolize on-line bidding and
violating antitrust laws by trying to limit access to auction listings.

   Bidder's Edge, based in Burlington, collects information from more than 170
on-line auction sites, allowing users to comparison shop on its Web site.

   EBay sued Bidder's Edge in December alleging the company was trespassing,
infringing on copyright and engaging in unfair business practices.

   - BLOOMBERG NEWS

   Nortel buys Alteon

   Nortel Networks announced a deal yesterday to acquire Alteon WebSystems Inc.,
a San Jose, Calif., company involved in "content-aware" switching in a stock
deal worth about $ 7.8 billion. The switches are designed in part to help large
Internet businesses handle data traffic.

   Alteon's competitor, ArrowPoint Inc., of Acton was acquired by Cisco Systems
in May in a deal worth $ 6.1 billion.

   - HERALD STAFF

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2000


                             322 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 29, 2000, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 561 words

HEADLINE: A COST HEALTH INSURERS CAN PAY COVERAGE URGED FOR CLINICAL TRIALS

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Many cost-conscious health insurers refuse to pay for the medical care of
patients enrolled in clinical trials. But a new study suggests that the costs
for cancer patients in clinical trials aren't much different than for those
receiving conventional therapy.

   Researchers who conducted the study at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute and four other large cancer centers said they hope the findings, being
published in next month's Journal of Clinical Oncology, will persuade more
health plans to provide coverage to patients in these trials.

   Lack of health care coverage is considered a major barrier to patients
enrolling in clinical trials, said Dr. Victor Vogel, a Pitt medical oncologist
and co-author of the study. Only about 3 percent of adult patients participate
in clinical trials, though doctors maintain that the best care, particularly for
patients with advanced or rare cancers, is only available in trials.

   Last month, President Clinton ordered Medicare to begin paying for the
medical care of patients in such trials. But Richard Coorsh, a spokesman for the
Health Insurance Association of America, cautioned that the new study is of
limited use in assessing costs and maintained that insurers also were worried
about additional issues such as quality of care and liability.

   The study by the American Association of Cancer Institutes, headed by Dr.
Charles Bennett of Northwestern University in Chicago, involved only 35 patients
enrolled in federally sponsored cancer trials and 35 receiving conventional
therapy. But the findings were consistent with previous studies performed at
individual institutions.

   Several similar but far larger studies are getting under way, Vogel said,
including a 2,000-patient study by the Rand Corp. that will include the
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.

   The new study found that six months of care for the patients in clinical
trials cost an average of $ 57,542, compared to $ 63,721 for patients with
similar characteristics and diseases who received standard treatment.
Researchers said the slightly higher cost for conventional care was not
statistically significant.

   Vogel, director of the Comprehensive Breast Program at UPCI and Magee-Womens
Hospital, said the additional costs involved in clinical trials are for
collecting and analyzing patient information and, sometimes, for experimental
drugs or equipment. Those costs are paid by the sponsor of the trial, he
explained, so the medical costs shouldn't vary much from those receiving
conventional care.

   There is a perception that patients in clinical trials must undergo
additional tests or make extra hospital or office visits.But Vogel said that
often isn't the case. Researchers need to work harder to dispel this notion, he
added, because patients' fear of inconvenience is as much a barrier to
recruitment as economic factors.

   As underscored by the death in September of a gene therapy patient at the
University of Pennsylvania, quality of care and liability are also concerns,
Coorsh noted. The study is useful, he acknowledged, but has several
shortcomings. It was based on hospital charges, which invariably are higher than
actual costs, and calculated expenses for only the first six months of care,
which even the researchers acknowledged are likely to be less than those shortly
before death.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000


                             323 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 29, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 697 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Cohu shares fall 15%

   Semiconductor equipment maker Cohu posted strong second-quarter earnings
Thursday, but the stock plunged 15.59 percent to $17.94 yesterday as Wall Street
seemed concerned about declining orders and a sinking backlog.  Sales shot up to
$86.7 million from $43.5 million a year earlier, as earnings per share rose to
62 cents from 24 cents.  But new orders at $70.8 million were down from $84.7
million in the first quarter, and the backlog at $68.8 million was down from
$84.7 million in the first period.  "The whole semiconductor equipment group has
sold off in recent weeks," said John H. Allen, Cohu's chief financial officer.
"But the semiconductor cycle is still pretty strong; we don't see significant
weakness." Cohu hit Wall Street's earnings-per-share expectation in the second
quarter, but had been well below it in the first quarter, noted Bud Leedom of
San Diego Stock Report.  "There may have been expectation they would beat the
second-quarter estimate." Sensing weak demand down the road, he is neutral on
the stock.

   Creative Host plans acquisition

   Creative Host Services of San Diego said it has signed a letter of intent to
acquire GladCo Enterprises of Pittsburgh for an undisclosed amount.  GladCo
operates concessions at airports in Pittsburgh; Atlantic City, N.J.; Albany,
N.Y.; and Freeland, Mich. GladCo also plans to open two concessions soon in the
Newark, N.J., airport.  The San Diego company also said it has terminated
acquisition talks with Cafe Diva.

   Loss grows for Collateral

   Collateral Therapeutics, a San Diego gene therapy company, announced a loss
of $3.3 million, or 25 cents per share, on revenue of $800,000 for the second
quarter, compared with a loss of $2 million, or 19 cents per share, on revenue
of $1.9 million for the year-ago period.  The company said reductions in costs
that were reimbursable to Collateral accounted for the drop in revenue.

   Suit targets citrus imports

   A citrus industry group representing 1,500 growers in California and Arizona
has filed suit to block imports of Argentine lemons, oranges and grapefruit.
After years of study and debate, the U.S. Department of Agriculture cleared the
way in June for Argentine citrus imports for the first time despite an outcry by
citrus growers who fear that shipments will carry pests and disease.  The U.S.
Citrus Science Council filed a federal court lawsuit in Fresno seeking an
injunction to keep the USDA regulation from going into effect.

   Income up for Cuyamaca Bank

   Cuyamaca Bank, which has offices in eastern San Diego County, generated
$114,000 in after-tax income in the second quarter, a 12 percent increase over
the same period of 1999. Assets grew 18 percent during the year to $62.7
million.

   SoftProse is acquired

   SoftProse Inc., maker of high-definition television technology, based in San
Diego and Des Moines, Iowa, said yesterday it has been acquired by Rohnert
Park-based Next Level Communications Inc. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.
SoftProse employees will remain in San Diego and DeMoines.  Next Level, with
expertise in digital subscriber line networking, will use SoftProse's technology
in its video offerings.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Latest suitor abandons Iridium

   Another would-be savior is abandoning Iridium LLC in bankruptcy court,
raising the possibility again that a $5 billion satellite system for mobile
phones will be reduced to ashes in the Earth's atmosphere.  Castle Harlan Inc.,
the New York investment bank that planned to buy Iridium's assets for just $50
million, said yesterday it has decided that the business is too weak to save
even at such a bargain-basement price.

   DaimlerChrysler deal signed

   Hoping to bolster its tiny share of the Asian market, especially in small
cars, DaimlerChrysler AG signed a pact yesterday giving it a 34 percent share in
Mitsubishi Motors Corp. The deal was announced in March.  The deal gives heavily
indebted Mitsubishi a partner with deep pockets, while DaimlerChrysler gets
access to Asian markets and help in developing subcompact cars, one of its
weaker lines.


LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000


                             324 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 29, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 677 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Cohu shares fall 15% Semiconductor equipment maker
Cohu posted strong second-quarter earnings Thursday, but the stock plunged 15.59
percent to $17.94 yesterday as Wall Street seemed concerned about declining
orders and a sinking backlog.

   Sales shot up to $86.7 million from $43.5 million a year earlier, as earnings
per share rose to 62 cents from 24 cents.

   But new orders at $70.8 million were down from $84.7 million in the first
quarter, and the backlog at $68.8 million was down from $84.7 million in the
first period.

   "The whole semiconductor equipment group has sold off in recent weeks," said
John H. Allen, Cohu's chief financial officer.

   "But the semiconductor cycle is still pretty strong; we don't see significant
weakness."

   Cohu hit Wall Street's earnings-per-share expectation in the second quarter,
but had been well below it in the first quarter, noted Bud Leedom of San Diego
Stock Report.

   "There may have been expectation they would beat the second-quarter
estimate."

   Sensing weak demand down the road, he is neutral on the stock. Creative Host
plans acquisition Creative Host Services of San Diego said it has signed a
letter of intent to acquire GladCo Enterprises of Pittsburgh for an undisclosed
amount. GladCo operates concessions at airports in Pittsburgh; Atlantic City,
N.J.; Albany, N.Y.; and Freeland, Mich. GladCo also plans to open two
concessions soon in the Newark, N.J., airport.

   The San Diego company also said it has terminated acquisition talks with Cafe
Diva. Loss grows for Collateral Collateral Therapeutics, a San Diego gene
therapy company, announced a loss of $3.3 million, or 25 cents per share, on
revenue of $800,000 for the second quarter, compared with a loss of $2 million,
or 19 cents per share, on revenue of $1.9 million for the year-ago period.

   The company said reductions in costs that were reimbursable to Collateral
accounted for the drop in revenue. Suit targets citrus imports A citrus industry
group representing 1,500 growers in California and Arizona has filed suit to
block imports of Argentine lemons, oranges and grapefruit.

   After years of study and debate, the U.S. Department of Agriculture cleared
the way in June for Argentine citrus imports for the first time despite an
outcry by citrus growers who fear that shipments will carry pests and disease.

   The U.S. Citrus Science Council filed a federal court lawsuit in Fresno
seeking an injunction to keep the USDA regulation from going into effect. Income
up for Cuyamaca Bank Cuyamaca Bank, which has offices in eastern San Diego
County, generated $114,000 in after-tax income in the second quarter, a 12
percent increase over the same period of 1999. Assets grew 18 percent during the
year to $62.7 million. SoftProse is acquired SoftProse Inc., maker of
high-definition television technology, based in San Diego and Des Moines, Iowa,
said yesterday it has been acquired by Rohnert Park-based Next Level
Communications Inc. Terms of the deal were not disclosed.

   SoftProse employees will remain in San Diego and DeMoines. Next Level, with
expertise in digital subscriber line networking, will use SoftProse's technology
in its video offerings. WORLD AND NATION Latest suitor abandons Iridium Another
would-be savior is abandoning Iridium LLC in bankruptcy court, raising the
possibility again that a $5 billion satellite system for mobile phones will be
reduced to ashes in the Earth's atmosphere.

   Castle Harlan Inc., the New York investment bank that planned to buy
Iridium's assets for just $50 million, said yesterday it has decided that the
business is too weak to save even at such a bargain-basement price.
DaimlerChrysler deal signed Hoping to bolster its tiny share of the Asian
market, especially in small cars, DaimlerChrysler AG signed a pact yesterday
giving it a 34 percent share in Mitsubishi Motors Corp. The deal was announced
in March.

   The deal gives heavily indebted Mitsubishi a partner with deep pockets, while
DaimlerChrysler gets access to Asian markets and help in developing subcompact
cars, one of its weaker lines.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             325 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 29, 2000 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 771 words

HEADLINE: State invests millions in colleges' sci-tech cutting-edge ventures

BYLINE: Kelly Heyboer, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   Concerned that New Jersey could fall behind in preparing students for
high-tech careers, the state gave seven colleges a total of $14.3 million
yesterday to develop cutting-edge science and technology programs.

    Some of the winning grant proposals read like science fiction novels, state
officials said. Many of the new fields - including process technology,
"bioinformatics" and information technology - are just emerging as college
courses and degree programs.

    Rutgers University will get $2.5 million to start a program to train
students in tissue engineering, a growing field that focuses on designing and
growing living tissue in labs. Bergen Community College will use part of its
grant to create a simulated hospital operating room to train technicians to
assist doctors in high-tech operations.

    Other schools will use the money to develop new majors. The University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey will start a graduate program in
bioinformatics, a new field that trains specialists who can mine and organize
the tidal wave of information from the human genome project and other biology
research projects.

    The state Commission on Higher Education approved funding for nine
recommended projects at its meeting in Trenton after representatives from each
college explained their plans for the grants. But many on the board, which
oversees the state's colleges, admitted they were surprised, and a little
baffled, by some of the science in the proposals.

    "I feel like I'm in a science fiction class. I don't understand a lot of
what's being said here," commission member Gloria Soto said with a laugh.

    The idea of funding new college programs to train students for high-tech
careers was originally proposed by Gov. Christie Whitman in January as part of a
$165 million economic package, called New Jersey Jobs for the New Economy.

    About $14.3 million was set aside for High-Tech Workforce Excellence Grants
for the colleges. The schools were asked to develop programs to both attract
students to New Jersey and keep high-tech companies in state by producing the
workers they need.

    State officials said the grants were hotly contested, with 24 of the state's
colleges submitting 45 different proposals. A team of 16 judges from New Jersey
and elsewhere reviewed each proposal.

    The nine proposals selected came from seven colleges, with Rutgers and
Stevens Institute of Technology each landing two grants.

    Two county colleges - Bergen Community and Salem Community - will use their
grants to train technicians in certificate and associate degree programs. Both
the College of New Jersey and Stevens won for programs that will train K-12
teachers to teach science, math and technology in the classroom.

   Whitman said she thought the state's money would be well spent on each of the
projects.

    "The state's investment in these outstanding academic programs promises to
pay substantial returns for both the institutions and the state," Whitman said
in a written statement.

    Michael Klein, Rutgers' dean of engineering, said there is already a demand
for undergraduate courses in tissue engineering. Johnson & Johnson, based in New
Brunswick, estimates the pharmaceutical industry will need 60,000 tissue
engineers over the next decade, he said. The job also topped Time Magazine's
"Ten Hottest Jobs" list this spring.

    With the abundance of pharmaceutical and medical technology firms in the
state, Rutgers-New Brunswick seemed like a good place to start building a top
tissue engineering program, the dean said.

   "This field requires not only more people but a new breed," Klein said.
"Rutgers is among the few places in the world that can pull this off."

    However, all the talk of emerging technology and cutting-edge fields led
some of the members of the Commission on Higher Education to question the moral
and ethical implications of some of the programs they were approving.

    Commission member William King said he would like the state to have some
oversight or be able to review the funded programs once they get going. King
cited the headlines generated by the University of Pennsylvania last year when
its gene ther- apy program came under fire after an 18-year-old subject died.
The federal government later charged that the university's gene therapy labs
violated numerous federal guidelines.

    King said he would like to avoid the possibility of similar problems in New
Jersey. "I don't want the board to answer to something we know nothing about,"
he said.

    Commission chairman Alfred Koeppe asked the commission's staff to look into
how the state can keep tabs on the approved programs and report back at a future
meeting.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             326 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 28, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A9

LENGTH: 304 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH/SCIENCE BRIEFS

BYLINE: Elan Ruskin; Tina HesmanMEDICAL RESEARCH; UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI;
GENETIC; REPLACEMENT THERAPY; ANIMAL STUDY; MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY; BLOOD; PRESSURE;
STROKE RISK

BODY:


MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY

Mizzou researchers test gene therapy on dog

   Using a new approach to gene therapy, researchers from the University of
Missouri at Columbia and elsewhere have found a potential method for treating
muscular dystrophy.

   The research involved Reuben, a golden retriever afflicted with Duchenne
muscular dystrophy due to a defective gene in his muscle cells. When scientists
injected a properly functioning gene into Reuben's leg to replace the faulty
one, they found that the muscle began to produce a protein normally absent in
dystrophy sufferers. Additionally, the functioning gene was taken up permanently
by the local muscle cells. Usually, gene therapy wears off after a period of
weeks or months.

WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Lowering systolic pressure also reduces stroke risk

   Lowering systolic blood pressure may help reduce the risk of strokes in
elderly patients, new research suggests. Systolic pressure is the top number in
a blood-pressure reading - indicating the pressure during a heart beat. Doctors
usually prescribe medicines to lower diastolic blood pressure - the bottom
number, which indicates pressure between heart beats.

   But the new study, published Wednesday in the Journal of the American Medical
Association, suggests that keeping systolic blood pressure low reduces the
stroke rate by one-third.

   Dr. H. Mitchell Perry, a Washington University professor emeritus of
medicine, and a team of researchers from 16 clinical centers around the nation
followed more than 4,700 elderly patients who had elevated systolic blood
pressure but normal diastolic pressure. The researchers found that drugs that
lower systolic pressure help prevent strokes caused by ruptures of blood vessels
in the brain and those caused by clots or plaques blocking blood flow.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2000


                             327 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         July 28, 2000 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LAGNIAPPE; Pg. L4

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: SIMPLY 'NUTTY';
SEQUEL PROVES THAT EDDIE MURPHY IS REIGNING 'PROFESSOR' OF COMEDY

BYLINE: By Michael H. Kleinschrodt Movie critic

BODY:

   Nutty Professor II: The Klumps," director Peter Segal's sequel to 1996's $270
million box office hit, puts the emphasis on sight gags and sex jokes instead of
on the story. Still, the appeal of star Eddie Murphy and his amazing
transformations (courtesy of Rick Baker's makeup) make the movie a
crowd-pleaser. (Murphy plays all but one member of the Klump family.)

   Hapless scientist Sherman Klump (Murphy), flush with the promise of fame and
fortune for having discovered a youth serum, is all set to marry geneticist
Denise Gaines (Janet Jackson). Unfortunately, Sherman's obnoxious alter-ego
Buddy Love (Murphy), whom Sherman thought he had suppressed inside himself,
continues to make his presence known at the most inopportune times. Inspired by
Denise's advanced research, Sherman devises a way to extract Buddy from his DNA
once and for all.

   A lab accident results in Buddy being cloned by mistake. Buddy is determined
to steal the youth serum and keep the money for himself, so Sherman hides the
secret formula at his parents' house. Before he knows what's hit him, the entire
Klump family is on Buddy's case, including lewd Granny (Murphy), grumpy Papa
(Murphy), oh-so-proper Mama (Murphy) and Sherman's scornful brother Ernie
(Murphy).

   The situation becomes more serious when Sherman realizes that he has damaged
his own brain cells during the extraction of Buddy. Somehow, these two have to
be reunited before Sherman turns into a vegetable.

   While nobody will be expecting a lesson in gene therapy from this movie, it
has to be said that the ending strains the limits of one's suspension of
disbelief. It's as if the writers -- all five of them -- had no idea how to wrap
up the story and improvised an ending on the spot.

   Murphy's fans will not be disappointed by his carefully delineated portrayals
of the various Klumps. The comic genius spends most of the movie playing
opposite himself in various incarnations. In one hilarious scene, Granny assumes
Buddy is the male stripper she's hired for Denise's bachelorette party. She puts
the moves on an appalled Buddy, and Murphy ends up giving himself a passionate
kiss. Despite the grueling effort of taking on so many makeup-intensive roles
for such extended periods, Murphy still appears to be having fun exploring these
characters. (Indeed, he seems to be having a bit too much fun with his fake
breasts.)

   Jackson does a fine job of balancing Murphy's antics. Although the script
doesn't give her that much to do, she is a luminous presence on screen and
convincingly portrays Denise's love for Sherman.

   Larry Miller has some bright moments as the put-upon dean of the college at
which Sherman and Denise work, especially in a scene in which he learns that it
doesn't pay to hide beneath a fur coat when trying to escape a giant hamster.
(Don't ask.)

   Anna Maria Horsford and Richard Gant make the most of their roles as Denise's
bewildered parents who first meet Sherman under less than ideal conditions.

   Audiences also will appreciate the movie's technical merits. Murphy's
interactions with himself are flawlessly executed. Some use of doubles is
involved, but many scenes expertly put Murphy in two places at once.

   While the movie does foray into the crude humor that seems obligatory these
days, it certainly doesn't sink to the level of "Me, Myself & Irene" or "Scary
Movie." There's nothing in "Nutty Professor II: The Klumps" that would be
terribly inappropriate for teens 15 and older. More conservative parents,
however, will definitely want to leave the theater as soon as the words "The
End" appear on screen. The final credits feature outtakes, some of which are
much raunchier than the scenes in the movie.

   NUTTY PROFESSOR II:

   THE KLUMPS

   ***

   Plot: Scientist Sherman Klump must defeat obnoxious alter-ego Buddy Love to
ensure his happiness with geneticist fiancee Denise Gaines.

   What works: Eddie Murphy's talent and Rick Baker's makeup guarantee laughs.

   What doesnt: The lame ending suggests that the film's creators were desperate
to wrap up the story in the quickest way possible.

   Starring: Eddie Murphy and Janet Jackson.

   Director: Peter Segal.

   Running time: 1 hour 55 minutes.

   Rating: PG-13, for language, crude humor and sex-related material.

   Where: Joy, Esplanade, Elmwood Palace, West Bank Palace, Hammond Palace,
Belle Promenade, Galleria, Chalmette, Holiday 12, Movies 8.

   GRAPHIC

GRAPHIC: The Klumps pose for a family portrait in Peter Segal's 'Nutty Professor
II: The Klumps,' Jamal Mixon, far left, plays Ernie Jr., the baby of the family.
Eddie Murphay plays, from left, Granny, Papa, Sherman, Ernie and Mama. [COLOR]
PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2000


                             328 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 27, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1009 words

HEADLINE: PENN HEALTH'S CEO RESIGNS PETER G. TRABER IS THE SECOND CHIEF TO LEAVE
IN FIVE MONTHS. HE IS GOING TO SMITHKLINE'S SUCCESSOR.

BYLINE: Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The University of Pennsylvania Health System is losing its second chief
executive officer in five months, sending shock and disappointment through an
institution that has been through several years of crisis.

   Peter G. Traber, who had won staff members' affection and loyalty in his
short tenure, will leave at the end of August, University of Pennsylvania
president Judith Rodin announced yesterday. He is resigning to become head of
clinical pharmacology and experimental medicine at GlaxoSmithKline, the
pharmaceutical company to be formed by the merger of SmithKline Beecham P.L.C.
and Glaxo Wellcome P.L.C.

   In addition to being chief executive of the health system, Traber, 45, has
been interim dean of the School of Medicine. The Ivy League university said it
would conduct a nationwide search for a single candidate to fill both posts.

   Rodin named Robert Martin acting chief executive officer of the health
system; and Arthur K. Asbury, acting dean of the School of Medicine. Martin has
been chief operating officer of the health system, Asbury deputy dean of the
medical school.

   When Traber was named chief executive in March, after a month as interim
chief executive, his appointment was hailed by Lori Doyle, the health system's
spokeswoman, as bringing "a real sense of stability back to the organization,
something we very much need right now."

   The health system had been rocked again and again in the previous two years
by financial crisis, scientific embarrassment, and a highly publicized patient
death.

   The problems included operating deficits totaling nearly $300 million in 1998
and 1999; the subsequent slashing of 2,800 jobs, or nearly 20 percent of the
system's workforce; the February firing of chief executive William N. Kelley;
the death last fall of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger in a gene therapy trial; and
charges by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration that operations of the animal
laboratories run by the Institute for Human Gene Therapy were fraught with
irregularities and violations of FDA guidelines.

   While Traber's resignation undeniably shatters the Penn health system's
stability at the highest level, interim CEO Martin and other staff members said
that there would be continuity elsewhere and that they expected no crisis of
morale or confidence.

   Martin, who oversaw a management housecleaning and reorganization when he
became the health system's chief operating officer a year ago, said his team "is
committed to this organization and will be here."

   In addition, he noted, Traber had focused on developing a 10-year strategic
plan for the system, and had left the day-to-day administration to Martin and
others who remain.

   "Big corporations have changes at the top all the time and they survive, and
that's what this is," Harvey Rubin, a Penn professor of medicine, said. "People
may talk about this over coffee" but not much more than that, he added.

   Still, others expressed sadness that they would be losing a long-time
colleague who gave them what one staff member called "a comfort zone."

   Traber was recruited to Penn by Kelley in 1992 as division chief of
gastroenterology. He became chair of the department of medicine the following
year. Traber is taking a leave of absence from his faculty position.

   Traber was quoted in a Penn news release as saying, "Nothing short of the
unique opportunity I have been offered could have persuaded me to take a
different direction at this point." He was not available yesterday for further
comment.

   Traber's position at GlaxoSmithKline will be in the area of potential drugs
that have been identified through genetic research, a SmithKline spokesman,
Richard Koenig, said.

   But some Penn faculty members, who requested anonymity, raised the question
of why a man known as a team player and sensitive manager would leave after just
a short time in a visible and critical job.

   Several faculty members noted that Traber's predecessor, Kelley, had had a
strained relationship with Penn president Rodin. They said they believe Traber
also found it difficult to work with her.

   "Look, Traber's been on the job five months," said one faculty member. "You
saw his opening statement of how proud he was to take the job. He was a rising
superstar. So why should the guy leave?"

   Martin said the meetings he attended with Rodin and Traber were "collegial
and professional."

   Other faculty members, including Rubin, found it credible that Traber had
simply gotten an offer that was too good to refuse.

   He has a strong background in clinical research, and at the University of
Michigan was a protege of Tachi Yamada, who will be chairman of research and
development at GlaxoSmithKline. When Yamada was named to the GlaxoSmithKline
post earlier this year, Traber said they continued a close association and had
dinner together about once a month.

   As the Penn system's chief executive, Traber was a welcome change from Kelley
for his courtesy and willingness to listen to others' ideas, said Elsa Ramsden,
immediate past president of the University of Pennsylvania chapter of the
American Association of University Professors.

   "Oh, what a loss," she said, on hearing of his departure.

   By the time Traber was appointed, the health system seemed to have absorbed
most of the shock of the belt-tightening measures instituted 15 months ago to
dig it out of the financial hole. After running up deficits of nearly $100
million in fiscal 1998 and nearly $200 million in 1999, the system is expected
to show an operating loss of about $20 million to $25 million in fiscal 2000,
which ended June 30.

   The University of Pennsylvania Health System includes the Hospital of the
University of Pennsylvania, Presbyterian Medical Center, Pennsylvania Hospital,
and Phoenixville Hospital; and a variety of affiliations with 24 community and
teaching hospitals, including Children's Hospital of Philadelphia.

   Andrea Knox's e-mail address is aknox@phillynews.com

   * Inquirer staff writer Karl Stark also contributed to this article.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO AND CHART

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             329 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    July 26, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 555 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME SUES TKT OVER DRUG ACCUSES BIOTECH FIRM OF VIOLATING ENZYME
REPLACEMENT PATENT

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   With both companies competing to be the first with a drug to treat a rare
metabolic disorder, Genzyme Corp. yesterday filed a patent infringement lawsuit
against Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. The suit claims TKT's proposed drug
violates a patent Genzyme licensed five years ago from Mount Sinai School of
Medicine in New York.

   The legal basis for Genzyme's action - announced after stock trading halted
yesterday - is comparable to the Amgen Inc. patent infringement case against
TKT, which is now before Judge William Young in US District Court in Boston in a
nonjury trial.

      "Patent rights need to be enforced when others do not respect those
rights," said Tom DesRosier, Genzyme's senior vice president and chief patent
counsel.

   He said the company's lawsuit against TKT was filed in US District Court in
Wilmington, Del.

   Genzyme's licensed patent, No. 5,356,804, is directed at the methods of
making alpha-galactosidase , the enzyme that is deficient in patients with
Fabry's disease, a rare disorder that causes severe pain and kidney failure. The
disease affects about 2,000 to 4,000 men worldwide.

   TKT also has developed the same enzyme replacement drug under the name
Replagal.  Last month Genzyme and TKT, both based in Cambridge, asked the US
Food and Drug Administration to approve their respective drugs, filing their
applications within days of each other.

   "We strongly believe that TKT's activities relating to Replagal do not
infringe the 804 patent and in addition the patent is not valid," said Dr.
Richard F. Selden, TKT president and chief executive, in a statement. "It is a
shame that Genzyme has chosen to compete based on a frivolous lawsuit rather
than on the merits of their product."

   Like Amgen, Genzyme is suing TKT over the method for making a drug using
mammalian cells. Genzyme uses mammalian Chinese hamster ovaries, or CHO cells,
to produce its drug, called Fabrazyme. TKT has not revealed how it makes
Replagal.

   Asked how he knew that TKT's Replagal violated the patent, DesRosier said
Genzyme has, over the past year, accumulated written reports from industry
analysts along with "discussions with people in the know that clearly support
this lawsuit." He said Genzyme does not know precisely how Replagal is made,
"but our patent coverage is broad enough for the manufacturing . . .  that we
and they use mammalian cells."

   With Replagal, TKT plans to develop a series of enzyme-replacement drugs
aimed at patients with rare genetic diseases. That is also Genzyme's strategy,
having created Ceredase and Cerezyme to treat Gaucher's disease, a rare disorder
that affects about 4,000 people worldwide. Last year Genzyme's Cerezyme sales
were $501.4 milion with Wall Street analysts estimating revenues reaching nearly
$580 million this year.

   Genzyme's case, however, is based on a single patent, in contrast to Amgen's
five patents that cover erythropoietin, or EPO, an anemia drug with $4 billion
in sales. In court, TKT maintains its plans to make EPO do not infringe on
Amgen's patents.

   "Once both companies asked the FDA for approval, TKT must have been expecting
Genzyme to sue them, even though unlike Amgen with its extensive patents,
Genzyme has a single patent," said William J. Tanner, vice president and
biotechnology analyst at SG Cowen in Boston.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2000


                             330 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 26, 2000 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 028

LENGTH: 353 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS in Brief; Terra chief may resign

BODY:

   The head of the Spanish telecommunications giant taking over Waltham-based
Lycos has reportedly reached a deal to resign his position.

   Juan Villalonga of Telefonica SA had been under investigation by Spanish
authorities since last month for possible insider trading violations.

   His company's Internet division, Terra Networks, reached an agreement in May
to acquire Internet portal Lycos in a deal worth $ 12.5 billion. Reports
indicate that Villalonga was offered the option of serving as chairman of Terra
until the acquisition is complete. - HERALD STAFF

   Biotech firms at odds

   Genzyme Corp. charged Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. yesterday with patent
infringement over Replagal, Transkaryotic's investigational enzyme replacement
therapy. Genzyme filed the suit in the U.S. District Court of Delaware. Both
companies are based in Cambridge.

   A Transkaryotic spokesman said officials deny the charge and don't believe
the patent is valid. - HERALD STAFF

   Fleet to buy Meehan

   FleetBoston Financial Corp. announced yesterday that it will buy M.J. Meehan
& Co., making its New York Stock Exchange floor trading unit the biggest based
on the number of stocks handled. Meehan is a specialist company, meaning it
handles dealings in specific stocks, matching trade orders and serving as buyer
or seller of last resort. "This strengthens our hand on the New York Stock
Exchange," said Bradford Warner, FleetBoston's vice chairman. - HERALD STAFF

   Matros' job ends

   The chief executive officer of e-business software maker Open Market Inc.
announced his resignation yesterday as the Burlington company saw its
second-quarter earnings suffer. Net income rose to $ 4.7 million, or 10 cents a
share, from a loss of $ 3.7million, or 9 cents a share, in the same quarter of
1999.

   But if not for money earned by selling its interest in SightPath Inc. to
Cisco Systems earlier this year, the company would have lost $ 7.4 million, or
16 cents a share. The company said CEO Ron Matros would step down immediately.
Board member Harland LaVigne will serve as interim president and CEO until a
replacement can be hired.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2000


                             331 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 26, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 481 words

HEADLINE: Genzyme Files Patent Infringement Suit Against Transkaryotic

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   A second biotechnology giant, the Genzyme Corporation, has filed a patent
infringement suit against Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., the upstart company
locked in a closely watched patent battle with Amgen Inc.

   Genzyme said yesterday that it had filed suit in United States District Court
in Wilmington, Del., accusing Transkaryotic, which is usually called TKT, of
infringing a patent covering the production of an enzyme to treat Fabry disease,
a rare inherited disorder.

    Transkaryotic and Genzyme, both based in Cambridge, Mass., are in a race to
be first to market with the enzyme, known as alpha-galactosidase. TKT applied
for marketing approval from the Food and Drug Administration on June 16 and
Genzyme followed a week later. If not blocked by the patent lawsuit, TKT's drug,
which it calls Replagal, is expected to be the company's first product.

   TKT has developed a technique for making biotechnology drugs that it says
avoids the patents held by industry giants. Instead of splicing the human gene
for a protein into bacteria or hamster cells, which is the conventional
approach, TKT turns on the inactive gene in human cells. In a trial already
under way in Boston, Amgen is trying to stop TKT from using this technique to
produce a version of Amgen's huge-selling anemia drug, erythropoietin.

   Yet it is not clear that TKT is using the controversial technique to produce
its drug for Fabry disease. The company has never said how it is making Replagal
and might be using more conventional recombinant DNA. But Genzyme said its
patent covers both methods.

   TKT said it did not infringe and it considered the Genzyme patent invalid.
"It is a shame that Genzyme has chosen to compete based on a frivolous lawsuit
rather than on the merits of their products," Dr. Richard F. Selden, TKT's chief
executive, said in a statement.

   People with Fabry disease have a deficiency of the alpha-galactosidase enzyme
and therefore cannot break down certain fats, which then accumulate in the
lining of the blood vessels in the kidney, heart and other organs. The condition
can cause pain, numbness, kidney failure and heart disease. Death typically
occurs about age 40.

   Genzyme estimates that only 2,000 to 4,000 people suffer from the disease
worldwide. But even such a small number of patients can mean high revenue if
there is no competition and the drug price is high. Genzyme's leading product, a
drug called Cerezyme, which treats another rare inherited disorder called
Gaucher disease, has annual sales of about $500 million. Even though only 3,000
patients are taking the drug, each one is paying about $170,000 a year.

   The filing of the lawsuit was announced after the markets closed. Shares of
TKT fell $1.75, to $30.375. Shares of Genzyme General, the division of Genzyme
that is developing the Fabry drug, fell 85.9375 cents, to $68.3125.


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2000


                             332 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 26, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   AT&T Profit Gains 16%, But Revenue Growth Slows
AT&T posted a 16 percent increase in second-quarter profit, modestly exceeding
analysts' expectations, but the company's revenue growth continued to slow amid
deepening erosion in the consumer long-distance business.

   While some of the company's newer operations, including wireless, are
performing well, the shrinking of the consumer long-distance business makes it
tough for the company to show satisfactory growth.  Page C2.


   Compaq Earnings Meet Forecasts
Compaq Computer posted second-quarter earnings that met analysts' estimates, and
the company's executives forecast strong revenue growth in the second half of
the year. Compaq reported its results after the close of the market. Its shares
closed at $28.1875, up $1.5625. Compaq's results come after reports showed that
PC shipments rose less than forecast in the second quarter.  C7.

Stocks Rise, Led by Chip Makers
The main stock market gauges rose for the first time in three sessions, led by
solid gains in big semiconductor companies. The Dow Jones industrial average
rose 14.85 points, or 0.1 percent, to 10,699.97. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock
index gained 10.18 points, or 0.7 percent, to 1,474.47, and the Nasdaq composite
index increased 48 points, or 1.2 percent, to 4,029.57.  C8.

Amazon President Quits After a Year
Joseph Galli, the president and chief operating officer of Amazon.com, resigned
after a year to become president and chief executive of VerticalNet, an Internet
company that runs 56 Web sites devoted to specific industries.  C4.

U.S. to Take Steps on Steel Imports
The Clinton administration plans to take aggressive new steps to protect
domestic steel producers from import surges, speeding up its use of antidumping
measures and providing faster relief for companies and workers, according to a
report to be released today.  C2.

New Group to Focus on Web Privacy
Richard M. Smith, a software engineer who tracks how personal data is gathered
on the Internet, said that he would join forces with researchers at the Privacy
Center, a new group at the University of Denver that investigates privacy
concerns.  C4.

Nortel Posts 75% Increase in Profit
Nortel Networks said that demand for fiber optic equipment helped increase its
second-quarter operating profit by 75 percent, beating forecasts, and the
company raised sales and profit estimates for 2000 and 2001.  C19.

Transkaryotic Faces Another Suit
Genzyme has filed a patent infringement suit against Transkaryotic Therapies,
the upstart company that is already locked in a closely watched patent battle
with Amgen.  C6.

All Hail a Rich Niche: Taxis
"In niches, there are riches." That advice has helped Andrew Murstein focus on
the business he really understands: taxis. Actually, the focus began with his
grandfather, an immigrant who bought his first New York taxi medallion for $10.
In the 1970's, the new Murstein niche was a loan business, to help immigrants
get into the taxi business. Now, as president of Medallion Financial, Andrew
Murstein continues to try to identify niches where immigrants are active and
banks are not. The Boss.  C5.

A School for Hard Hearts, Sort Of
Corporate volunteerism has been increasing since the early 90's. But advocacy
groups say it is rare to find a program as intensive as that devised by United
Parcel for community service by its managers. Management.  C5.

Consumer Confidence Rose in July
The Conference Board said its Consumer Confidence Index increased to 141.7 in
July, up from 139.2 last month but well below the record of 144.7 in January and
May.  C19.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials -- 10,699.97 up 14.85
Nasdaq composite -- 4,029.57 up 48.00
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 5.81% Unch.
The euro -- $0.9385 up 0.0058
The dollar -- 109.09 yen up 0.32

Graph tracks Compaq share price since Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 2000


                             333 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     JULY 26, 2000 Wednesday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: CITY & REGION; Pg. B03

LENGTH: 500 words

HEADLINE: JEFFERSON RESEARCHER AGREES TO SETTLEMENT DR. LINGXUN DUAN IS BARRED
FROM FEDERALLY FUNDED STUDY FOR 2 YEARS. HE WAS ACCUSED OF MISCONDUCT IN AIDS
WORK.

BYLINE: Marian Uhlman, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A former Thomas Jefferson University researcher has agreed not to accept
federal grants as part of a settlement with the government over alleged
scientific misconduct involving AIDS research.

   Denying any wrongdoing, Dr. Lingxun Duan last month signed the voluntary
settlement that bars him for two years from participating in any work involving
federally sponsored research or serving in any advisory role for the U.S. Public
Health Service, according to a government document.

   The case against Duan involved allegations that he had fabricated data
involving a novel gene therapy approach to combat HIV, the virus that causes
AIDS. After an internal Jefferson investigation, the case was referred to the
federal Office of Research Integrity, which is responsible for ensuring honesty
in scientific research and protecting whistle-blowers from retaliation.

   In explaining the settlement, the government said the Public Health Service
and Duan were "desirous of concluding this matter without further expense of
time and other resources." Chris Pascal, the acting director of the federal
office, said the settlement ended the government's investigation of the case.

   Duan could not be reached for comment.

   "This agreement contains no admission of fault or wrongdoing and there are no
findings of scientific misconduct, which is consistent with the findings of the
university's own internal investigation committee," Jefferson said in a
statement.

   The case was brought to the government's attention by a postdoctoral fellow
at Jefferson who had raised questions about the research.

   In May, the whistle-blower, who was fired, was awarded $90,000 as part of a
combined $2.6 million that the university agreed to pay the federal government
to settle two civil cases - the AIDS project and a separate government-sponsored
leukemia study. (Prosecutors had alleged in the leukemia case - among other
points - that the principal investigator had been in Italy during most of the
time covered by the grants.)

   Jefferson denied any scientific misconduct or misuse of federal funding in
the combined settlement.

   The AIDS research, which was overseen day to day by Duan, involved attempts
to use a gene to trigger antibodies against an important protein produced by
HIV. In theory, the antibodies were supposed to bind to that protein and prevent
any virus that had invaded the cells from reproducing.

   Jefferson scientists reported in medical journals that the approach
effectively had stopped the reproducing of HIV in cell culture.

   The university has since submitted corrections to the journals. In last
month's agreement with the government, Duan contended that some of his original
data were missing.

   Jefferson has denied any misuse of research funds. In a statement issued in
May, the university said the gene-therapy research was "validated and
reconfirmed by numerous laboratories outside of Jefferson."

   Marian Uhlman's e-mail address is marian.uhlman@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             334 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 26, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1954 words

HEADLINE: Science on a small scale; Tiny fish give larger-than-life insight into
human genetics

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Blond fish and stripeless fish, crinkle-finned and gutless fish.

   Bubble brained, malformed-eared and fish with snouts all squished

   Brave fish that stay put when their container glass is tapped, and

   Fish that swim in circles or whose eyes are patchy black.

   No, these fish aren't the characters in a rhyme by Dr. Seuss, but the results
of experiments conducted at the zebrafish lab at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in Cambridge.

   Here, inside an ordinary red brick building, developmental biologist Nancy
Hopkins has assembled what looks like a pet store overrun with tiny silver
creatures.

   She calls it her fish farm, or "The Fish Ritz," for these guppylike fish
receive a great deal of special attention.

   Scientists say this lab, and many like it around the world, are revealing
astonishing clues about the puzzle of the human genome, whose 3-billion-letter
alphabet was unveiled last month.

   "The timing is now perfect," Hopkins said.  "With the unfolding of the human
genome project, we will soon have a list of genes.  But the challenge for
geneticists is to define the role of each one."

   And, Hopkins said, there's very good reason to believe that "many of these
genes are used in the development of the human embryo, and for the same
purpose." After all, fish and humans have common ancestors some 420 million
years ago and the zebrafish and the human are believed to have about the same
number of genes.

   Engineers often learn how something works by taking it apart, and scientists
are no different.  Using chemicals or viruses, they can chop up an animal's
genetic sequence in its embryo stage, without harming its basic ability to
develop.  What sort of mutant will be formed depends on what parts of the
sequence are disrupted.

   "What we are trying to do is build a construction kit for a baby fish,"
Hopkins says, with her slight British inflection inherited from her grandmother,
who took care of her as a child.  "We're doing it by taking away one gene at a
time to see just what happens.  What kind of an effect do we get?"

   With postdoctoral student Adam Amsterdam and others in her lab, Hopkins has
discovered and cloned 90 of some 2,400 genes necessary to make a normal baby
fish.  By the end of next year, she hopes to have 300.

   And she has done this largely by generating mutant fish.

   Every week, she said, she and her colleagues "are amazed" when two or three
new types of mutant fish emerge, revealing new bits of information about the
genetic sequence responsible for cell formation, organ development and, in some
cases, behaviors such as the startle response or fish fear.

   "It's astounding.  It's freaky," she said as she listed the variety of
mutants in her collection: fish with dysfunctional livers, poor pigmentation,
defective eyes, deformed jaws or weak cartilage.

   First fish

   The 1 1/2 -inch zebrafish arrived in the United States from the tropical
rivers of India decades ago as a decorative inhabitant of home aquariums.  But
it wasn't considered a candidate for genetic research until the early 1970s,
when the late geneticist George Streisinger looked in a pet store for a good
vertebrate to use in experiments.

   Streisinger wanted an animal that procreated quickly, voluminously and
cheaply; that excludes rodents, snakes, salamanders and frogs.  The proprietor
suggested zebrafish because they lay hundreds of eggs every few weeks and are
extremely hardy, surviving assaults from neglect or tank pollution better than
most other aquarium fish.

   The zebrafish embryo not only lives not only outside the mother but is
transparent, so genetic changes affecting development are immediately
noticeable.

   Streisinger bought a lot of fish, took them back to his lab and spawned a new
era of genetics research.

   Historically, geneticists have used chemicals to disrupt genetic sequences in
sperm of laboratory animals, usually the common housefly Drosophilia or the worm
C. elegans.  Some, but not all, progeny will carry mutations, which may be seen
when descendants inherit two copies of the gene, one from both mother and
father.

   These chemically induced mutations can eventually lead scientists to the
defective gene culprit, but it's a time-consuming and labor-intensive process.

   Hopkins had a better idea.  A decade ago, she read about the work of UCSD's
Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a gene therapy researcher.  He had found a way to alter
a harmless mouse virus so that it could infect a wide variety of cells.

   Drawing on that finding, Hopkins decided to see if injecting Friedmann's
"pseudotype" virus into zebrafish embryos might cause the development of random
mutations in the fish germline.  If so, it would be much better than subjecting
the fish to chemicals.  The longer viral sequence can be used as a tag that
makes finding the mutated gene a lot easier.

   Last year, after her lab had successfully cloned some 50 genes, Hopkins
realized with certainty that her strategy worked.

   After the virus is inserted in the fish embryo, DNA analysis of the newborn's
fin clippings determine which fish have received the most viral inserts.  And
these fish are allowed to mate at random.

   By the third generation, about one-fourth of the offspring will have
inherited a copy of the mutation from both parents and will display that in an
obvious defect, such as a malformed eye or a misshaped snout.

   "Getting a mutant fish is great," Hopkins said, "because it tells you that
there exists a gene that in a normal embryo causes the eye, heart or whatever to
form normally."

   Knowing the sequence of that tag makes it easier to find that gene and clone
it, so that you can be sure it is the responsible gene, Hopkins said.

   "Of course it takes a lot of fish tanks," Hopkins says with a wry smile,
noting that the number of fish needed to generate this research is in the
hundreds of thousands.

   "But I have a big family album with pictures of a lot of mutant fish."

   In fact, she has identified more than 200 mutants, that display unique
abnormalities, and expects to have 800 by the end of next year.

   Not-so-close cousins

   What geneticists now realize is how much alike the zebrafish is to the human,
said Monte Westerfield, director of the Zebrafish International Resource Center
and ZFIN, a repository of genetic information about the zebrafish based at the
University of Oregon in Eugene.

   "It's a major discovery.  There's a remarkably high degree of conservation
between the human and zebrafish genomes, not only in terms of genes and
structures of genes, but in their organization along their chromosomes," he
said.

   Westerfield, Hopkins and other researchers said that the zebrafish's
transparent embryo is a critically important asset.  Even subtle changes in the
formative brain, blood system, cartilage, liver and gut can be discerned as
early as the first 24 hours of life.

   Hopkins has found four genes that cause multiple defects in the zebrafish
ear.  One appears to be responsible for formation of bonelike structures called
otoliths in the inner ear that help the fish tell up from down.

   Other identified genes regulate size, shape and function of fins.  Yet
another appears to influence how often a fish's tail flips back and forth.

   Hopkins' team is going further with some genes, re-inserting the normal gene
and correcting the problem, much like experimental gene therapy for some human
diseases.  With one zebrafish mutant that lacks photo receptor cells in the eye,
Hopkins has corrected the defect by inserting the correct gene at the fish's
earliest embryonic stage.

   "You can't make a perfect fish again, but you can restore it partially, and
if you get it back into the germline, you can restore the fish completely," she
said.  Also in Boston, Dr. Mark Fishman, a cardiologist and director of the
federally funded zebrafish lab at Massachusetts General Hospital, has focused on
similarities in genes that regulate the heart in both the zebrafish and the
human.

   "We have mutations that are exact mimics of complex human diseases such as
heart failure," he said.

   "What is truly amazing is that the development of the human is not that
distinct from the development of the mouse or the bird or the fish," Fishman
said.  "And what we're finding is that if a gene is needed to make a heart or a
blood cell in a human, you can count on it being used in the same way in a
zebrafish."

   The fish has been a rewarding model for the study of the cardiovascular
system because it can live for one or two days without a functional heart,
giving researchers more time to see how the mutations are manifested.

   Another advantage is the fishes' ability to survive as a haploid for a week,
which means that it can be genetically engineered to inherit only the genes from
the mother instead of from both parents.

   In the last five years, increasing numbers of researchers are turning to the
zebrafish.  At La Jolla's Salk Institute, embryologist Juan Carlos Izpisua
Belmonte hopes to have the first of his fish tanks installed later this month.

   Belmonte studies developmental processes of bone and cartilage.  In recent
experiments, Belmonte also has used the zebrafish to identify genes that dictate
why the heart is normally on the left side of the body, and certain aspects
about the asymmetry of parts of the brain.

   Now that word has filtered out about his project, he said, "it seems,
everyone is interested, and I have requests for collaborations from many
researchers."

   In the zebrafish lab at the University of California San Francisco, Didier
Stanier is focusing just on genes that make the zebrafish's heart, blood vessels
and endoderm, cells that eventually form the animal's liver.

   By chemically inducing mutations in zebrafish sperm, neuroscientist Wolfgang
Liedtke at Rockefeller University in New York identified mutant zebrafish
offspring with eating disorders.

   Liedtke now is in pursuit of the responsible gene and suspects that it is
similar to the gene that makes leptin, a protein that regulates energy
metabolism and which is deficient in obese lab mice.

   Up and going

   Hopkins struggled for several years to attract a major grant to develop her
virus mutation strategy, but she found little interest until the mid '90s when
the pharmaceutical company Amgen Inc. provided some support.  Two years ago, the
Thousand Oaks company agreed to fund 60 percent of her research.

   Amgen enjoys exclusive rights to patent her findings for six months after
each discovered gene.

   "We see the zebrafish as a workable model system," said Amgen senior
scientist Robert Bosselman.  "The hope is that some of these genes will be
useful in developing models in human disease and, perhaps, for genes that can be
used therapeutically."

   If anybody can do that, he said, Hopkins can.  "She's scaled up her method to
the point where she's cloned more zebrafish genes and identified more vertebrate
genes and their developmental role than all the other zebrafish labs combined."

   Hopkins said her relationship with Amgen, while not ideal, has not caused her
problems with her scientific peers who want unimpeded access to new science.
Amgen has never denied her the ability to publish or publicly discuss her
findings, she said.

   Hopkins said she is relieved that her great scientific gamble has finally
paid off, and that geneticists around the world now share her excitement.
Zebrafish researchers say there is talk at the Sanger Institute in Cambridge,
England, of launching a project to sequence the entire zebrafish genome, which
will make Hopkins' work easier.

   "I now have confidence we will understand this genome in our lifetime," says
Hopkins.  "The fish and the human are amazingly similar.  That Darwin was really
on to something!"


GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; 1,2,3,4,5. Nancy Hopkins / Massachusetts Institute of
Technology photos 6. SOURCE: Nancy Hopkins, MIT biology faculty | NEW YORK TIMES
NEWS SERVICE; 1. In her lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
researcher Nancy Hopkins uses zebrafish to identify many of the 2,400 genes
necessary to make a normal baby fish. Hopkins has created hundreds of mutant
families, each of which has a defect in one specific gene. 2,3. A 4-day-old
zebrafish, shown from the top of the head, has two normal black eyes (top). But
the fish at the bottom shows the eye disintegrating. The defect is easily seen
because fish embryos are transparent and show development at every stage. 4,5. A
normal zebrafish heart (top) beats regularly in a 4-day-old zebrafish, shown
here from a side view. The fish at bottom is developing an enlarged heart that
appears as a pouch below and to the right of the eye. The abnormal heart pumps
irregularly. 6. Construction kit for a mutant zebrafish (E-4)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2000


                             335 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 26, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-1

LENGTH: 1932 words

HEADLINE: Science on a small scale;
Tiny fish give larger-than-life insight into human genetics

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Blond fish and stripeless fish, crinkle-finned and gutless fish. Bubble
brained, malformed-eared and fish with snouts all squished Brave fish that stay
put when their container glass is tapped, and Fish that swim in circles or whose
eyes are patchy black. No, these fish aren't the characters in a rhyme by Dr.
Seuss, but the results of experiments conducted at the zebrafish lab at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge. Here, inside an ordinary red
brick building, developmental biologist Nancy Hopkins has assembled what looks
like a pet store overrun with tiny silver creatures. She calls it her fish farm,
or "The Fish Ritz," for these guppylike fish receive a great deal of special
attention. Scientists say this lab, and many like it around the world, are
revealing astonishing clues about the puzzle of the human genome, whose
3-billion-letter alphabet was unveiled last month. "The timing is now perfect,"
Hopkins said.

   "With the unfolding of the human genome project, we will soon have a list of
genes.

   But the challenge for geneticists is to define the role of each one." And,
Hopkins said, there's very good reason to believe that "many of these genes are
used in the development of the human embryo, and for the same purpose."

   After all, fish and humans have common ancestors some 420 million years ago
and the zebrafish and the human are believed to have about the same number of
genes. Engineers often learn how something works by taking it apart, and
scientists are no different.

   Using chemicals or viruses, they can chop up an animal's genetic sequence in
its embryo stage, without harming its basic ability to develop.

   What sort of mutant will be formed depends on what parts of the sequence are
disrupted. "What we are trying to do is build a construction kit for a baby
fish," Hopkins says, with her slight British inflection inherited from her
grandmother, who took care of her as a child.

   "We're doing it by taking away one gene at a time to see just what happens.

   What kind of an effect do we get?" With postdoctoral student Adam Amsterdam
and others in her lab, Hopkins has discovered and cloned 90 of some 2,400 genes
necessary to make a normal baby fish.

   By the end of next year, she hopes to have 300. And she has done this largely
by generating mutant fish. Every week, she said, she and her colleagues "are
amazed" when two or three new types of mutant fish emerge, revealing new bits of
information about the genetic sequence responsible for cell formation, organ
development and, in some cases, behaviors such as the startle response or fish
fear. "It's astounding.

   It's freaky," she said as she listed the variety of mutants in her
collection: fish with dysfunctional livers, poor pigmentation, defective eyes,
deformed jaws or weak cartilage. First fish The 1 1/2 -inch zebrafish arrived in
the United States from the tropical rivers of India decades ago as a decorative
inhabitant of home aquariums. But it wasn't considered a candidate for genetic
research until the early 1970s, when the late geneticist George Streisinger
looked in a pet store for a good vertebrate to use in experiments. Streisinger
wanted an animal that procreated quickly, voluminously and cheaply; that
excludes rodents, snakes, salamanders and frogs.

   The proprietor suggested zebrafish because they lay hundreds of eggs every
few weeks and are extremely hardy, surviving assaults from neglect or tank
pollution better than most other aquarium fish. The zebrafish embryo not only
lives not only outside the mother but is transparent, so genetic changes
affecting development are immediately noticeable. Streisinger bought a lot of
fish, took them back to his lab and spawned a new era of genetics research.
Historically, geneticists have used chemicals to disrupt genetic sequences in
sperm of laboratory animals, usually the common housefly Drosophilia or the worm
C. elegans.

   Some, but not all, progeny will carry mutations, which may be seen when
descendants inherit two copies of the gene, one from both mother and father.
These chemically induced mutations can eventually lead scientists to the
defective gene culprit, but it's a time-consuming and labor-intensive process.
Hopkins had a better idea.

   A decade ago, she read about the work of UCSD's Dr. Theodore Friedmann, a
gene therapy researcher.

   He had found a way to alter a harmless mouse virus so that it could infect a
wide variety of cells. Drawing on that finding, Hopkins decided to see if
injecting Friedmann's "pseudotype" virus into zebrafish embryos might cause the
development of random mutations in the fish germline.

   If so, it would be much better than subjecting the fish to chemicals.

   The longer viral sequence can be used as a tag that makes finding the mutated
gene a lot easier. Last year, after her lab had successfully cloned some 50
genes, Hopkins realized with certainty that her strategy worked. After the virus
is inserted in the fish embryo, DNA analysis of the newborn's fin clippings
determine which fish have received the most viral inserts.

   And these fish are allowed to mate at random. By the third generation, about
one-fourth of the offspring will have inherited a copy of the mutation from both
parents and will display that in an obvious defect, such as a malformed eye or a
misshaped snout. "Getting a mutant fish is great," Hopkins said, "because it
tells you that there exists a gene that in a normal embryo causes the eye, heart
or whatever to form normally." Knowing the sequence of that tag makes it easier
to find that gene and clone it, so that you can be sure it is the responsible
gene, Hopkins said. "Of course it takes a lot of fish tanks," Hopkins says with
a wry smile, noting that the number of fish needed to generate this research is
in the hundreds of thousands. "But I have a big family album with pictures of a
lot of mutant fish." In fact, she has identified more than 200 mutants, that
display unique abnormalities, and expects to have 800 by the end of next year.
Not-so-close cousins What geneticists now realize is how much alike the
zebrafish is to the human, said Monte Westerfield, director of the Zebrafish
International Resource Center and ZFIN, a repository of genetic information
about the zebrafish based at the University of Oregon in Eugene. "It's a major
discovery.

   There's a remarkably high degree of conservation between the human and
zebrafish genomes, not only in terms of genes and structures of genes, but in
their organization along their chromosomes," he said. Westerfield, Hopkins and
other researchers said that the zebrafish's transparent embryo is a critically
important asset.

   Even subtle changes in the formative brain, blood system, cartilage, liver
and gut can be discerned as early as the first 24 hours of life. Hopkins has
found four genes that cause multiple defects in the zebrafish ear.

   One appears to be responsible for formation of bonelike structures called
otoliths in the inner ear that help the fish tell up from down. Other identified
genes regulate size, shape and function of fins.

   Yet another appears to influence how often a fish's tail flips back and
forth. Hopkins' team is going further with some genes, re-inserting the normal
gene and correcting the problem, much like experimental gene therapy for some
human diseases.

   With one zebrafish mutant that lacks photo receptor cells in the eye, Hopkins
has corrected the defect by inserting the correct gene at the fish's earliest
embryonic stage. "You can't make a perfect fish again, but you can restore it
partially, and if you get it back into the germline, you can restore the fish
completely," she said.

   Also in Boston, Dr. Mark Fishman, a cardiologist and director of the
federally funded zebrafish lab at Massachusetts General Hospital, has focused on
similarities in genes that regulate the heart in both the zebrafish and the
human. "We have mutations that are exact mimics of complex human diseases such
as heart failure," he said. "What is truly amazing is that the development of
the human is not that distinct from the development of the mouse or the bird or
the fish," Fishman said.

   "And what we're finding is that if a gene is needed to make a heart or a
blood cell in a human, you can count on it being used in the same way in a
zebrafish." The fish has been a rewarding model for the study of the
cardiovascular system because it can live for one or two days without a
functional heart, giving researchers more time to see how the mutations are
manifested. Another advantage is the fishes' ability to survive as a haploid for
a week, which means that it can be genetically engineered to inherit only the
genes from the mother instead of from both parents. In the last five years,
increasing numbers of researchers are turning to the zebrafish.

   At La Jolla's Salk Institute, embryologist Juan Carlos Izpisua Belmonte hopes
to have the first of his fish tanks installed later this month. Belmonte studies
developmental processes of bone and cartilage.

   In recent experiments, Belmonte also has used the zebrafish to identify genes
that dictate why the heart is normally on the left side of the body, and certain
aspects about the asymmetry of parts of the brain. Now that word has filtered
out about his project, he said, "it seems, everyone is interested, and I have
requests for collaborations from many researchers." In the zebrafish lab at the
University of California San Francisco, Didier Stanier is focusing just on genes
that make the zebrafish's heart, blood vessels and endoderm, cells that
eventually form the animal's liver. By chemically inducing mutations in
zebrafish sperm, neuroscientist Wolfgang Liedtke at Rockefeller University in
New York identified mutant zebrafish offspring with eating disorders. Liedtke
now is in pursuit of the responsible gene and suspects that it is similar to the
gene that makes leptin, a protein that regulates energy metabolism and which is
deficient in obese lab mice. Up and going Hopkins struggled for several years to
attract a major grant to develop her virus mutation strategy, but she found
little interest until the mid '90s when the pharmaceutical company Amgen Inc.
provided some support.

   Two years ago, the Thousand Oaks company agreed to fund 60 percent of her
research. Amgen enjoys exclusive rights to patent her findings for six months
after each discovered gene. "We see the zebrafish as a workable model system,"
said Amgen senior scientist Robert Bosselman.

   "The hope is that some of these genes will be useful in developing models in
human disease and, perhaps, for genes that can be used therapeutically." If
anybody can do that, he said, Hopkins can.

   "She's scaled up her method to the point where she's cloned more zebrafish
genes and identified more vertebrate genes and their developmental role than all
the other zebrafish labs combined." Hopkins said her relationship with Amgen,
while not ideal, has not caused her problems with her scientific peers who want
unimpeded access to new science.

   Amgen has never denied her the ability to publish or publicly discuss her
findings, she said. Hopkins said she is relieved that her great scientific
gamble has finally paid off, and that geneticists around the world now share her
excitement. Zebrafish researchers say there is talk at the Sanger Institute in
Cambridge, England, of launching a project to sequence the entire zebrafish
genome, which will make Hopkins' work easier. "I now have confidence we will
understand this genome in our lifetime," says Hopkins.

   "The fish and the human are amazingly similar.

   That Darwin was really on to something!"

GRAPHIC: 5 PICS; CAPTIONS: 1. In her lab at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, researcher Nancy Hopkins uses zebrafish to identify many of the
2,400 genes necessary to make a normal baby fish. Hopkins has created hundreds
of mutant families, each of which has a defect in one specific gene. 2,3. A
4-day-old zebrafish, shown from the top of the head, has two normal black eyes
(top). But the fish at the bottom shows the eye disintegrating. The defect is
easily seen because fish embryos are transparent and show development at every
stage. 4,5. A normal zebrafish heart (top) beats regularly in a 4-day-old
zebrafish, shown here from a side view. The fish at bottom is developing an
enlarged heart that appears as a pouch below and to the right of the eye. The
abnormal heart pumps irregularly. 6. Construction kit for a mutant zebrafish
(E-4); PHOTOBY: 1,2,3,4,5. Nancy Hopkins / Massachusetts Institute of Technology
photos 6. SOURCE: Nancy Hopkins, MIT biology faculty | NEW YORK TIMES NEWS
SERVICE

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             336 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                      July 25, 2000 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: HEALTH&;FITNESS; How you walk can affect how you feel, according to new
book.Menopause marks a great beginning for some women. A web site is looking for
women who can testify about its benefits.Florsheim's MagneForce shoes boast
built-in magnetic   insoles.Sports-related injuries have increased among female
baby boomers in the last decade.Strawberries are a great source of folate and
may reveal something about your personality.; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: HealthNews

BYLINE: Compiled Lynn Waldsmith

BODY:

   Fitness

   Boomeritis on the rise among women

   Keeping active is the key to looking and feeling young, but apparently many
women are over-doing it. According to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety
Commission, sports-related injuries among women in age 35 to 54 have increased
42 percent in the past decade. Topping the list of sports with injuries:
bicycling, running, skiing and in-line skating. Most of the injuries are
preventable if women warm up, don't overexert themselves and take precautions
like wearing bike helmets and knee pads, the commission says.

   Cancer

   Learn more about your risk

   Do you know if you're at risk for cancer? Do you want to learn more about
ways to avoid facing cancer? Are you confused by the barrage of conflicting
information about cancer research? "My Answer to Cancer" is a free interactive
information program from the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute in Detroit
for anyone interested in learning more about the risk of cancer and what to do
about it. Call (877) KARMANOS (877-527-6266) or access www.myanswertocancer.org.

   Menopause

   Search for role models

   Healthy Woman Soy Menopause Supplement and the National Women's Health
Resource Center are looking for women to profile on the center's web site
(www.healthywomen.org). Women should explain in 200 words or less how menopause
has had a positive effect on their lives. Women can also nominate someone they
know. Those chosen will receive a gift certificate for a day of relaxation and
rejuvenation at a local spa. Entries should include name, address and phone
number. Fax entries, along with a photo, to (212) 355-6318 or e-mail them to
healthywoman@mahercomm.com.

   Books

   Try new approaches ot walking

   Most people don't realize there are many styles of walking, and some provide
greater benefits than others. In The Way of Walking (Contemporary Books,
$14.95), authors Dr. Jacques MoraMarco and Rick Benzel introduce a walking
fitness program that encompasses holistic exercise and emotional balance. It
explains the vitality walk for energy and life, the Tai Chi animal walks for
balance and body awareness, the Zen walk for inner harmony and Ba Gua circle
walks for longevity. Available at bookstores now.

   Alternatives

   Shoe packs sole power

   Florsheim's magnetic style has expanded. The men's footwear company pioneered
shoes with built-in magnets in 1998, when it introduced the MagneForce Golf
shoe. Now it has introduced the MagneForce Dress ($145) and Comfortech Walking
($120) lines. Magnets are increasingly being used as an alternative healing
method to increase circulation, range of motion, energy and vitality. Call (800)
261-1930 or check www.florsheim.com to learn more about the products.

   What they say about...

   Strawberries

   Not only are strawberries low in calories and fat -- only 45 calories and 0
grams of fat per serving -- they are also loaded with vitamins and minerals.
Strawberries are rich in folate, an important vitamin for women of child-bearing
age. The folate-rich fruit may also reduce the risk of heart disease.
Strawberries may even reveal something about your personality. According to the
California Strawberry Commission, people were asked to describe a person who
liked strawberries and a person who did not in a 1998 survey of U.S. households.
Strawberry lovers were described as health-conscious, happy, and fun-loving.
Someone who dislikes strawberries was described as sour, unhappy or boring. For
nutrition information and healthy recipes with strawberries, visit
www.calstrawberry.com

   Research

   Scientists attempt to grow teeth

   Biological, self-regenerated teeth may one day replace dentures and dental
implants. Scientists are investigating and cultivating ways to grow teeth, says
Mary MacDougall, Ph.D., a leading dental researcher at the University of Texas.
Work is also under way to identify genes in human diseases that affect tooth
number, shape and structure. Through targeted gene therapy, these studies are
expected to one day lead to clinical treatments to fight or prevent tooth decay
and other diseases.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             337 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 25, 2000, Tuesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B15

LENGTH: 802 words

HEADLINE: NOW THE REAL WORK BEGINS

BYLINE: Carl B. FeldbaumOPINION; VIEWPOINT; HUMAN GENOME PROJECT; DNA MAPPING;
HUMAN GENETICS; BIOTECHNOLOGY

BODY:


HUMAN GENOME

   After laboring more than a decade and spending billions of dollars,
scientists have constructed a rough draft of the more than 3 billion letters in
the human genome's chromosomes. This monumental accomplishment provides us with
a new encyclopedia, a molecular anatomy chart of the human condition.

   But if it were a marathon race, we would just be at the point of lacing up
our shoes. The hardest work is still ahead: describing our molecular physiology,
the functions of genes and proteins and how they interrelate.

   The biotechnology industry uses this genetic information to develop
innovative drugs and vaccines for our most life-threatening illnesses, such as
heart disease, various cancers and Alzheimer's. In the past 25 years, we have
created nearly 100 new medicines, many of them first-of-a-kind treatments, and
another 350 are in late-stage clinical trials. With a map of the human genome,
the next quarter century will be remarkably productive.

   Completion of the map is a significant milestone in our industry's mission to
improve human and animal health. It also exemplifies the power of our technology
and is certain to generate debate on many serious bioethical issues as well as
the direction of genetic research. The biotech industry encourages thorough
discussion of these issues in open forums. We already are dealing with some:
privacy, discrimination and intellectual property.

   The biotech industry has a long tradition of responsible behavior and respect
for concerns generated by its research.

   In the 1970s when recombinant DNA technology was invented, scientists called
for a moratorium on its use until the implications of the new technology could
be assessed and the guidelines for research established.

   The biotech industry was one of the first organizations to support a
voluntary moratorium on cloning human beings. It also imposed its own ban on
gene therapy research with germ line cells, those that pass genetic information
from generation to generation.

   On the issue of discrimination, we have argued that medical information,
including genetic data, should be protected against misuse by insurers,
employers, educators and police. Advances in genetic testing have brought this
issue to the fore. People must feel secure that their medical information will
not be abused. Otherwise, they will not take advantage of tests early in their
lives that could help them reduce the risk, as they age, of developing certain
diseases.

   Privacy is a related issue and one that demonstrates the dangers of
overreacting. Among the reasons genetic information should remain confidential,
of course, is to prevent misuse. But medical researchers also need access to
patient data to study diseases and develop new drugs to treat them. To achieve
this balance between privacy and research, we need national standards that
protect patient anonymity and permit researchers to keep working on new
therapies and cures.

   Intellectual property, in this case gene patenting, is an issue where a
little explanation goes a long way. Patents are not granted on the raw DNA
sequences of genes. A patent is awarded only if the applicant can describe a
gene's role in human health or other commercial application. And a patent has no
impact on academic researchers not engaged in commercial activity. Such
researchers are free to work without getting a license.

   But without patents, there would be no biotech industry and no innovative
drug development. Patents enable companies to sell their new treatments and
cures for a limited time free from competition. This gives them the opportunity
to earn the money they need to stay in business, pay their employees and
reinvest to develop more new drugs.

   We all have a stake in exploring thoroughly the bioethical issues raised by
the progress of biotechnology and genetic research. These discussions should be
a responsible search for ways this new technology can coexist with our social
and ethical traditions. Without public support, our industry cannot succeed in
its mission to improve our health.

   The Biotechnology Industry Organization and its more than 900 members adhere
to a Statement of Principles, adopted in 1997, for the ethical practice of
biotechnology. The rapid advance of genetic research demands more.

   We have initiated a project to encourage all companies to integrate bioethics
principles into their everyday business practices. Some already have by forming
bioethical advisory boards to evaluate research projects and hiring consultants
to conduct regular classes in bioethics for their employees.

   Biotechnology can greatly improve the quality of our lives, but we recognize
this new technology should be approached with an appropriate mixture of
enthusiasm, caution and humility.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2000


                             338 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                        July 24, 2000 Monday 2D EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E-01

LENGTH: 1085 words

HEADLINE: Fort Collins company takes lead in pet health

BYLINE: By John Aguilar, Special to The Denver Post,

BODY:

   Deep in a Colorado laboratory, Gary Silver and Scott Walmsley  use
microscopes and hand counters to track the number of dead  fleas that have
accumulated in a petri dish after being exposed to  a vaccine designed to kill
them.

   About 50 feet away, in a lab known as Flea World, rows of  glass tanks pulse
with leaping fleas and hatching flea pupae.  Nicki Hausser, a scientific
technician with Heska, a veterinary  health-products developer headquartered in
Fort Collins, is one of  the scientists who breeds the fleas with the sole
intent of  devising ways to most effectively exterminate them.

   'We're doing some very unique work in the flea control  business,' said
Robert Grieve, CEO of Heska, a Colorado-based  biotech firm.

   Heska is also attempting to map the genetic code of a flea.  While the
company's studies may not produce the flurry of global  press releases and
widespread back-slapping among the scientific  community that the near
completion of the human genome project  produced last month, its findings are
critical to its business.

   And its business is much more than simply ridding dogs and  cats of fleas.
The company is trying to firmly position itself in  the eyes of veterinarians
around the world as a critical player in  the $ 3 billion animal health
prescription products business.

   'We are very focused on the companion animal health market,'  Grieve said.
'Our future is limited to helping dogs, cats and, to  a lesser extent, horses.'

   Heska, with 375 employees worldwide and revenues of $ 52  million last year,
markets more than 30 products to vets. It  manufactures diagnostic equipment to
screen dogs for heartworm  disease, it produces vaccines in the form of eyedrops
for cats  with common viral infections, and it develops cancer and gene  therapy
treatments for pets. It scored one of its biggest  successes with the
development of a nasal mist vaccine that  combats a tenacious equine influenza.

   'They are a cutting-edge, new-concept company, and they are  ahead of the
competition,' said Tom Miller, a board member of the  Colorado Biotechnology
Association. 'But the competition has  better distribution capabilities, and it
has large marketing  forces out there already.'

   The competition includes pharmaceutical giants with animal  health divisions,
such as Pfizer, American Home Products, Bayer  and Novartis.

   Heska is partnering with the competition to reach consumers it  might not
otherwise have the ability to reach on its own.  Currently, it is teaming with
Ralston-Purina to bring to market a  cat food formula for diabetic cats.

   'We've carved out some areas where we're collaborating with  certain
strategic investors,' Grieve said. 'We have an ongoing  relationship with
Novartis.' Novartis owns 11 percent of Heska.

   Miller believes that Heska is going to need to expand its  business strategy
if it wants to survive in a tough marketplace.

   'What Heska needs to do is follow a pattern that is happening  in the
pharmaceutical industry and offer products directly to the  consumer as well as
the vets,' he said.

   Grieve said that his company already recognizes the power of  the consumer.

   'It's a very educated consumer these days. The vets are the  channels for our
sales, but the consumer is the one spending their  money on their pets, and they
influence the vets more than ever,'  he said.

   Recently, Heska began offering e-commerce solutions on its  Web site to vets
looking for more convenient ways of purchasing  equipment and medicines.

   In the end, Miller thinks the consolidation wave in the  industry will
eventually swallow Heska too.

   'In three to five years, it is likely that one of the big  boys will buy up
Heska,' Miller predicted.

   The name Heska, a Lakota word for white mountains, was chosen  to reflect the
company's home at the edge of the Rockies in Fort  Collins and its presence in
Europe near the Alps in Switzerland,  Grieve said. Heska has a third location in
Des Moines, Iowa, where  much of its manufacturing takes place.

   'The company started out with the notion of making parasite  vaccines,'
Grieve said.

   That was in California, the year was 1988, and the name of  the fledgling
company was Paravax. Grieve was a professor at CSU's  College of Veterinary
Medicine when he joined Paravax and became  chief scientific officer, one
employee out of a total of three. At  the time, the company was focused on
health research for  livestock, pets and people.

   The company relocated to Fort Collins in 1991, was renamed  Heska in 1995 and
went public in 1997. By 1998, Heska had hired  668 people and its operations
were spread across the globe. But by  the end of that year, an effort to reach
profitability prompted a  management shake-up, layoffs and a close examination
of the  company's focus and direction.

   'We pared back our expenses to be more in line with projected  revenues,'
Grieve said. The company hopes to make a profit for the  first time next year.

   Ron Hendrick, Heska's executive vice president and CFO, said  that operations
in Wisconsin, the U.K. and New York were either  sold or consolidated over the
past few years to sharpen Heska's  focus and lessen costs.

   'We've been doing a lot to refocus the business. We've  eliminated product
lines that have been unprofitable. We've been  getting rid of subsidiaries and
managing our expenses very  closely,' he said.

   Heska is primarily involved in the research and development  end of things at
this point, with 90 full-time scientists on  staff. But Hendrick pointed out
that the company is completely  vertically integrated, from research to
manufacturing to marketing  to sales.

   Grieve said that the companion animal health sector is  growing about 20
percent a year. With the baby boom generation  pampering its pets with specialty
toys, grooming sessions and  psychiatric sessions, he thinks that Heska is
serving this  human-pet niche at a good time.

   'Spending decisions are made by the consumer on an emotional  basis, unlike
with livestock, where the market swings back and  forth based on commodity
prices,' he said. 'It's about the  human-animal bond.'

   In a business like Heska's, animal testing is unavoidable.  Hendrick said
that the company tries to minimize its testing and  conduct it in a way that
least harms the test subjects.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Denver Post/John Epperson Heska CEO Robert Grieve says the
Fort Collins-based biotech company is 'very focused on the companion animal
health market.' Scientist Gary Silver separates male and female fleas in a Heska
laboratory. The company is using gene research to create more effective vaccines
and other products for animals.

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2000


                             339 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                      July 24, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Health; Part S; Page 2; View Desk

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: SAY 'AAAH';
 MEDIA MIX;
 THE PEAKS AND VALLEYS OF MEDICINE;
 THE RISE AND FALL OF MODERN MEDICINE; BY DR. JAMES LE FANU; CARROLL & GRAF; 426
PAGES, $26.

BYLINE: JANE E. ALLEN

BODY:


   In this intriguing but academic volume, Dr. James Le Fanu reviews the moments
in modern medicine that gave us longer, healthier lives, then argues that the
engine driving medical innovation is slowing down. The pattern, says this
British practitioner, is classic: In every field of human knowledge, there is a
Golden Age, "followed by a decline in creativity and new ideas."

   His Top 10 moments are, indeed, definitive and their stories exciting. The
discovery of penicillin in 1941 immediately saved lives and led to other
antibiotics. The innovation of open-heart surgery in 1955 made heart defects
survivable and paved the way for transplants. The 1984 discovery that bacteria
cause stomach ulcers revolutionized treatment of a condition formerly linked to
stress and a bad diet.

   But, Le Fanu writes, the pace of discovery slowed by the 1970s: Fewer doctors
gravitated to research, physicians over-relied on expensive tests and on
equipment that futilely prolonged some lives, and pharmaceutical companies came
up with fewer new drugs. He rightly observes that although manufacturers have
developed AIDS drugs and a hepatitis B vaccine, they mostly have generated
variations of existing antidepressants, anti-inflammatories and antibiotics,
while giving us lifestyle drugs like Viagra for impotence and Xenical for
obesity.

   Le Fanu says medicine's "fall" began in the 1980s, when experts looked to
epidemiological origins of disease, such as poor diet and lifestyle, and sought
answers in genetic manipulation.

   Despite unlimited promise, genetic engineering, genetic screening and gene
therapy have produced only slim benefits to date, he says. And although we're
told that eating meat and high-fat dairy products may be at the root of heart
disease and cancer, Le Fanu says it may very well be that such illnesses result
from still-unidentified bacteria or viruses, or even agents like the prions
behind mad cow disease.

   His criticism here is legitimate: Perhaps we're relying too heavily on the
fields of epidemiology and genetics to furnish answers to our toughest maladies.
We may not be able to rely on our past pace to eliminate cancer, AIDS and
Alzheimer's disease.

   In his somewhat simplistic conclusion, Le Fanu suggests Western society stop
putting a premium on progress "as an ideological necessity" and welcome progress
as it comes. He advocates a return to old-fashioned medicine in which doctors
exert their judgment, establish trusting relationships with patients and
recognize the practical limits of what medicine can achieve.

   That's all very well and good, but he doesn't address the reality of
results-oriented managed care that is too far gone for that to occur--or
results-oriented government funders wary of pouring taxpayer dollars into basic
research that may not yield major benefits for years.

   The biggest flaw in this book, however, is a plethora of inexcusable, sloppy
errors. For example, Le Fanu misspelled the names of two leading lights in heart
surgery: Dr. Walt Lillehei, the doctor who pioneered open-heart surgery at the
University of Minnesota (incorrectly identified by Le Fanu as the University of
Minneapolis), and Dr. Norman Shumway, a heart transplant surgeon at Stanford
University, mistakenly identified as Stamford University.

   Le Fanu, his researchers and editors should have caught these and others,
like misspelling Genentech, the company that produced genetically engineered
insulin. Such errors raise questions about where else Le Fanu's reporting might
have gone astray.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (no caption)

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2000


                             340 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                             July 23, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: NEWS - INSIGHT, Pg. 7B

LENGTH: 568 words

HEADLINE: DEMOCRACY CAN'T FUNCTION WITHOUT SCIENTIFIC LITERACY

BYLINE: Steve Rissing, For The Dispatch

BODY:


   Sputnik changed my life. That first satellite, launched by the Soviet Union
in 1957, intensified the scientific Cold War between the U.S.S.R. and the United
States. I, too, was launched in the 1950s, and I am a child of Sputnik and that
war.

   In high school, I studied a curriculum designed to recruit science majors
into college; it worked. In college, I received support from the National
Science Foundation to spend summers doing research; the system was intended to
recruit students into graduate programs in science, and it worked, too. In
graduate school, I was supported by an NSF fellowship and a similar postdoctoral
fellowship. I did well by Sputnik.

   Later this year, the Soviet space station Mir, another child of Sputnik, will
plunge to Earth in a crash like that suffered by the Soviet government that
launched them both. Science is neither totalitarian nor democratic. But
governments, especially democracies, require a scientifically literate public.

   Our greatest science-policy challenges today occur in biology, where cloning,
gene therapy, bioprospecting in Third World countries and DNA typing to identify
cancer risks (good for patients, even better for life-insurance companies) need
governmental support and regulation. Can our democratic institutions meet this
policy need?

   Maybe not, because biology today is taught reductionistically. Every college
biology text starts with the "scientific method'' and a promise to use the theme
of evolution; a picture of Darwin (one of three) and organisms (perhaps frogs)
follow. But in most subsequent sections, there is no science, no method, no
questioning, no alternative hypotheses, no evolution.

   Imagine Shakespeare or macroeconomics taught this way. The first chapter of a
literature text would speak of the bard's impact and include his picture (one of
three). The next section, "The Grammar of Literature,'' would " cover'' parts of
speech. In economics, the first chapter would speak boldly of international
trade. The next section, "Fundamentals of Currency,'' would " cover''
differences between dollars, yen, pounds and euros.

   This reductionistic fascination conceals (intentionally?) the major
organizing principle of biology. Better to blind students with DNA bases and the
amino acids they specify than to acknowledge that the near universality of this
code provides powerful support for descent from a common ancestor. Better to
memorize names of our bones than to acknowledge that these same bones exist in
frogs and fish. Better to memorize stages of meiosis than to acknowledge that
sexual reproduction makes sense only in light of natural selection.

   Reductionist biologists should get out of their inadvertent bed with anti-
evolutionists; ultimately, neither will enjoy the experience. We need good
science in our schools, even if it offends some. Evolution is the organizing
principle of biology. Every grade-school, high-school, college and graduate
student needs to know that -- as does every member of school boards and
Congress.

   Sputniks come and go; so do governments. Natural selection works on political
systems as well as biological ones. I'll think about that as Mir crashes into
history.

   Steve Rissing (Rissing.2@osu.edu) is a professor in the Department of
Evolution, Ecology and Organismal Biology at Ohio State University and director
of the university's Introductory Biology Program.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2000


                             341 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 July 23, 2000, Sunday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. B3

LENGTH: 752 words

HEADLINE: LET US NOT STAND IN THE WAY OF SCIENTIFIC PROGRESS

BYLINE: William A. PeckHUMAN GENOME PROJECT; SCIENTIFIC BREAKTHROUGH; SCIENCE;
ANNOUNCEMENT; GENETICS; DNA MAPPING SEQUENCE; GENES; HUMAN; GENETIC CODE;
BIOTECHNOLOGY; HUMAN GENE MAP

BODY:


GENETIC MAPPING

   WE are now at an early stage of a scientific revolution that promises
unimagined improvements in health and nutrition. A seminal contribution will be
the complete understanding of the human genome -- all of the DNA in our
chromosomes -- and the genomes of many simpler organisms. One field that will
use this information is biotechnology, the modification of living organisms to
obtain useful products and the use of biological products to benefit human kind.
But biotechnology is opposed by those who fear unintended consequences or
deliberate misuse. Of course, there are real risks in virtually all scientific
advances. But while it is important to understand and minimize such risks, it
would be tragic to unnecessarily delay scientific progress in a field that will
improve the human condition so dramatically.

   Biotechnology has already yielded great advances in medicine with no apparent
ill effects. Recombinant technology, the insertion of specific human genes into
bacteria, has enhanced the production of insulin and growth hormone used in
treating patients with diabetes mellitus and certain types of growth problems.
Moreover, human hormones produced by bacteria are safer and more effective than
those previously extracted from animal or human tissues. Genetically modified
animal cells already are the major sources of a lifesaving clotting factor used
to treat one form of hemophilia. Fears that bacteria modified by similar
technology might be used for evil purposes have been unfounded, thanks in part
to effective federal oversight embraced by the scientific community. Bacteria
resistant to available antibiotics have appeared not because of genetic
engineering but because of antibiotic overuse. Future treatment of bacterial
infections may well involve drugs that alter bacterial genes. Moreover,
scientists are modifying fruit flies, worms, fish, mice and other organisms to
better understand a wide range of diseases and to generate new approaches to
diagnosis, treatment and prevention. Also, studies with genetically modified
mice have provided an awesome storehouse of information about the roles of
specific genes and causes of disease.

   It now is possible to modify the genetic complement of human cells. Missing
or abnormal genes causing debilitating and fatal illnesses can be replaced with
normal genes, apparently curing the disease. This form of gene therapy recently
was used to correct the fundamental genetic abnormality in a patient with severe
combined immunodeficiency, which deprives the body of the ability to fight
infection. Gene therapy is in its infancy, and fatal complications have
occurred. But technological improvements on the horizon will permit its safe
application to a host of conditions stemming from defects in single or multiple
genes as well as the many diseases where genetic variations increase
susceptibility. Genetic programming of humans conjures up a host of fears as we
gain the ability to modify genes for human characteristics as opposed to disease
susceptibility. Objective oversight and regulation of gene therapy will be
required to protect society and those who volunteer for treatments.

   PLANT technology invokes the strongest opposition, despite its huge potential
to address the world's devastating hunger problem. Every day, more than 40,000
people die of starvation, principally in undeveloped countries, and millions
more suffer long-term effects of undernutrition. Most of the afflicted are
mothers and young children, and the susceptible population is growing. So
without effective action, we can anticipate a substantial increase in world
hunger. Biotechnology offers an opportunity to improve the food supply. Crops
can be genetically modified to be pest-, weed- and disease-resistant, to require
less rainfall or tolerate too much, to use vital nutrients more efficiently and
to provide high concentrations of vitamins. These scientific advances will not
in themselves solve the problem -- financial, organizational and educational
barriers to production, distribution and acceptance will have to be over come.
And genuine concerns about safety must be addressed. But unfounded scientific
fears and commercial competitive interests that skew public opinion should not
be allowed to impede scientific advances.

   Opportunities afforded by biotechnology will provide enormous benefits. Let
us understand its risks and ensure its safe and ethical application. Let us not
stand in the way of progress.

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2000


                             342 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     July 22, 2000, Saturday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 657 words

HEADLINE: TRANSKARYOTIC TAKES A HIT IN ITS PATENT TRIAL JUDGE, SEEKING MORE
EVIDENCE, STOPS SHORT OF RULING IN AMGEN'S FAVOR

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   US District Judge William Young yesterday narrowed the patent infringement
trial between Amgen Inc. and Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. by weakening TKT's
argument that Amgen's patents were invalid. Young ruled the Cambridge company
failed to prove that the discoveries and prior inventions found in its rival's
patents were widely known.

   The decision was hailed by some as a victory for Amgen. But Young stopped
short of making any of the findings on patent infringement that Amgen sought.

      "My gut tells me that if there's other evidence, I'd like to hear it,"
said Young, who will reconvene the trial next Friday and may recess the case
until Sept. 5 when Amgen continues its rebuttal arguments.

   Investors reacted to the judge's comments by boosting Amgen shares, which hit
a 52-week high closing at $78, up $3.9375, while TKT shares fell $3.875 to
$31.125 on heavy volume.

   The widely followed case has spotlighted the strength and breadth of biotech
patents.

   At issue is whether TKT is infringing on three key Amgen patents for
erythropoietin, the biggest-selling biotech drug - $4 billion in US sales last
year - that is universally used to stimulate red blood cell production. Amgen,
of Thousand Oaks, Calif., markets the drug under the brand name Epogen,
primarily to treat anemia for kidney dialysis patients. The drug is made by
cloning a human gene and splicing it into Chinese hamster ovary cells.

   TKT claims it has developed EPO using "gene activation" technology, which
turns on a "switch" inside human cells that activates the dormant gene
responsible for making EPO.

   Amgen maintains TKT is violating its patents, which TKT said are overly
broad, invalid, and were obtained fraudulently.

   Yesterday, Young presented his views using a whiteboard drawing with a big
circle and two smaller nonoverlapping circles to illustrate how he is grappling
with whether a commonality exists between Amgen's use of animal cells to make
EPO and TKT's approach using human cells.

   "He is asking whether Amgen's EPO patents teach how to make EPO using human
cells, and if they do there is infringement by TKT, but for the moment he is not
sure of this," said Kathy Williams, cochairperson of the patent law practice of
Palmer & Dodge, who has been attending the trial.

   Yesterday some courtroom observers and Wall Street analysts said Young's
ruling weakened TKT's case, but all agreed the small company has plenty of other
defenses.

   "The case is still wide open, although the odds still favor Amgen," said
Elise Wang, PaineWebber's senior biotechnology analyst. "Based on the things the
judge has said and the way he has led the discussions with witnesses, there is a
sense that he is leaning more to Amgen's side of things. But until he makes a
final ruling, it is still tough to handicap."

   But attorney Williams said Young's ruling did not impact TKT's infringement
and validity claims. She said Young has taken a conservative approach, throwing
out two of TKT's weakest issues - prior inventions and anticipation that others
in the scientific field knew of the technology.

   "This is not a big victory for Amgen," said Williams. Young "wants to hear
more evidence before he makes final decisions on validity and infringement, and
that includes hearing witnesses from the US Patent Office and from Amgen."

   TKT claims Amgen committed fraud on the Patent Office and, in an unusual
move, the firm plans to call Michael Boren, Amgen's inside patent counsel, who
in the 1980s drafted the company's patents. His revisions of the early drafts of
Amgen's patents, particularly on the use of the term "human EPO," and the role
of the Patent Office will be questioned.

   "TKT has gotten the judge to think about the right issues," said Dr. Jonas
Alsenas, a former ING Baring biotechnology analyst who is now portfolio manager
at ING Furman Selz Asset Management Co. Alsenas believes TKT will prevail in the
trial.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2000


                             343 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      July 22, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 019

LENGTH: 213 words

HEADLINE: Transkaryotic cannot dispute patents

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   A federal judge yesterday ruled that Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. could not
dispute Amgen Inc.'s Epogen patents, removing one leg of Transkaryotic's defense
against Amgen's patent infringement claims.

   Judge William Young postponed until at least September a final ruling in the
patent fight after limiting Transkaryotic's ability to claim Amgen's patents are
invalid. Despite the setback, Transkaryotic, of Cambridge, insisted it would
prevail.

   "We believe we have compelling arguments and we have confidence in our legal
position," said Transkaryotic spokeswoman Justine E. Koenigsberg "We believe
it's premature to draw conclusions as to the final outcome based on today's
ruling."

   Young hasn't decided whether Transkaryotic infringed on Amgen patents.
Arguments resume Friday.

   "My gut tells me that if there's other evidence, I'd like to hear it," Young
said.

   Amgen spokesman David Kaye said the judge "made some comments about his
thinking but. . . left the door open to change his mind."

   At stake in the fight is a share of the $ 4 billion U.S. market for the
anemia  therapy, often used by kidney dialysis patients.

   Transkaryotic shares fell $ 3.88 to $ 31.13, while Amgen shares rose $ 3.94
to $ 78 yesterday.

   Bloomberg News contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             344 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 Los Angeles Times

                               All Rights Reserved
                               Los Angeles Times



                     July 22, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: AMGEN WINS ROUND IN DISPUTE OVER EPOGEN ANEMIA DRUG

BYLINE: From Bloomberg News

DATELINE: BOSTON

BODY:


   Amgen Inc. won a preliminary victory Friday in its patent dispute with
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. over the best-selling anemia drug Epogen.

   U.S. District Judge William Young limited Transkaryotic's ability to claim
Amgen's patents are invalid. The judge postponed until at least September a
final ruling in the patent fight.

   Young reserved judgment on whether Transkaryotic infringed Amgen's patents
and certain other defenses. The judge has been trying the case without a jury
since May.

   "My gut tells me that if there's other evidence, I'd like to hear it," Young
said. He has said he will hold additional hearings in the case after Sept. 5.

   David Kaye, spokesman for Amgen, said, "From our point of view, the judge
made some comments about his thinking but issued no rulings. He left the door
open to change his mind."

   At stake is an estimated $ 4 billion in annual U.S. sales for Epogen. Amgen
developed a method for copying erythropoietin, which healthy kidneys make to
stimulate red blood cell production. The final product, Epogen, is given to
kidney dialysis patients, who often become anemic.

   Though Young didn't rule on whether Transkaryotic infringed Amgen's patents,
he knocked out two legal defenses the company had hoped to mount to prove them
invalid.

   Young did preserve the smaller company's bid to claim the patent examiner
based his decision to grant Amgen the patents on insufficient information. The
judge declined to rule on whether the descriptions of the technology in Amgen's
patents were too broad.

   Thousand Oaks-based Amgen, the world's biggest biotechnology company,
contends that Transkaryotic and Aventis predecessor Hoechst Marion Roussel Inc.
are infringing its patents by developing another version of erythropoietin.
Amgen sued Transkaryotic in 1997.

   The case, closely watched by patent attorneys, investors and drug makers,
could permit up-and-coming gene therapy companies such as Transkaryotic to more
easily challenge the dominance of established pharmaceutical makers such as
Amgen, patent experts say.

   Amgen argued that Transkaryotic should not be allowed to capitalize on its
success by misappropriating patented inventions.

   Amgen shares gained $ 3.94 to close at a record $ 78, while Cambridge,
Mass.-based Transkaryotic fell $ 3.88 to close at $ 31.13, both on Nasdaq.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             345 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

HEADLINE: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Judge Rejects One Argument In Biotechnology Patent Suit

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Amgen Inc. won another round yesterday in its patent infringement lawsuit
against Transkaryotic Therapies when the judge overseeing the case eliminated
some of the arguments Transkaryotic was trying to use in its defense. Still,
lawyers and analysts said the trial, which is expected to last at least until
September, was far from decided.

   Transkaryotic, which is known as TKT, wants to sell its own version of
erythropoietin, or EPO, the best-selling drug in the biotechnology industry. TKT
says it can make EPO, which is used to treat anemia, in a manner that does not
infringe Amgen's patents.

    As part of its defense, TKT is trying to persuade Judge William G. Young of
the Federal District Court in Boston to declare Amgen's patents invalid. One set
of arguments it made was that Amgen's claims did not warrant a patent because
they were obvious and anticipated by the previous work of others.

   The judge, who is trying the case without a jury, ruled against TKT on those
points yesterday. But he did not rule on whether TKT infringed any patents.

   Elise Wang, an analyst with PaineWebber, said the ruling weakened the
position of TKT and its partner, Aventis S.A., the big European drug company
that is also a defendant in the suit. Shares of TKT fell $3.875, to $31.125,
while Amgen rose $3.9375, to $78.

   Still, there are other grounds on which Amgen's patents can be declared
invalid. TKT's main argument is expected to be that the claims in Amgen's
patents are broad and seek to cover things beyond what Amgen invented. It is
also arguing that Amgen defrauded the Patent Office by withholding information.

   "They still have half a dozen defenses left," said Jonas V. Alsenas,
portfolio manager for ING Furman Selz Asset Management.

   EPO is a protein normally produced in kidneys that stimulates production of
red blood cells. Amgen makes it by cloning the human gene for EPO and putting it
in hamster ovary cells that are grown in culture. TKT puts DNA into human cells
grown in culture to turn on the EPO gene, which is usually dormant.

   The stakes are high because EPO accounts for roughly $2 billion in sales for
both Amgen and its licensee, Johnson & Johnson. The industry is watching closely
because if TKT prevails, it might also make versions of other drugs. However,
each such attempt by the company is likely to face a separate patent challenge.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             346 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Nasdaq Reverses Course As Focus Shifts to Earnings
The Nasdaq composite index fell 2.2 percent as investors returned their focus to
corporate earnings, a day after pleasant surprises from the chairman of the
Federal Reserve. The Nasdaq was off 90.11 points, to 4,094.45, while the Dow
dropped 110.31 points, or 1 percent, to 10,733.56. The Standard & Poor's
500-stock index slumped 15.38 points, or 1 percent, to 1,480.19.

   But bond prices rallied a little as hopes persist that new signs of slowing
consumer spending and economic growth will persuade Fed policy makers to leave
interest rates alone when they next meet, on Aug. 22.  Page C3.


   Ericsson Shares Fall on Warning
Investors hammered shares in Ericsson despite a healthy increase in
second-quarter earnings, as concern grew that the Swedish company might be
losing ground in the battle for control of the thriving market for wireless
phones. Shares of Ericsson fell $2.75, or 12 percent, to $19.8125, its steepest
one-day decline in more than a year and a half.  C2.

Amgen Wins Round in Patent Case
Amgen won another round in its patent infringement lawsuit against Transkaryotic
Therapies when the judge overseeing the case eliminated some of the arguments
Transkaryotic was trying to use in its defense. Still, lawyers and analysts said
the trial, which is expected to last at least until September, was far from
decided.  C2.

China Revamps Domestic Airlines
China announced a vast reorganization of domestic airlines, merging seven
carriers into the three largest to reduce the overlap of routes and half-empty
planes that have plagued the industry for years.  C2.

$1.8 Billion Bid for Mining Company
Making another move to expand its interests outside South Africa, Anglo
American, the world's biggest mining company, offered $1.8 billion to take over
the Australian iron miner North Ltd., outbidding Rio Tinto, which is expected to
sweeten its bid.  C2.

Insurance Analyst Switches Firms
Alice D. Schroeder, an insurance analyst who managed to charm Warren E. Buffett
and Maurice Greenberg, has left PaineWebber to join Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.
Ms. Schroeder, who has done perhaps the most detailed and exhaustive research of
any analyst on Mr. Buffett's company, Berkshire Hathaway, and Mr. Greenberg's,
American International Group, left PaineWebber on June 28. She began work at
Morgan Stanley the next day.  C4.

Profit at Kodak Meets Expectations
Eastman Kodak said second-quarter profit lose 4.5 percent, in line with Wall
Street Expectations, as it cut costs and sold more film. Profit from operations
increased to $513 million, or $1.65 a share, compared with net income of $491
million, or $1.52 a share, in the period a year earlier. Even so, the largest
photography company said its United States market share shrank this year.  C14.

Sears Profit Up on Card Revenue
Sears said that its second-quarter profit jumped 17 percent as credit card
revenue and appliance sales increased. But the company's chief executive, Arthur
C. Martinez, warned that clothing sales were not expected to pick up in the
second half, and shares of Sears fell $2, to $31.75.  C14.

Drkoop.com Receives Merger Offer
MillenniumHealth Communications, a health care news company, said that it had
offered to combine with Drkoop.com, the troubled provider of online
health-related services. The offer, whose terms were undisclosed, could ease the
uncertainty surrounding Drkoop.com, named after its co-founder, Dr. C. Everett
Koop, the former surgeon general.  C3.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials -- 10,733.56 down 110.31
Nasdaq composite -- 4,094.45 down 90.11
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 5.79% down 0.02
The euro -- $0.9369 up 0.0044
The dollar -- 108.88 up 1.21

Graph tracks the daily closing price of Nasdaq Composite since January 2000.

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             347 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            July 22, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 787 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   SAIC debt is upgraded

   Moody's Investors Service upgraded its rating on SAIC's senior unsecured
long-term debt to A3 from Baa1. Moody's says the San Diego company is
well-positioned to benefit from the accelerating global transformation of
telecommunications and Internet technologies.  The rating service added,
"Moody's does not anticipate that SAIC will retain its currently high level of
liquidity over the long-term, but will in time use a substantial portion on
acquisitions."

   Rogers Quinn wins Navy order

   The Navy awarded a $5.45 million order to Rogers Quinn Construction of
Bonsall for a Marine operations and command center at Camp Pendleton.  The work
is to be completed by November 2001.

   Agilent warns on earnings

   The price of Agilent Technologies shares fell 11 percent yesterday after the
San Jose company said its third-quarter earnings would fall well short of
analysts' expectations.  Agilent said it expects its earnings for the third
quarter ending July 31 will fall well below the consensus estimate of 35 cents
per share.  The company was unable to keep up with demand.  The Palo-Alto-based
spinoff of computer giant Hewlett-Packard said it will likely report quarterly
earnings of 18 to 22 cents per share on Aug. 17. In the year-ago period, Agilent
earned 36 cents per share.  Revenue will also likely fall below expectations,
the company said.  Its shares fell $24.75 to $48.25 on the New York Stock
Exchange.

   WORLD AND NATION

   Mortgage rates rise

   Mortgage rates rose this week.  In the previous two weeks, rates on 30-year
and 15-year mortgages had fallen.  The average interest rate on 30-year
fixed-rate mortgages climbed to 8.21 percent from 8.09 percent last week.
Fifteen-year mortgages rose to 7.93 percent from 7.80 percent.  On one-year
adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial rate of 7.32
percent, up from 7.22 percent.

   Luby's to revamp restaurants

   Luby's Inc., which operates more than 220 cafeteria-style restaurants in 10
states, said it plans to add drive-through windows to 37 of its restaurants as
part of its plan to remodel 50 restaurants in its next fiscal year, which starts
in September.  The San Antonio-based company said the drive-throughs will help
it take advantage of the trend of consumers getting more take-out food.  Also,
Luby's said it cut its quarterly dividend to 10 cents a share from 20 cents,
citing the need to invest capital in the business without increasing debt.

   Amgen wins round in court

   Amgen Inc. won a preliminary victory in its patent dispute with Transkaryotic
Therapies Inc. over the best-selling anemia drug Epogen.  A federal judge in
Boston limited Transkaryotic's ability to argue Amgen's patents are invalid.
The judge postponed until at least September a final ruling in the patent fight.
Transkaryotic plans to present further evidence related to the issues of
infringement, validity and enforceability of the patent, said Justine
Koenigsberg, spokeswoman for Transkaryotic.  At stake is a share of the market
for a drug with an estimated $4 billion in annual U.S. sales.

   MPower sets 3-for-2 split

   Phone and Internet service provider MPower Communications Corp. said it will
split its stock three shares for two.  The split will increase the number of
shares to 53 million.  The new shares will be issued Aug. 28 to shareholders of
record as of July 31. MPower shares fell 50 cents to $55.50 in Nasdaq trading.

   Tomkins sheds unit

   British diversified engineering group Tomkins PLC said it has sold its
European food manufacturing businesses, Ranks Hovis McDougall Europe, to Doughty
Hanson for $1.7 billion.  Doughty Hanson is a British private-equity firm.
Tomkins had said over a year ago that it planned to dispose of its food
businesses.  The company now plans to concentrate on its engineering businesses.

   Dutch firm wants out of Ireland

   Dutch telecommunications company Royal KPN said it will sell its $1.1 billion
stake in Irish phone company Eircom PLC in a bid to raise cash for a European
expansion.

   Steinway sets acquisition

   Steinway Musical Instruments Inc., the maker of Steinway pianos, said it
agreed to acquire privately held United Musical Instruments Holdings Inc. to
expand its product line.  Waltham, Mass.-based Steinway said the deal was worth
about $85 million, including the assumption of debt, but declined to provide a
more specific sale price.  United Musical of Elkhart, Ind., sells band and
string instruments.  It is expected to have $70 million in revenue this year.
Steinway, which had $304.6 million in sales last year, is the largest maker of
band instruments in the United States.


LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2000


                             348 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 22, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS ; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 766 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA SAIC debt is upgraded Moody's Investors Service
upgraded its rating on SAIC's senior unsecured long-term debt to A3 from Baa1.
Moody's says the San Diego company is well-positioned to benefit from the
accelerating global transformation of telecommunications and Internet
technologies.

   The rating service added, "Moody's does not anticipate that SAIC will retain
its currently high level of liquidity over the long-term, but will in time use a
substantial portion on acquisitions." Rogers Quinn wins Navy order The Navy
awarded a $5.45 million order to Rogers Quinn Construction of Bonsall for a
Marine operations and command center at Camp Pendleton.

   The work is to be completed by November 2001. Agilent warns on earnings The
price of Agilent Technologies shares fell 11 percent yesterday after the San
Jose company said its third-quarter earnings would fall well short of analysts'
expectations.

   Agilent said it expects its earnings for the third quarter ending July 31
will fall well below the consensus estimate of 35 cents per share.

   The company was unable to keep up with demand.

   The Palo-Alto-based spinoff of computer giant Hewlett-Packard said it will
likely report quarterly earnings of 18 to 22 cents per share on Aug. 17. In the
year-ago period, Agilent earned 36 cents per share.

   Revenue will also likely fall below expectations, the company said.

   Its shares fell $24.75 to $48.25 on the New York Stock Exchange. WORLD AND
NATION Mortgage rates rise Mortgage rates rose this week.

   In the previous two weeks, rates on 30-year and 15-year mortgages had fallen.

   The average interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages climbed to 8.21
percent from 8.09 percent last week. Fifteen-year mortgages rose to 7.93 percent
from 7.80 percent.

   On one-year adjustable-rate mortgages, lenders were asking an average initial
rate of 7.32 percent, up from 7.22 percent. Luby's to revamp restaurants Luby's
Inc., which operates more than 220 cafeteria-style restaurants in 10 states,
said it plans to add drive-through windows to 37 of its restaurants as part of
its plan to remodel 50 restaurants in its next fiscal year, which starts in
September.

   The San Antonio-based company said the drive-throughs will help it take
advantage of the trend of consumers getting more take-out food.

   Also, Luby's said it cut its quarterly dividend to 10 cents a share from 20
cents, citing the need to invest capital in the business without increasing
debt. Amgen wins round in court Amgen Inc. won a preliminary victory in its
patent dispute with Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. over the best-selling anemia
drug Epogen.

   A federal judge in Boston limited Transkaryotic's ability to argue Amgen's
patents are invalid.

   The judge postponed until at least September a final ruling in the patent
fight.

   Transkaryotic plans to present further evidence related to the issues of
infringement, validity and enforceability of the patent, said Justine
Koenigsberg, spokeswoman for Transkaryotic.

   At stake is a share of the market for a drug with an estimated $4 billion in
annual U.S. sales. MPower sets 3-for-2 split Phone and Internet service provider
MPower Communications Corp. said it will split its stock three shares for two.

   The split will increase the number of shares to 53 million.

   The new shares will be issued Aug. 28 to shareholders of record as of July
31. MPower shares fell 50 cents to $55.50 in Nasdaq trading. Tomkins sheds unit
British diversified engineering group Tomkins PLC said it has sold its European
food manufacturing businesses, Ranks Hovis McDougall Europe, to Doughty Hanson
for $1.7 billion.

   Doughty Hanson is a British private-equity firm.

   Tomkins had said over a year ago that it planned to dispose of its food
businesses.

   The company now plans to concentrate on its engineering businesses. Dutch
firm wants out of Ireland Dutch telecommunications company Royal KPN said it
will sell its $1.1 billion stake in Irish phone company Eircom PLC in a bid to
raise cash for a European expansion. Steinway sets acquisition Steinway Musical
Instruments Inc., the maker of Steinway pianos, said it agreed to acquire
privately held United Musical Instruments Holdings Inc. to expand its product
line.

   Waltham, Mass.-based Steinway said the deal was worth about $85 million,
including the assumption of debt, but declined to provide a more specific sale
price.

   United Musical of Elkhart, Ind., sells band and string instruments.

   It is expected to have $70 million in revenue this year.

   Steinway, which had $304.6 million in sales last year, is the largest maker
of band instruments in the United States.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             349 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 21, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C3

LENGTH: 367 words

HEADLINE: GENZYME SEEKS TO TEST CYSTIC FIBROSIS DRUG

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Genzyme Corp., unsuccessful in developing a gene therapy treatment for cystic
fibrosis, yesterday said it will ask the Food and Drug Administration for
permission to start human testing of its first drug to treat the disease.

   The decision to begin an initial safety study of the drug, named Lumarel,
follows eight attempts to treat the inherited breathing disorder using gene
therapy. None proved effective for the Cambridge biotechnology company that has
been studying the disease for nearly 10 years.

      Genzyme's optimism with Lumarel stems from the research by Drs. Juan
Alvarez and Steven Freedman at Boston's Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
They found that a reversible imbalance between two fatty acids found in cell
membranes is linked to the common symptoms of cystic fibrosis. Those symptoms
include the large buildup of excess mucus in the airways and chronic
inflammation of the lungs.

   Working with mice carrying the genetic defect that causes cystic fibrosis,
Alvarez and Freedman reported they could correct the problem by feeding them
large amounts of one of the fatty acids, known as docosahexaenoic acid, or DHA.
Genzyme began collaborating with the researchers last fall.

   Only two drugs are on the market to treat the symptoms of cystic fibrosis.
They are Pulmozyme from Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco, and Tobramycin
from PathoGenesis Corp. of Seattle. In addition to these drugs, patients take
several enzyme replacement drugs to help in food digestion.

   Cystic fibrosis is the most common fatal hereditary disease among whites in
the United States, affecting an estimated 30,000 people. The median life
expectancy of people with the disease is age 32, according to the Cystic
Fibrosis Association of Alexandria, Va.

   There are seven cystic fibrosis drugs in development, including two
considered "gene-assist therapies," according to the Pharmaceutical Research and
Manufacturers of America, which represents the major drug companies. Last year
there were 11 drugs under development - the decline due, in part, to
gene-therapy failures by several companies.

   Stock in Genzyme Corp. rose $2.375, to $66.025, in trading on the Nasdaq
Stock Market.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2000


                             350 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 21, 2000, Friday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: HARVARD FORUM EYES OVERSIGHT OF BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH

BYLINE: By Patrick Healy, Globe Staff

BODY:

   With public confidence in university research shaken after several deaths
last year during human gene therapy experiments, the National Institutes of
Health came to Harvard University this week as part of a national campaign to
ensure that campuses conduct federal research properly.

   NIH officials said yesterday that Harvard had only a few problems, but that
bigger failings remained in university research facilities elsewhere.

      "It's not apparent that a culture of compliance is universally present in
the biomedical research enterprise," said Gary Thompson, who led the NIH team.

   Harvard yesterday permitted a reporter to attend a closed NIH forum for
faculty and staff there. During the session, university officials said they had
increased compliance efforts, creating a risk-management committee to defuse
financial, legal, and health threats that grow out of research and other work on
campus.

   "Once the public doesn't have the trust, it just feeds on itself," said
Elizabeth Huidekoper, Harvard's vice president for finance. "We want to be much
more proactive in how we deal with risk."

   At stake in the NIH review is a large amount of money for university
scientists nationwide. The agency's road show, which will take it to six other
universities by October, is intended partly to reassure Congress about federal
research spending at a time when NIH is seeking a huge budget increase.

   NIH now receives $17.8 billion a year, making it the largest federal sponsor
of university research. In June, the Senate voted to increase that budget by
$2.7 billion. But the House of Representatives has voted for only $1 billion
more. A compromise budget is now being worked out, and NIH officials are
maneuvering to get as much money as possible.

   Which is why the nation's universities are now on the spot: About 80 percent
of NIH's funding, more than $13 billion, goes to outside grants, mostly to
campuses. But the research-related deaths and other embarrassments have stung
schools over the last year.

   In September, 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died during a gene-therapy
experiment led by a University of Pennsylvania researcher who had a stake in a
biotechnology company sponsoring the trial. A Tufts University scientist,
Jeffrey M. Isner, lost two patients in a gene study at St. Elizabeth's Medical
Center, though neither death was a direct result of the experiments.

   In the wake of these deaths, both federal and university officials are
realizing that they cannot take government funding for granted.

   "Within the nods and winks in the interchanges between the university people
and the government people, there's a realization that there's a great deal of
laxity in compliance," said Daniel S. Greenberg, a science analyst and author
who is writing a book, "Science, Money, and Politics."

   While they aren't investigating campuses, the NIH teams are quizzing
researchers and officials on their activities and policies, and turning up some
problems.

   NIH officials would not comment yesterday on the Harvard review, but none of
the issues appeared to raise major problems.  For example, one university
administrator said, some scientists have taken too long in charging research
costs to their grants.

   Thompson told the Harvard group that NIH and universities need to show grants
are well managed and that research is safe and free of serious conflict of
interest.

   "Congress says to us, 'Where is the oversight of the $13 billion grant
program?' We say that mainly lies at the institutions," Thompson said. "They
say, 'Well, what's the oversight of the oversight?' And we need to do a better
job at that."

   Harvard Medical School, for one, recently ended a year-long study of its
conflict-of-interest policy, considered to be among the most stringent. The
school's dean opted to keep limits on how much money faculty researchers can
earn from their experiments.

   Some Harvard representatives at yesterday's forum said they hope NIH
encourages other institutions to adopt tough conflict-of-interest codes. But one
medical school professor, Alan M. Zaslavsky, said campuses need to balance
research safeguards with breathing room for entrepreneurial faculty members.

   "Keeping this line too tight," Zaslavsky said, "draws too strong a line about
whether people can work in a university and enjoy benefits."

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2000


                             351 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 21, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

HEADLINE: DNA Innovation Lets Team Undermine the AIDS Virus

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Biologists at the University of Texas have invented a novel and apparently
far-reaching method of singling out precise regions of DNA. The method can be
used both to disrupt particular genes and to add new genetic material at a
specific site.

   As a first use, the biologists have shown that they can disrupt both the AIDS
virus and the human gene for the receptor that the virus uses to gain access to
human cells.

    The chief inventor, Dr. Alan M. Lambowitz, said that if further laboratory
tests were successful, he wanted to take T-cells from AIDS patients, disrupt the
cells' receptor gene and return the cells to the patients, in the hope that the
cells resist further attack just like those of people naturally unaffected by
the virus.  T-cells are the infection-fighting cells of the immune system that
are a principal target of the AIDS virus.

   Dr. Lambowitz's method could also give a shot in the arm to gene therapy, the
concept of inserting corrective genes into patients to treat a wide variety of
diseases. That field still has many obstacles to overcome, and one major
drawback is that the viruses currently used to deliver new genes to human cells
insert their cargo at random sites in the chromosome. In delivering new genes to
a precisely designated site, the new method, if it works, would be safer and
more effective.

   The idea of being able to insert new genes into a "safe harbor" in the genome
"would be very important for future gene therapy," said Dr. Ronald Crystal, a
gene therapist at New York Hospital.

   Dr. Savio Woo, a gene therapist at Mount Sinai Medical School, said the new
method "is in principle very exciting, because it provides a specific means of
inactivating a particular gene in a human genome."

   The technique was developed by Dr. Lambowitz and Dr. Huatao Guo at Texas and
by colleagues at other institutions, and is described in today's issue of
Science.

   Their work is based on a discovery about introns, pieces of DNA that are
found inserted in between the working parts of genes in many species. The cell
strips out the intronic DNA and splices the remaining segments together before
using the information to make a protein.

   Dr. Lambowitz had been working with a kind of intron found in bacteria. The
intron did not always sit passively in the bacterium's chromosome but would
instead sometimes spring free and reinsert itself at another site in the
bacterial DNA.

   In 1995 Dr. Lambowitz found that in choosing its new site, the intron looked
for a string of 14 DNA letters that matched 14 letters in its own structure. He
realized that by changing some of these 14 letters in the intron's own
structure, he might be able to make it insert itself at any desired point in a
DNA molecule.

   "We were carrying out basic research on Group II introns and how they related
to gene structure," he said. "Any kind of practical applications was the
furthest thing from our minds."

   In today's article, he and colleagues describe how they designed introns that
disrupted the human CCR5 receptor, a protein that studs the surface of human
cells and is exploited as a trapdoor by the AIDS virus to gain entry to the
cell. People with a certain variant form of the receptor are immune to AIDS.

   The artificial introns all inserted themselves in the intended position in
the receptor gene, the scientists reported. Other introns attacked specified
points in the form of the AIDS virus that lies latent in cells.

   These experiments were conducted in human cells grown in the laboratory. The
receptor gene and the AIDS virus were not in their usual position in the
chromosomes but rather, for ease of experiment, were carried in small rings of
DNA known as plasmids. Dr. Lambowitz said he now needed to test whether the
attack introns worked as well against targets in the chromosomes.

   Ohio State University, where work on the new method started, has applied for
a patent on it, as has the University of Texas. A company, InGex, has been
formed to exploit the method. Dr. Lambowitz, who is a scientific adviser to the
company, said practical applications included disrupting deleterious genes in
the microbes used to make wine and cheese, and making new vaccines by knocking
out the pathogenic genes in harmful bacteria.

   Besides disrupting target genes, the introns can be used to insert new
genetic material into DNA. The longest piece of inserted material so far is
2,000 DNA letters in length. Most human genes are far longer, but Dr. Lambowitz
said introns' carrying capacity had not yet been assessed.

   He said the method should be useful in any kind of genetic engineering where
genes must be inserted at a specific site, and in any genome project where the
function of an unknown gene could be ascertained by disrupting it.

   "We couldn't have designed a better way of inserting DNA," Dr. Lambowitz
said. "If you set out to do it, you never would have thought of it. But nature
did it in the course of evolution."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2000


                             352 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 20, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. A-16

LENGTH: 459 words

HEADLINE: LETTERS OF LIFE;
DECIPHERING THE HUMAN GENOME IS AN AWESOME FEAT

BODY:


   Once deciphered, the genetic blueprint of human beings will read like a bowl
of alphabet soup consisting of four letters: A, T, C and G. According to
Scientific American, the arrangement of the 3.1 billion base pairs that make up
the human genome could easily fill 200 telephone books -- if we ever came up
with a good reason to stack them end to end.

   We're becoming increasingly familiar with such factoids now that we've
officially entered the Genome Era, formerly the province of futurists, science
fiction writers and "X-Men" comics.

   The successful completion of the first stage of the scientific and commercial
enterprise known as the Human Genome Project generated appropriate hullabaloo.
Even so, the complete delineation of the human "instruction book" may be a
century away.

   Long before that, however, society will have to come to terms with the
medical, political and economic implications of this breakthrough. Post-Gazette
science editor Byron Spice addressed many of these questions in "Reading the
Book of Life: How Genetics Will Transform Medicine," a four-part series that
ended in Sunday's PG.

   The series showed how enthusiasm for the visionary potential of human genome
research (genetic therapy that cures all diseases, the perpetual regeneration of
the body and the enhancement of desirable characteristics before and after birth
via genetic engineering) has dictated the tone of the story so far. But the real
story isn't located in the far-off future.

   As the series demonstrated, genetic breakthroughs raise issues that need to
be confronted sooner rather than later. They include a host of privacy concerns;
the burden of knowing about one's susceptibility to a terminal disease decades
before symptoms are manifest; the danger that genes will be patented too
broadly; and genetic discrimination by health and life insurance companies.

   Will the presence of a particular genetic disposition to disease prevent an
individual from advancing in his or her profession? Who has a right to access an
individual's genetic history? Is medical insurance a civil right that cannot be
denied even to people at genetic risk for disease?

   In Pennsylvania, as in most states, public policy lags behind the advance of
genetic knowledge. Laws need to be enacted here and elsewhere to address the
potential for genetic discrimination.

   Everyone understands that the sheer volume of data unlocked by the Human
Genome Project will become the ultimate currency of the Information Age. It may
not be the "map" that a hyperventilating press has declared it, but it is a road
into an uncharted future. Whether that road is perilous depends on how willing
we are to think about where we're going before we fall into a pit of hubris.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2000


                             353 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                       July 17, 2000 Monday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: What will genetic study unleash?

BYLINE: TOM DELBANCO

BODY:

   As the race to decipher the human genome ends its first phase, we are quite
properly amazed watching our genetic map unfold before our eyes. But it is far
too early to conclude that understanding our genetic substance will trigger a
leap forward in human "progress." One thing is certain: We are not spending
nearly enough time or money considering how society will cope with what
scientists are unleashing.

   Darwin taught us that progress from survival of the most fit organisms occurs
over thousands of years, as nature weeds out weaknesses. Now we threaten to
change the human organism virtually all at once, without affording the time to
reach balance and harmony. As science fiction writers love to speculate, we may
even generate a war within our own bodies.

   Might genetic interventions inadvertently trigger more trouble than success?
Consider HIV therapy, how it alters cells and too often induces resistance. Will
genetically altered cells make good or bad neighbors to those in adjoining
tissues?

   Genetic knowledge will never abolish all disease and suffering, and Americans
don't like to address rationing explicitly. We already spend about 15% of our
gross domestic product on health care, and there is no way our economic
resources can keep pace with the new technologies. Virtually every new
diagnostic and therapeutic manipulation adds costs. The rush by biotechnology
companies to profit from the new genetic discoveries makes it likely that the
new maneuvers will be the most expensive of all, and rarely do new discoveries
replace existing expensive tests and interventions.

   Who will have access to the new technologies, and who won't? Will we end up
further widening the gap between rich and poor? When the United States has 45
million people without health insurance and many more who can't afford therapies
already proven worthwhile, how can we -- and should we -- find the money for new
genetic therapies that will cost a fortune?

   Consider how poorly our society is dealing with the elderly, the
beneficiaries of extended life expectancy that scientific, behavioral and social
changes have already provided. As doctors urge their patients to throw away
cigarettes, we rarely pause to take stock of the paradox that if everyone were
to stop smoking tomorrow, the burden on society from increased longevity could
prove enormous.

   Take that thought a step further. If genetic therapies that increase life
expectancy arrived tomorrow, they might bankrupt our health care system or
siphon vital resources away from education or human services. Are we ready to
deal with this kind of success?

   Will mapping genes help further discrimination and loss of privacy? How will
society address genetic tests for health insurance, jobs and life insurance?
What role is there for the marketplace vs. governmental regulation? And consider
the next step: full-blown eugenics. In today's narcissistic society, people
aspire increasingly to their notion of perfection: the cherished height, gender,
skin color. How will we build moral consensus, a code that stymies those who
would create a master race or a Frankenstein?

   Think about the anguish of those deciding whether to learn if they or their
children have genes that forecast Huntington's disease, or increase the
likelihood of breast cancer or dementia. Reflect on the uncertainties that
already attend the relatively primitive genetic tests that amniocentesis offers
the pregnant woman and multiply those dilemmas a thousandfold.

   Learning about one's genetic map may induce far more pain than pleasure.

   What about responsibility, voluntary behaviors, the old-fashioned idea of
choosing right over wrong? Will we rush to "blame the gene" for every human
failure or transgression? Will genetic determinism weaken our will? Will it stop
our search for mystery, community, art, spirituality and the deepest pleasures?
Will the genetic map replace the dream?

   The human quest for knowledge will never abate, and we must mobilize quickly
to address the consequences of what we learn. It's time to build a national
"Genome Commission" that is well-supported, broadly representative and has
strong bipartisan teeth, analogous to the Atomic Energy Commission, which helped
us live with the consequences of splitting the atom. We should also form an
international counterpart that is truly global in its reach.

   For every dollar we spend on the genome project and the attendant frantic
race for discovery, we should spend an equal amount to prepare for what we find.
The rush for that kind of enlightenment has hardly begun.

   ------------

   Tom Delbanco is Koplow-Tullis professor of general medicine and primary care
at Harvard Medical School and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000


                             354 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                      July 17, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1089 words

HEADLINE: Psychics of science;

BYLINE: KURT LOFT, of The Tampa Tribune;

BODY:


   Futuristic scholars bring forth a list of the top 10 emerging technologies,
from hydrogen  engines to virtual assistants.

   TAMPA - Blink twice and you miss the latest leap in technology, which moves
at such a pace these  days it's hard to keep up. And if people have trouble
comprehending our digitally fueled  Information Age, imagine their trepidation
over the high-tech rush in the coming years.

   This is why a group of futuristic scholars formed a think tank to predict
what ideas, techniques  and hardware might have profound impact on our lives -
at least those lives steeped in the  cutting-edge. The George Washington
University Forecast of Technology and Strategy runs a Web site  that pools the
knowledge of experts in a wide range of fields, and they refine their choices to

 reflect emerging trends.

   The team has monitored advances in powerful information systems, high-tech
farming, genetic  engineering and new modes of transportation, all of which are
advancing at dizzying speed, says  William E. Halal, who heads the research
team. Technology's pace and complexity, he says, are  linked to how we process
information, and the fact that "knowledge" work is overtaking "industrial"
work.

   "Today's wave of technological change seems destined to transform life over
the next 20 to 30  years," Halal says. "The unusual power of the information
revolution is in turn causing a far greater  technology revolution."

   So here are the top 10 emerging technologies, selected from more than 100 in
various stages of  development and expected to enter the economic mainstream in
the near future. The list also is  recognized by the World Future Society in
Maryland, which publishes The Futurist magazine.

   1. Portable information devices. A "post-PC world" of small machines will
combine the benefits of  a personal computer, the Internet, television images
and a cell phone. In a few years, wireless  competition will drive down the cost
to just pennies per minute of use. Experts also expect  bandwidth to increase by
a factor of 100 in the next decade, expanding the scope of wireless
technologies.

   2. Automobiles powered by fuel cells. Engines that combine hydrogen and
oxygen to produce  electricity will run vehicles and produce water, not toxic
exhaust, as a byproduct. Toyota, Ford  and Daimler-Chrysler are planning to
introduce experimental models in the next three or four years,  but their
initial costs are too high to be practical, and the volatility of hydrogen
remains a  problem.

   3. Precision farming. Computers will manage crops, lasers will guide robotic
machinery across  fields and satellites will monitor soil conditions. Large
corporate farms could quickly replace  those run by families.

   4. Mass customization. By catering to the desires of consumers, more
companies will tailor their  wares for online buying, giving people more
purchasing power without leaving their homes, and  creating a powerful "virtual
economy."

   5. "Teleliving." A series of intelligent networks working in concert will
allow people to move  through a constant stream of information in their home,
office and car, rather than be restricted  to a desktop computer. They will
interact with life-sized images of people and 3-D data on large  wall monitors.

   6. Virtual assistants. Smart programs installed in personal computers will
monitor e-mail,  faxes, files and phone calls and create a "profile" of the
recipient. In time, these assistants would  learn enough to take over routine
tasks such as retrieving computer files, returning phone calls  and making
simple decisions based on large amounts of information.

   7. Genetically altered organisms. The debate rages now over genetically
modified food, but  resistance may be futile because biotech  nology and
agriculture are converging. As the world population grows, scientists will
explore more  efficient ways to increase food production through crops resistant
to pests and drought. Synthetic  meats could replace beef.

   8. Computerized health care. America's health care system is still in the
dark ages when it  comes to computers, which could enhance recordkeeping,
diagnosis, prescriptions and other facets of  medicine. Smart chips might
contain everything a doctor needs to know about a patient.

   9. Alternative energy sources. As carbon-based fuels continue to pollute the
atmosphere,  societies will invest more research and development into wind,
solar, geothermal and hydroelectric  alternatives. The goals will be to make
them comparable in price to coal and oil, and to make them  a viable part of the
work force economy.

   10. Smart, mobile robots. A new generation of robots armed with artificial
intelligence and  sophisticated sensors will be able to "sense" their
environment, adapt their behavior and make  complex decisions. These machines
will do household chores, run factories and assist handicapped  people - without
supervision.

   For more details on the George Washington University predictions, visit its
Internet site at  www.GWForecast.gwu.edu    (CHART) Full steam ahead   Here's a
peek into the near future and emerging technologies that await, according to the
George  Washington University Forecast of Technology and Strategy:   2004 - Half
of all goods in the United States are sold electronically.   2007 - The majority
of books and magazines are published online.   2008 - Genetic engineering
creates specifically designed plants and animals.   2009 - Computer speech
recognition is common.   2010 - Green taxes encourage ecofriendly manufacturing
and commerce.   2012 - Optical computers begin to replace traditional devices.
2015 - Astronauts establish a permanent moon base.   2016 - Alternative energy
sources compete with coal and oil.   2017 - Automated highways control speed,
steering and braking.   2019 - Desalinized seawater becomes economically
feasible.   2020 - Aquaculture revolutionizes the seafood industry.   2021 -
Biochips that store data in molecular bonds enter the market.   2022 - Humans
set foot on Mars.   2023 - Hypersonic planes enter the commercial market.   2025
- Genetic therapy cures most illnesses.   Beyond 2030 - Fusion power moves
closer to practical application; artificial food replaces many  natural foods;
ecosystem designs recycle most known pollutants; the average human life span
tops  100 years; contact is made with intelligent life elsewhere in the
universe.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (C); CHART,
 (DRAWING) (C) (Scientist) DAVID O'KEEFE, Tribune illustration

NOTES: SCI TECH

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2000


                             355 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  July 16, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Page 11; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

HEADLINE: NEW JERSEY & CO.;
'Cowches' To Graze At Home

BYLINE: By LISA SUHAY

DATELINE: RHODESTOWN

BODY:

   If you're in the market for a cow, Helga Tacreiter can be of some help.

   She doesn't use cloning or gene therapy, but rather a combination of sewing
and vegetarianism to create what she calls a "cowch."

    These creations are life-size animal floor pillows, each named and
individually patterned after the cattle tended by Ms. Tancreiter. The herd is an
odd mix of cows and bulls that includes Jersey, Mexican, Scottish Highland and
Black Angus breeds she has taken in over the years. So far, more than 1,000
cowches graze people's homes.

   One of her higher-profile customers is Gateway, the computer maker based in
San Diego, whose company logo is a black-and-white cow printed on its shipping
boxes.

   The 48-year-old Ms. Tacreiter lives on an 80-acre farm just south of Shilo,
in Hopewell Township, where she has spent the past 10 years raising what she
calls "companion cattle" -- 15 bovine pets. She is, it should be noted, a
vegetarian.

   While she started with a herd of six calves, other cattle have been brought
to her farm for fostering from animal lovers from around the state as well as
the group called Farm Sanctuary in Watkins Glen, N.Y., PETA (People for the
Ethical Treatment of Amimals) and individuals from Pennsylvania and Maryland

   Sometimes she keeps the animals, and sometimes they move on to Farm
Sanctuary. "It depends on how the animal fits in with the herd," Ms. Tacreiter
said.

   Born in Gdansk, Poland, Ms. Tacreiter moved several times after her parents
-- her mother was a chemist and her father a psychiatrist -- divorced when she
was a toddler. Her mother moved to Nova Scotia, and her father raised her.

   Helga and her father moved to England when she was 5, then to Ontario at the
age of 7, and finally settled in Maryland when she was 12. She attended
California State University, where she majored in English literature.

   "If I didn't go to some college somewhere," she said, "my father would have
been heart-broken.'

   While at the university she met a young man who lived in Shilo and decided to
follow him here. Last year, after 23 years, their relationship ended.

   "He's a neat freak and I'm a slob and it became unbearable on both sides,"
she said.

   During their time together she did odd jobs at local farms and crafted tiny
replicas of homes that she sold. She wrote "Possum Huts" -- a photo book of the
intricately detailed miniature homes with stained-glass windows and hand-dipped
taper candles that she made herself -- which was published in 1984.

   She said she decided to become a vegetarian after reading Upton Sinclair's
"The Jungle" in high school. "Everyone else saw the animals representing people,
but I also saw the slaughter of the animals and that stuck with me," she said.

   Ten years ago, while working for a local horse ranch that also had a small
herd of cattle, Ms. Tacreiter first began rescuing livestock.

   "It started out when I was taking care of this really sick calf, Harvey," she
said. "The herd I was caring for was struck by lightning one night and the 15
adults were killed. Six calves survived and Harvey was in shock and very ill."

   Ms. Tacreiter took Harvey home and spent weeks tending him.

   "I would snuggle with him," she said. "I had this teddy bear when I was 2
that was as big as I was and this reminded me of those days. One day I woke up
and realized that here I was spending all this time healing this animal that
we're going to slaughter."

   Ms. Tacreiter convinced the farmer to give her the calves, which she
determined to save from human consumption.

   "I was thinking about it one day and I thought that if people had stuffed
cows instead of teddy bears they would relate to them and not want to eat them,"
she went on. "Then I thought I really wanted to reach adults, too, so I thought
having the animal be big enough for an adult to cuddle would be ideal.".

   With that, she was off to the fabric shop to gather materials and try her
hand at creating a life-size stuffed cow. Returning to the farm with several
bolts of faux fur material, she found Harvey was keenly interested in her
project and followed her around.

   "I decided to try modeling the fabric and pinning it on Harvey," she said.
"He stood still for five hours while I made the first pattern right on him."

   The first effort was a minor disaster. "I had home economics in eigth grade
and that's about the extent of my sewing training," she said. "It looked like an
alien cow. I keep it in the attic."

   Subsequent attempts improved her results, and today Ms. Tacreiter turns out
about 100 cowches a year on her own, and more if she hires help.

   The creations range in price from $300 for a calf to $500 for a yearling and
$800 for an adult-sized cowch. She also does horses. The sale of the cowches and
her book -- along with donations -- keep home and herd together.

   Two years ago, at Gateway's request, Ms. Tacreiter created a cowch with a
black world map instead of spots, for which she was rewarded with a computer.
"The World Cow," she said, sits today in the office of the company's chief
executive, Ted Waitt.

   On the whole, Ms. Tacreiter prefers transactions to be cash cows rather than
items for barter since it costs about $1,000 a year to feed each cow and about
the same amount for each of the two horses. Ms. Tacreiter raises her own hay top
help keep costs down.

   "Let's just say that my life has always run on miracles," Ms. Tacreiter said.
"Just when I'm sure I can't make the mortgage, like now, something happens to
pull us through. I'm waiting for the next one."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Helga Tacreiter lives on an 80-acre farm just south of Shilo, in
Hopewell Township, where she has spent the past 10 years raising what she calls
"companion cattle" -- 15 bovine pets. (David Hunsinger for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2000


                             356 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    July 16, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 2336 words

HEADLINE: CREATING A 'GENOBILITY';
GENETIC INSIGHTS MAY EXTEND LIFE, ENHANCE OFFSPRING

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Today, the only place where all the women are strong, all the men are
good-looking and all the children are above average is Garrison Keillor's
mythical Lake Wobegon.

   But genetic advances may someday make those people a reality, even if Lake
Wobegon remains a fantasy.

   Scientists who are still struggling to manipulate genes to correct inherited
defects say that it will be decades before prospective parents will be able to
pick their baby's hair color or athletic skills out of a catalog. Yet every
report of cloned sheep and genetically engineered "smart" mice brings
speculation that people eventually will be genetically enhanced as well.

   Last month's announcement that scientists have largely determined the
spelling of the entire human genetic code carries the promise that they might
someday understand its meaning. And that has only increased talk about making
people who would be uniformly smart, caring, tall, strong, handsome, beautiful
and charismatic.

   Maxwell Mehlman has even coined a word for them: the genobility, for
"genetically enhanced nobility."

   Mehlman, director of the Law-Medicine Center at Case Western Reserve
University in Cleveland, is no geneticist; he's a lawyer. But he figures it's
only a matter of time before the technical barriers to making designer babies
fall and society is altered by a growing genobility.

   If that seems far-fetched, Mehlman explains that he is "a professional
paranoid. I'm paid to think of worst-case scenarios."

   Mehlman worries about creating genetic haves and have-nots, which he
maintains could destabilize society. And talk of engineering humans contains
echoes of the eugenics movement, which led in America to sterilization laws for
the "mentally unfit" in the 1920s and ' 30s before its supposedly scientific
underpinnings were discredited.

Eugenics, the attempt to improve the human race through breeding and other
genetic means, reached its ugly zenith in Nazi Germany. People deemed physically
or mentally unfit were killed, and the Lebensborn program encouraged men and
women with desirable characteristics to mate and produce a blond-haired,
blue-eyed master race.

   Altering the 'germ line'

   In the last decade or so, hundreds of medical researchers have attempted to
treat disease by replacing defective genes in cells or by adding beneficial
genes, an approach called gene therapy. But these experiments have always been
performed on "somatic" cells not involved in reproduction, rather than
"germ-line" cells such as sperm or eggs that would allow genetic modifications
to be passed on to offspring.

   Eric Lander, director of the Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for Genomic
Research in Cambridge, Mass., said he long assumed that no responsible
researcher was interested in germ-line modifications. But the more he talks with
fellow scientists these days, the more they tell him it wouldn't be such a bad
idea.

   Imagine being able to increase intelligence, or stave off the ravages of
aging. Could those be bad things?

   For now, Lander favors a ban. But if and when it becomes technically
feasible, all bets are off.

   "I don't know if we can say 'no' forever," Lander said.

   "Eugenics of the future won't be government-enforced, but consumer-driven,"
said Dr. Michael Gorin, interim chairman of human genetics at the University of
Pittsburgh. Germ-line changes will occur because parents want a child with
enhanced musical talent, or blue eyes, or the height of an NBA center.

   The immediate problem is that many genes, maybe most, perform multiple
functions. If you change a gene to enhance one characteristic, it could have
unintended consequences. It may turn out that engineering a child to be a fast
runner might increase his susceptibility to colon cancer, for instance.

   "Why do you think we have so many automobile recalls?" Gorin said. "Certainly
people know how to build cars by now. But people make changes, often with the
intention of making improvements, that have unanticipated effects."

   That's one reason that even conventional gene therapy likely will be used
only for serious disorders -- diseases and conditions that are disabling or
life-threatening and, therefore, worth the risk of side effects, Gorin said.

   Germ-line modifications, however, are possible and probably inevitable, said
Dr. Arthur Levine, former scientific director of the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development and dean of the Pitt medical school.

"The history of science is that once we know how to do something, eventually we
start doing it," Levine said.

   A subtle revolution

   When we start making inheritable changes, we'll probably back into it, said
the Rev. Ronald Cole-Turner, who specializes in the ethics of science and
technology at Pittsburgh Theological Seminary.

   "I think we will move in such small increments that it will fly beneath the
moral radar of the population," he predicted. Sometime in the next decade,
perhaps, a germ-line modification may slip through as a side effect of
conventional somatic cell gene therapy.

   For instance, gene therapy to correct a genetic defect in a girl may
inadvertently alter the DNA in the girl's eggs, so that none of her children
will carry the undesired trait.

   "If that was a side effect of the therapy," Cole-Turner suggested, "most
people would say 'Sign us up sooner rather than later.' "

   Or there may be a disease that can be treated only by germ-line modification,
such as a reproductive disorder.

   "Any ethicist looking at that couldn't say no," said Cole-Turner, who
recently served on an American Association for the Advancement of Science panel
examining issues surrounding germ-line modification.

   Religions tend to favor healing and the elimination of pain, Cole-Turner
noted, and the line between healing and enhancement is often thin. Would anyone
object to boosting the intelligence of a person with Down syndrome or delaying
the onset of dementia in an Alzheimer's patient? If not, then at what point do
you stop enhancing intelligence?

   What is the difference, he continued, between altering DNA to prevent heart
disease and administering a vaccine to prevent an infectious disease?

   "Is a vaccine a therapy or an enhancement of nature?" Vaccination is now seen
as such a societal good that parents can be sanctioned for failing to have their
children immunized, he noted.

   Perhaps one day genetic enhancement will be considered routine, even expected
-- a scenario suggested in the 1997 science-fiction movie "GATTACA," in which
children conceived without genetic improvements were called "in-valids" or
"faith-births."

"It's going to be extremely hard to know when to stop saying yes," Cole-Turner
concluded.

   Living long and well

   The ethical issues aren't confined to the beginning of life. Many
conscientious researchers are actively pursuing ways to extend human life span.

   "We have to take over from where the process of evolution has left off," said
Dr. John Marler, scientific leader of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke's neurodegeneration group. Evolution, he explained, may
have limited our life spans because there is no species survival value for
people to stay alive once they have raised children and grandchildren. That
means extending our "health span" beyond the age of 100 may require undoing some
longstanding genetic programming.

   Marler is not talking about immortality. Instead, "we're talking about the
brain functioning as it is supposed to for as long as you are alive."

   In one way, then, finding how to prevent or cure degenerative brain diseases
such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease -- the main thrust of
Marler's group -- can be seen as life extension.

   But Dr. George Zubenko of the Western Psychiatric Institute & Clinic suspects
that staying alert mentally into old age also may involve genes that have
nothing to do with a specific disease.

   He studies people who have lived to 90 with their mental faculties intact to
find out what might lurk in their genome that enables them to age so
successfully.

   He's been gathering a group of 100 such people, using an array of genetic
markers to analyze their genomes.

   Zubenko compares the genetic makeup of his successful agers with people ages
18 to 25, a group that presumably includes those who will have both short and
long lives. He reasons that some genes -- genes that enhance longevity -will be
expressed more often in the older contingent than in the younger group.
Likewise, genes that contribute to premature deaths should be expressed less
often in the older group.

The availability of a complete sequence of the human genome should make it
easier to identify the specific genes associated with the genetic markers that
the study finds significant, Zubenko said.

   Mimicking calorie reduction

   Maintaining physical health into old age also may be enhanced through
genetics, said Anna McCormick, chief of the genetics and cell biology branch of
the National Institute on Aging's biology of aging program.

   For instance, mice have been shown to live longer when the calories in their
diets are cut by 40 percent. It should be possible to use DNA microarrays -- a
new tool that enables researchers to determine which genes are turned on in a
cell -- to see how the cells of these mice differ from those on a normal diet.
Once that difference in gene activation is known, it may be possible to design
drugs or isolate a human hormone that can mimic that action.

   "I can't see the human population eating 40 percent fewer calories," said
McCormick, a Baldwin High School graduate. "I think we need a drug."

   A similar technique might be used to find chemical or hormonal means of
maintaining muscle mass, which tends to waste in old age.

   Marler maintains that this sort of tinkering with evolution is nothing new.
"We mess with evolution when we go to the optometrist," he said. Better
nutrition also could be seen as altering our genetic inheritance, but "no one
asks what you're going to do with the extended life you get from eating a
low-fat diet."

   Some technical possibilities in the new genetic era may turn out to hold
little appeal.

   Though the cloning of Dolly the sheep touched off new speculation about
cloning humans, people may find that the reality of cloned humans -- or clones
of anything to which we feel emotional attachment -- is unsatisfying.

   University of Pennsylvania bioethicist Art Caplan believes the wealthy couple
that gave Texas A&M scientists $ 2.3 million to clone Missy, their beloved
collie-husky mix, will ultimately be disappointed. Yes, they'll get a clone of
their perfect dog with the business-like bark, he acknowledged. But what they
really want is for their dog to live forever, and that's not going to happen.

It's a reality that scientists appreciate better than the public: Even though
genes have a powerful influence on our lives and our health, environment and
upbringing still count for a great deal of who we are and even what our pets
are.

   Seeking an edge

   Still, the benefits of enhancing, rather than duplicating, human offspring
will be enticing, Case Western's Mehlman said. After all, people go to great
lengths to give their children even small advantages -- private schools, music
lessons, football camps, homes in safe neighborhoods.

   "Those things will look primitive once it becomes possible to create
genobility," he said.

   Yet even if the technical barriers to a genobility may fall, the economic
barriers are likely to remain. Already, advances such as single-cell analysis --
the ability to genetically screen a test-tube embryo to determine whether it
should be implanted in a woman's womb -- are available only to people able to
afford in vitro fertilization, which can cost $ 10,000 per attempt.

   If wealthy people are able to concentrate their advantages, not just by
sending their children to special classes or schools, but by gaining huge
improvements through genetic engineering, the gap between the haves and
have-nots will only get worse.

   "That's not a democracy," Mehlman said. "That's feudal society, a caste
system." If people don't perceive that they or their offspring have a chance of
upward mobility, the principles underlying Western democratic society will break
down and civil unrest could occur.

   As yet, no solution appears obvious. Any attempt by the government to
regulate reproduction can become mired in charges of eugenics. Even government
subsidies for reproductive enhancements might be suspect.

   One solution -- though a pathetic one, Mehlman admits -- might be a lottery.
Rather than competing for a cash jackpot, couples would join a lottery that
gives the winners access to genetic enhancement.

   "Whether you like them or not, lotteries do help maintain social stability,"
he explained. "They let people feel like they have a chance."

   Another answer, Cole-Turner suggested, may be to cultivate "a moral culture"
that persuades people to tread carefully with genetic technology and to express
disapproval when it is used irresponsibly.

   "Instead of enhancing a few through off-shore clinics, let's enhance the
health of children worldwide," he said. Genetic technology could be used to
increase resistance to many diseases and thus reduce the socioeconomic burden of
developing nations.

   "Technically, that's a more attainable goal than a child with an IQ of 200
and perfect health," he said. "We don't want a world in which you need to build
forts around the enhanced. That's not the world we want."

   For more information about the Genetics of Successful Aging project at
Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, call toll-free at 1 (877) 485-7568 or
visit the Web site at www.edc.gsph.pitt.edu/genlab/gensa/

   For information on the American Association for the Advancement of Science's
Dialogue on Science, Ethics and Religion and links to related sites, visit its
Web site at www.aaas.org/spp/dspp/dbsr/

   PART 4 OF 4

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, PHOTO 2, DRAWING: James Hilston/Post-Gazette; PHOTO: Matt
Freed/Post-Gazette photos: Above: John Marler, of the National; Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke.; PHOTO: Left: Dr. George Zubenko studies the
genetics of people who "age; successfully" -- who reach age 90 with their mental
faculities intact -- at; Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000


                             357 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 16, 2000 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1H

LENGTH: 922 words

HEADLINE: ACUTE NEED;
FOR MEDICAL;
RESEARCH;
CITED IN U.S.;
SHORTAGES OF DOCTORS,;
PATIENTS LIMIT NEW TRIALS

BYLINE: By BRUCE TAYLOR SEEMAN; NEWHOUSE NEWS SERVICE

BODY:

   When the federal government ordered Oklahoma researchers to shut down tests
of a new cancer vaccine late in June, the lead researcher was vilified for
putting patients at risk.

   The case made headlines when it was revealed earlier this month. But experts
say there are broader problems clogging the gears of medical experimentation at
a time when the enterprise should be shifting into overdrive.

   Among the growing worries about the booming world of clinical research:

   Not enough doctors are being properly trained to convert new knowledge into
real medicine. The work is complex, tedious and rarely a path to riches. Without
enough specially trained clinical researchers, test tube discoveries may
languish in the lab - no new drug to prevent migraines, perhaps, or no gene
manipulation to block breast cancer.

   Case Western Reserve University is looking for more medical researchers, said
George Stamatis, director of public affairs for the Cleveland school. Biomedical
research is a field that is growing quickly, especially because of the advances
in structural biology.

   "A number of fields are growing tremendously, so we're going to need more
clinical researchers," Stamatis said. (The Cleveland Clinic, on the other hand,
said it was not having any problems finding researchers.)

   Some studies are funded by the government, others by drug companies or
foundations. No one is tracking how many are ongoing or for what diseases. Some
tests may be redundant, and deserving illnesses may be getting scant attention.

   Too few patients participate in tests. Fewer than 3 percent of adult cancer
patients, for example, enroll in clinical trials. Experts say sign-ups are low
because doctors rarely recommend the test programs and patients are often
afraid.

   The government continues to wrestle with how to protect patients. In the
Oklahoma case, much blame was leveled at a local institutional review board
assigned to monitor study safety. A federal investigator recently concluded that
such boards are often too busy to protect patients properly.

   The troubles are arising, medical professionals agree, in an era of
unprecedented promise. The decoding of the human genome and other mysteries of
life are spawning wondrous possibilities to improve human health.

   But at a recent roundtable organized by the Institute of Medicine, part of
the National Academy of Sciences, leading doctors outlined an urgent need to
jump-start clinical research.

   "When we find a gene that affects a disease, the public is going to expect
life will change for the better," said Dr. William Crowley, a Harvard University
medical professor who directs clinical research at Massachusetts General
Hospital. "But if we don't deliver on that promise, we're going to see support
wane" for continued experimentation.

   The realm of clinical research is complex and loosely defined. Some clinical
trials test new drugs or theories. Others examine current drugs for new uses or
current drugs at new doses. Others give medical devices, such as pacemakers, a
series of test runs.

   A trial may take five years or more, requiring cooperation among doctors at
several locations. Often, small armies of nurses and others conduct the tests
and compile the encyclopedic reports required to verify results.

   Worries about patient well-being increased last year when Jesse Gelsinger, an
18-year-old Arizonan, died while enrolled in experimental gene therapy at the
University of Pennsylvania.

   Myriad mistakes were alleged in the recent case at the University of Oklahoma
College of Medicine at Tulsa. The clinical trial involved first-time use of an
experimental vaccine for people with melanoma, a skin cancer.

   In a letter June 29 to university officials, the federal Department of Health
and Human Services outlined charges that Dr. Michael McGee, the lead researcher,
misinformed patients about the test's goals and risks, produced the vaccine
without proper safeguards and made many other mistakes.

   All government-sponsored trials involving humans were ordered stopped at the
medical school. McGee was removed as the college's vice chairman of surgery. The
review board assigned to oversee the tests disbanded.

   Those conducting the study were "not prepared by background, training or
experience" to act as sponsors of the study, according to a consultant cited in
the federal letter.

   Lots of doctors and other health professionals oversee clinical trials -
50,000 or more, according to expert estimates. They might work for the federal
government, universities, drug companies or other health groups.

   But many don't stick with it because of pressures to see patients and earn
more for their practices or hospitals, while others lack the extensive training
the field requires.

   The number of doctors who view research as their primary activity dropped 6
percent between 1980 and 1997, according to a study by the Federation of
American Societies for Experimental Biology, a Bethesda, Md., professional group
that represents biomedical scientists.

   It has proven difficult, analysts said, to measure the shortage, but
anecdotal evidence suggests some tests have been delayed, done improperly or put
on hold.

   "I got one call the other day for (a study on) ulcerative colitis, which is a
disease that affects the gastrointestinal system," said Dr. Adrian Dobs,
director of clinical trials at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. "And I
told the drug company, 'I don't have a doctor.' And I feel bad, because that's a
study that needs to be done."

GRAPHIC: BOX BY: ASSOCIATED PRESS; CLINICAL TRIALS

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000


                             358 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       July 16, 2000 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 1767 words

HEADLINE: CRACKING CODE OF GENES RAISES HARD QUESTIONS;
ETHICS CENTRAL TO ASSESSING IMPACT OF GENOME PROJECT

BYLINE: By JOHN MANGELS; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   It used to be a conversation-starter at parties: If you could find out ahead
of time when and how you were going to die, would you want to know?

   The Human Genome Project won't force us to confront exactly that question,
but it may come close.

   Etched on the ticker tape of our DNA is a coded prediction for the course of
each individual life - a lineup of genes that helps determine everything from
how we look and act to the diseases we will face.

   "We have caught the first glimpses of our instruction book, previously known
only to God," said Dr. Francis Collins of the National Human Genome Research
Institute in announcing completion of the project's first step. Government and
commercial scientists two weeks ago finished the monumental, decade-long task of
mapping where those 50,000 or more genes lie. Now they are trying to figure out
what each gene does, how they work together to fashion a human being and how to
counteract defective ones.

   It is unclear whether researchers will ever be able to fully understand, much
less manipulate, the entire genetic code book. But ethicists, theologians and
geneticists say that even limited success will force us to face profoundly
difficult issues, the likes of which haven't been seen since Copernicus declared
the Earth wasn't the center of the universe and Darwin asserted that man evolved
from apes.

   The questions spill across the boundaries of religion, morality, politics and
social policy: How should we use the genetic forecast of each person's future?
Who has a right to the information? Will our genetic potential - and limitations
- dictate what jobs we can hold or what opportunities we are offered in life?

   And if it were someday possible, should we venture into the realm of gods
ourselves, "enhancing" our genetic makeup?

   "We still have a long way to go in understanding the subtleties of the
issues," said LeRoy Walters, director of Georgetown University's Kennedy
Institute of Ethics in Washington, D.C. And with the dizzying pace of discovery,
"society at large and most physicians are ill-equipped to fully understand
what's going on," added Dr. Nathaniel Robin, a clinical geneticist at Case
Western Reserve University's Center for Human Genetics.

   Planners of the mammoth genome project realized it would have a profound
impact on society as well as science. They set aside 5 percent of the estimated
$2 billion budget to address ethical, legal and social issues related to
unraveling the genetic code.

   The chief concern: how to protect the privacy of genetic test results and
prevent discrimination against those being tested. Here's why they were so
concerned.

   Some of what is written in our genes is as certain as Christmas in December -
the color of our eyes, the height we will reach. A slight error in the genetic
code on a region of Chromosome 4 inevitably brings on the devastating brain
decay of Huntington's disease. A badly copied gene on Chromosome 18 guarantees
the bizarre tics and yelps of Tourette's syndrome.

   Many other genes carry only a whisper of possibility. Like a single ace in a
poker player's hand, these genes might result in a winning flush or a losing
fold, depending on what they're combined with and how they're played. Genes that
direct the manufacture of strong muscles and robust bones might result in a
great athlete only if the child who bears them has a proper diet, gets good
coaching or plays the right sport. Genes that make a person vulnerable to skin
cancer may never get a chance to initiate their deadly work if the bearer avoids
sunburns.

   Current genetic tests mainly detect single genes certain to cause disease -
usually rare inherited diseases for which there is no cure. The results help
doctors make a diagnosis and anticipate the disease's complications. Parents can
use the information to deal with morally complex decisions - to prepare for a
sick child, to abort a pregnancy or to help them decide whether to have more
children.

   As researchers better understand the role genes play in operating the human
body, there probably will be tests that detect the presence of arrays of genes
involved in much more complex processes - heart disease, for example, or mental
illness, maybe even behavioral traits like criminality or creativity. But by
their nature, the tests will only be able to predict possibilities, not
outcomes, since they cannot measure intangible "environmental" things that work
hand in hand with genes to affect disease and development.

   The difficulty is in knowing what to do with the test results, or even
whether to test at all, especially when there is no cure for the suspected
disorder.

   When researchers found the gene that causes cystic fibrosis in 1989, they
thought parents who had one child with the incurable disease would want to
screen future pregnancies.

   Many either opted not to, or had the test but didn't abort the pregnancy,
said Dr. Pamela Davis, chief of the division of pediatric pulmonary disease at
Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital.

   "They just didn't want to roll the dice," Davis said. The reasons included
the less than 100 percent accuracy of the test; concern that the decision would
make their child with CF feel unwanted; and hope for improved treatments or a
cure.

   Even the issue of discrimination based on test results isn't as clear-cut as
it might seem. If a factory removes a worker from a noisy assembly line post
because a genetic test shows the employee is especially vulnerable to future
deafness, "you're not denying them a job, you're protecting their hearing,"
Robin suggests.

   But if the same worker was denied a job as a telephone operator on the
prospect of future deafness, would that be unfair?

   While the genome project's planners were good at identifying the problems
that disclosure of genetic tests might pose, solutions so far have been elusive.

   Despite several attempts, Congress has not passed a national law that would
stop insurers from denying coverage or charging a higher premium based on what a
genetic test says about a person's chances for future illness. Although federal
agencies are barred from using genetic information to discriminate against their
employees, no such law covers nongovernment workplaces.

   "It would be an absolute travesty if a (genetic) test that could save your
life ends up costing you your job or your financial security," South Dakota Sen.
Tom Daschle said in late June, just before the Senate voted down his proposal
containing genetic-discrimination protections.

   State legislatures have been more proactive. Thirty-five have passed laws
dealing with genetic information and insurance. Ohio, for example, forbids
health insurers from requiring or asking for the results of genetic tests in
order for a person to get coverage. Insurers here also can't cancel or refuse to
renew a policy because of genetic test results. But Ohio, like the majority of
other states, doesn't have laws specifically prohibiting a business from firing
or not hiring a worker based on his or her genetic profile.

   Health insurers generally agree they shouldn't use predictive genetic tests
to decide who gets coverage, said Dean Rosen, vice president of policy and
general counsel for the Health Insurance Association of America. But they are
worried legislation such as Daschle's is so broad it would stop them from using
more concrete means of assessing a person's health, such as cholesterol tests or
family histories. Insurers also believe a broad federal ban would encourage
frivolous but costly lawsuits, Rosen said.

   Medical ethicist Gregory Pence of the University of Alabama at Birmingham
says a titanic struggle will unfold over the use of genetic information. On one
hand, employers and insurers face huge pressures - and could reap huge profits -
from health care cost control through genetic tests. On the other hand,
unregulated use of such information could render large numbers of people
uninsurable and unhireable.

   Some ethicists worry that discrimination won't be limited to jobs and
insurance. They fear that those born without "desirable" genes or unable to get
them through still-theoretical genetic "improvements" will become social
outcasts as well.

   "That's one of the serious worries on the horizon, what these abilities will
do to our attitudes about human difference," said Eric Juengst, a CWRU
biomedical ethicist who headed the Ethics, Legal and Social Issues program of
the National Human Genome Research Institute from 1990 to 1994. "You can begin
to see a gap growing that is not just economic, but genetic in nature."

   Likewise, findings about the genetic variations between races could be
misused to justify prejudice. "There's a danger of exacerbating racism by giving
it a biologic underpinning," Juengst warned.

   As the genetic code-breaking process proceeds, we also may have to adjust to
the knowledge that our genes dictate far more about ourselves than previously
suspected - a potentially unsettling thought for believers in self-determination
or divine guidance.

   "Maybe we'll come to a kind of semi-determinism - we inherit a certain set of
limits, and within those limits we achieve the best we can," Walters said. "It
can help us to be realistic and not have excessive expectations."

   For now, we're stuck with the genes we're born with. Gene therapy - fixing or
replacing defective, disease-causing genes - is a distant possibility. Going
further, adding or manipulating genes to design a better person, is so complex a
prospect that some researchers wonder if it ever will be possible.

   But some scientists predicted the same thing about the just-completed Human
Genome Project. So ethicists say it isn't too early to begin publicly discussing
what might happen when the Pandora's box of genetic manipulation is opened.

   Giving someone the genetic potential to be a Mozart or a Michael Jordan isn't
a bad thing, Walters said. But "unless the enhancements were universally
available, that would be a terribly high price to pay."

   It also would force us to reconsider what is normal and what ought to be
"improved." If people could be made taller, for example, would those whose birth
genes dictate that they are of average height be deemed deficient or disabled?

   "It's hard to predict in which direction the culture will go," Juengst said.
"On the whole, I'm an optimist - I think we can use these tools in a good way. I
do occasionally have waves of terror about how it might come out.

   "We've achieved the Holy Grail. Now we have to learn to live with it. The old
Arthurian legends never told us how to do that."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY ASSOCIATED PRESS; PHOTO 1; Dr. Francis Collins, director of
the National Human Genome Research Institute, waits to be called for his
appearance on CBS' "Face the Nation" last Sunday.; PHOTO 2; Kim Delehaunty,
production coordinator at Washington University's Genome Center, collects
samples in St. Louis last month.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000


                             359 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                July 13, 2000, Thursday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A4

LENGTH: 438 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPIES WILL NOT BE CURE-ALL FOR CANCER, RESEARCHERS CONCLUDE
IN REPORT;
NON-GENETIC CAUSES PLAY BIGGEST ROLE, THEY SAY

BYLINE: From News Services

DATELINE: NEW YORKMEDICINE; HEALTH; CANCER RESEARCH FINDINGS; STUDY; RESULTS;
GENETIC MANIPULATION

BODY:


   Genes cause more than one-quarter of three major types of cancer, a new study
says. The percentage is greater than previously thought, but not enough to
sustain hopes that the cracking of the human genetic code could eliminate the
disease, researchers say.

   Scandinavian researchers concluded that genes account for 42 percent of the
risk for prostate cancer, 35 percent for colorectal cancer and 27 percent for
breast cancer.

   The majority of cases are caused by what people do, such as smoking and diet,
or what happens to them, such as on-the-job hazards, random genetic mutations or
viral infections, the researchers said.

   The finding, published in today's New England Journal of Medicine, exceeds
earlier estimates that genes account for 10 percent to 20 percent of all cancer,
said Paul Lichtenstein. He is an epidemiologist who led the study at the
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm.

   Still, the conclusion runs contrary to the widespread belief that scientists
"will find solutions or cures to all diseases in the genes," Lichtenstein said.
"That won't be the case."

   The study is the largest of its kind yet, said Heather Spencer Feigelson,
senior epidemiologist for the American Cancer Society.

   Lichtenstein and colleagues studied 44,788 sets of twins in Sweden, Denmark
and Finland. They looked at both identical twins, who have the same genes, and
fraternal twins, who are no more closely related than any other brothers and
sisters, to analyze the importance of genetics in each type of cancer.

   Overall, genes probably account for 30 percent of various cancers,
Lichtenstein estimated in an interview.

   He emphasized that the figures do not mean that someone whose identical twin
has prostate cancer has a 42 percent risk of developing it, too. The identical
twin of someone with breast, colorectal or prostate cancer had an 11 percent to
18 percent risk of developing the same cancer before age 75, the researchers
said.

The risk was only 3 percent to 9 percent for fraternal twins.

   Those figures should go a long way toward dismissing the widespread belief
"that if your sister has cancer, you're doomed," said Dr. Robert N. Hoover, a
director at the National Cancer Institute.

   "Someone with the identical set of genes has a much greater chance of not
developing cancer than of developing it," he said. "I think that's a useful
piece of information."

   In the Scandinavian study, only breast, prostate and colorectal cancer were
common enough for full analysis. Lichtenstein said he expects enough information
over the next 10 to 20 years to analyze 10 more types of cancer.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2000


                             360 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 12, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: LAB AT PENN GENE FACILITY CITED FOR ERRORS ACCORDING TO THE FDA, THE
INSTITUTE'S ANIMAL LABORATORY WAS RIFE WITH PROBLEMS THAT CALL ITS DATA INTO
QUESTION.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Federal regulators, who have already shut down human clinical trials at the
University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, have now cited
the institute's animal laboratory with a laundry list of violations.

   In a July 3 warning letter to James M. Wilson, institute director, the Food
and Drug Administration said the program's animal labs, which test gene-therapy
drugs on mice and monkeys before the procedures are tried on people, were
fraught with irregularities and violations of FDA guidelines.

   Among the problems listed by the FDA: Mice reported as "found dead" in their
cages were actually euthanized by institute personnel; key tissues, such as
pancreas, were missing from some of the dead mice; and animal data were stored
in an unused restroom, which was accessible to anyone in the lab. The FDA also
said the use of outdated biological material in animal experiments may have led
scientists to underestimate their potential toxicity in humans.

   FDA officials said the problems were so egregious that the agency might not
be able to accept the institute's animal data for any current studies - or those
conducted in the past. The agency ordered Penn to outline a corrective-action
plan within 15 days.

   The action follows the FDA's shutdown of human gene-therapy trials at Penn's
institute after the Sept. 17 death of Jesse Gelsinger, an Arizona teenager who
died in a clinical trial of an experimental gene-therapy drug designed to treat
an inherited liver disorder.

   Gelsinger's death was the first fatality known to have occurred as a direct
result of gene therapy, a highly experimental field that aims to replace
defective genes with correct ones.

   Penn has been striving for months to get the FDA ban lifted and restore
public confidence in Wilson's institute, which was formerly regarded as the
premier gene-therapy program in the country.

   Wilson declined comment on the latest salvo from the FDA. Rebecca Harmon, a
Penn spokeswoman, said the university was "preparing a thoughtful response,"
which would take time.

   She said many of the issues outlined in the warning letter were being
addressed at the time FDA officials conducted an on-site evaluation of the
animal lab during the last two weeks of February. "We have made substantial
progress since that time," she said.

   Harmon said she could not address the specific allegations in the FDA letter.

   Since Gelsinger's death, both the FDA and the National Institutes of Health
have come under fire in Congress, accused of not doing an adequate job of
overseeing gene-therapy trials around the country.

   Harmon said the toxicology studies involving experimental animals represented
"a small part of the basic research" at the institute. During the trial in which
Gelsinger died, institute scientists shot trillions of copies of disarmed
adenovirus - a type of cold virus - into the livers of trial participants. The
virus was genetically engineered to carry copies of corrective genes.

   The viruses, known as vectors, were first tested in animals in Wilson's lab.

   The FDA said some of the vectors sat around on lab shelves for months before
being tested in animals, making them less potent than they could have been.
That, in turn, may have resulted in an underestimation of the vectors' potency
in humans.

   Huntly Collins' e-mail address is hcollins@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             361 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    July 12, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A09

LENGTH: 773 words

HEADLINE: FDA Faults Penn Animal Tests That Led to Fatal Human Trial; Genetic
Research Killed Teenager

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Federal officials have uncovered multiple shortcomings in animal experiments
that the University of Pennsylvania's Institute for Human Gene Therapy used to
justify human research that killed an Arizona teenager.

   A warning letter that the Food and Drug Administration released yesterday
states that institute researchers, led by director James M. Wilson, used viruses
that were more than two years old and past their expiration date in monkey
experiments that were designed to test the treatment's toxicity. The outdated
viruses may have been less than half as toxic as the fresh doses that they
planned to give to patients, the FDA said, and so may have significantly
overstated the treatment's safety for humans.

   The FDA also concluded that the researchers underestimated the amount of
liver damage those animals suffered--the same kind of damage that contributed to
the death last fall of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson.

   The 15-page warning letter is the result of an ongoing investigation of three
animal studies at Penn. The studies were designed to establish the safety of
experimental "gene therapy" treatments that sought to cure diseases, including
Gelsinger's inherited liver disorder, by giving patients new genes.

   Only one of the animal studies--one used to justify approval of the Gelsinger
experiment--is specifically identified in the letter, leaving it unclear whether
the two others were also used to prove the safety of human experiments at the
institute or elsewhere. FDA officials said they could not say whether there are
other human studies underway whose presumption of safety is based on the problem
animal studies.

   Penn spokeswoman Rebecca Harmon said the warning letter has not affected the
bulk of the institute's animal research.

   "These toxicity studies represent only a small part of the basic research
involving animals being done at the institute," Harmon said. "We continue to
take this matter very seriously, and many of the issues addressed in the letter
were being addressed already at the time of the audit. We've made substantial
progress since that time and will continue to work with the FDA."

   In January, the FDA suspended human experiments at the institute. On May 24,
Penn announced that Wilson and the institute would conduct only animal and lab
research. The latest FDA letter appears to call into question even that new,
diminished role.

   Among the problems uncovered by agency inspectors:


   * Instances in which researchers did not follow the pre-approved research
protocol were later written off as "amendments" to the protocol, even though the
"amendments" were written after the experiments were completed.


   * Researchers did not dilute the viruses properly in some of the animal
studies, leading to potentially erroneous conclusions about the treatment's
toxicity.


   * In one instance, when researchers had trouble infusing viruses into an
artery as planned, they gave the rest of the viruses via a different route
without determining whether that change might affect the experiment's outcome.


   * One pathology report stated that a monkey was euthanized, while another
laboratory record stated that the animal was "found dead."

   In the warning letter, posted on the FDA's Web site yesterday, the agency
indicates that it wants to expand its inquiry beyond the three recent studies to
include animal studies conducted as far back as 1994. The letter takes issue
with Penn's contention that the problems represent isolated occurrences.

   "We do not agree with your position that these errors are isolated, since
errors were found in all three studies reviewed during this FDA inspection,"
wrote Steven Masiello of the FDA's Office of Compliance.

   Masiello repeatedly chastises Penn for not fully responding to agency
questions about the animal studies and threatens to take further, unspecified
actions if Penn does not reply satisfactorily within 15 days.

   The letter indicates that Wilson took issue with many of the FDA's findings
and promised to provide further documentation to the agency. In the case of the
outdated gene treatment, for example, Wilson told the FDA that he had evidence
that the treatment retains its potency over time. However, Masiello cited a
January 2000 memorandum that estimates the treatment would have lost as much as
65 percent of its potency by the time it was given to the monkey. He challenged
Wilson to produce test results that show otherwise.

   "Please provide the results of all stability testing. . . . If stability
testing was not performed, your response should so state," Masiello wrote.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2000


                             362 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                    JULY 10, 2000 Monday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 961 words

HEADLINE: ALZHEIMER'S RESULTS GIVE EXPERTS HOPE RECENT ADVANCES RAISE THE
POSSIBILITY THAT A TREATMENT IS AT HAND

BYLINE: SETH BORENSTEIN FREE PRESS WASHINGTON STAFF

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the race against an impending epidemic among aging baby boomers,
Alzheimer's disease researchers say they are pulling ahead.

   "There's a smell of success in the air," Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
neurosciences director at the National Institute on Aging, said Friday before a
major conference on the disease.
"We've all been seeing the incremental changes in how we understand Alzheimer's
disease for many years. But I think this is the first time people are really
thinking that some treatments are just around the corner."

   Scientific advances are coming fast: In the past six weeks, scientific
journals have reported three major advances in research. Nearly 60 drugs are now
available to fight Alzheimer's effects. Researchers are turning from treating
symptoms, such as forgetfulness, to battling the disease's root causes.

   Scientists and researchers promised more encouraging news at the World
Alzheimer Congress, which convened Sunday in Washington. More than 5,000
Alzheimer's scientists and caregivers were scheduled to attend.

   "It doesn't mean we're there yet, but there's real true hope," said Dale
Schenk, vice president of Elan Pharmaceuticals, an Irish company which has its
research lab in San Francisco.

   On Tuesday, Schenk plans to announce results of early human-safety tests of
an Alzheimer's vaccine, which has already proven to work in tests with mice.

   A year ago, Schenk stunned the research community when he announced that in
his studies with mice, he could prevent a buildup of brain plaque -- which most
researchers say is the root cause of Alzheimer's -- with a vaccine that
stimulates the immune system.

   "This is one of those rare projects and efforts where at least so far, it
just seems to be unfolding wonderfully," Schenk said.

   As the U.S. population ages, Alzheimer's is a problem of growing urgency.

   "We're on the verge of an epidemic with the baby boomers," said Bill Thies,
vice president of medical and scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's
Association.

   Baby boomers are people born between 1946 and 1964. The first of them will
hit age 65 in 2011. By 2025, 18 percent of the nation's population will be 65 or
older.

   About 10 percent of the nation's population over 65 has Alzheimer's. Nearly
50 percent of 85-year-olds have it, experts say.

   Researchers are focusing on two physical manifestations of the disease in the
nervous system. Most are looking at excess brain plaque, called beta amyloid,
which shows up in large amounts in Alzheimer's patients.

   Others are focusing on unusual tangled fibers -- called tau -- inside the
neuron cells of Alzheimer's patients. Scientists are divided on whether the tau
causes the plaque or vice versa.

   Morrison-Bogorad said the beta amyloid research is "tantalizing" and the most
promising. Beta amyloids grow between nerve cells, where they block
communication and even kill cells. In a sense, they are the brain's version of
cholesterol.

   The plaque consists of tiny fragments of a long protein that is normal in the
body. Alzheimer's patients have many more of those fragments than people without
the disease.

   Recent research has identified two enzymes that cut the long protein into the
tiny fragments that clog cells. Scientists are trying to determine how to block
the enzymes, Morrison-Bogorad said.

   Scientists also have isolated three separate genes, each of which can cause
overproduction of brain plaque.

   But other researchers say plaque-oriented scientists are looking at the wrong
thing. They contend the tangled fibers inside nerve cells are at the heart of
the mystery of Alzheimer's.

   "Alzheimer's disease is a million-piece puzzle, where 999,000 pieces don't
belong," said Khalid Iqbal, chairman of the department of neurochemistry at the
New York State Institute for Basic Research on Staten Island.

   Iqbal said he has found excess phosphorous in the tangled fibers of
Alzheimer's patients, making those fiber bundles, in effect, "a toxic molecule."

   On Tuesday, Iqbal is expected to tell colleagues that he can make the fibers
tangle in a test tube by manipulating the enzyme that regulates phosphorous.

   "That has never been done before," Iqbal said. His hope: If the fibers can be
untangled, then perhaps scientists someday will find a way to prevent them from
tangling in the first place.

   Other recent research to be discussed at the conference points to
environmental factors such as diet and blood pressure, Morrison-Bogorad said.
Gene therapy is also being examined. Because Alzheimer's takes different forms,
such as causing a loss of memory or deep depression, she predicts its treatment
will entail a mix of therapies.

   It's a burgeoning field. Twenty-five years ago, she noted, maybe two
scientific research papers were published each year on Alzheimer's. Now it's
more than 2,000.

   "It's almost impossible to keep up," Morrison-Bogorad said. "And that's
wonderful."

   Washington staff writer SETH BORENSTEIN can be reached at
sborenstein@krwashington.com.
SIGNS OF DISEASE

   The top warning signs of Alzheimer's disease:

   * Recent memory loss that affects job skills.

   * Difficulty in performing familiar tasks.

   * Problems with language, such as finding the right word.

   * Disorientation as to time and place.

   * Poor or decreased judgment.

   * Problems with abstract thinking.

   * Misplacing things.

   * Changes in mood, personality or behavior.

   * Loss of initiative.

   Source: World Alzheimer Congress 2000

   TO LEARN MORE

   For more information on Alzheimer's disease , visit these sites :

   * World Alzheimer Congress: www.alzheimer2000.org

   * Alzheimer's Association: www.alz.org

   * National Institute on Aging: www.nih.gov/nia

   * For 1999 Alzheimer's research: www.alzheimers.org/pubs/pr99cover.html

NOTES: SIDEBAR ATTACHED

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             363 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        JULY 10, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: FEATURES MAGAZINE: HEALTH & SCIENCE; Pg. F04

LENGTH: 793 words

HEADLINE: ADVANCES MADE AGAINST ALZHEIMER'S RECENT STRIDES HAVE BEEN
SIGNIFICANT. MORE NEWS IS EXPECTED FROM A CONFERENCE NOW IN SESSION.

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the race against an impending epidemic among aging baby boomers,
Alzheimer's disease researchers think they are pulling ahead.

   "There's a smell of success in the air," Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
neurosciences director at the National Institute on Aging, said Friday. "We've
all been seeing the incremental changes in how we understand Alzheimer's disease
for many years. But I think this is the first time people are really thinking
that some treatments are just around the corner."

   Advances, even breakthroughs, are coming fast: In the last six weeks,
scientific journals have reported three major advances in research. The number
of drugs available to fight Alzheimer's effects is approaching 60. Researchers
are turning from treating symptoms, such as forgetfulness, to the disease's root
causes.

   They promise more encouraging news at the World Alzheimer's Congress, which
began yesterday in Washington. More than 5,000 Alzheimer's scientists and
caregivers were expected to attend.

   "It doesn't mean we're there yet, but there's real true hope," said Dale
Schenk, vice president of Elan Pharmaceuticals, an Irish company with a research
lab in San Francisco.

   Tomorrow, Schenk plans to announce results of early human-safety tests of an
Alzheimer's vaccine that works in mice. A year ago, Schenk stunned the research
community when he announced that he could prevent a buildup of brain plaque -
which most researchers think is the root cause of Alzheimer's - with a vaccine
that stimulates the immune system.

   "This is one of those rare projects and efforts where at least so far it just
seems to be unfolding wonderfully," Schenk said.

   Alzheimer's is a problem of growing urgency. "We're on the verge of an
epidemic with the baby boomers," said Bill Thies, vice president of medical and
scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's Association.

   The first of America's baby boomers will hit age 65 in 2011. By 2025, 18
percent of America's population will be 65 or older. About 10 percent of
65-year-olds have Alzheimer's. Nearly 50 percent of 85-year-olds develop it.

   Researchers are focusing on two physical manifestations of the disease in the
nervous system. Most are looking at excess brain plaque, called beta amyloid,
which shows up in large amounts in Alzheimer's patients. Others are focusing on
unusual tangled fibers - called tau - inside the neuron cells of Alzheimer's
patients. Scientists are split on whether the tau causes the plaque or vice
versa.

   Morrison-Bogorad said the beta-amyloid research is "tantalizing" and thinks
it is the most promising. Beta amyloids grow between nerve cells, where they
block communication and even kill cells.

   The plaque consists of tiny fragments of a long protein that is normal in the
body. Alzheimer's patients just have many more of those fragments. Recent
research has identified two enzymes that cut the long protein into the tiny
fragments that clog cells, and scientists are trying to figure out how to block
the enzymes, Morrison-Bogorad said.

   Scientists also have isolated three separate genes, each of which can cause
overproduction of brain plaque.

   Other researchers think tangled fibers inside nerve cells are at the heart of
the mystery of Alzheimer's.

   "Alzheimer's disease is a million-piece puzzle, where 999,000 pieces don't
belong to the puzzle," said Khalid Iqbal, chairman of the department of
neurochemistry at the New York State Institute for Basic Research on Staten
Island.

   Iqbal has found excess phosphorus in the tangled fibers of Alzheimer's
patients, making those fiber bundles, in effect, "a toxic molecule." Tomorrow,
Iqbal will tell colleagues that he can get the fibers to tangle in a test tube
by manipulating the enzyme that regulates phosphorus. "That has never been done
before," Iqbal said.

   Other recent research to be discussed at the conference points to
environmental factors such as diet and blood pressure, Morrison-Bogorad said.
Genetic therapy is also being examined. Because Alzheimer's takes different
forms, she predicts its treatment will entail a mix of therapies.

   It's a burgeoning field. Twenty-five years ago, she noted, perhaps two
scientific research papers on Alzheimer's were published per year. Now it's more
than 2,000.

   "It's almost impossible to keep up," Morrison-Bogorad said. "And that's
wonderful."

   INFORMATION ON ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE HELP LINE

   Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral Center: 1-800-438-4380

   ON THE WEB

   World Alzheimer's Congress: http://www.alzheimer2000.org

   Alzheimer's Association: http://www.alz.org

   National Institute on Aging: http://www.nih.gov/nia

   National Institute on Aging's "Progress Report on Alzheimer's Disease, 1999":
http://www.alzheimers.org/pubs/pr99cover.html

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM AND CHART

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             364 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                      July 10, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 591 words

HEADLINE: Clinical trials halted Feds: Cancer study endangered patients

BYLINE: Edward T. Pound

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- In a continuing crackdown on mishandled medical
experiments, federal health officials have shut down all government-sponsored
clinical trials involving human subjects at the University of
Oklahoma College of Medicine in Tulsa. They acted, officials say,
after concluding that a cancer study there endangered patients'
safety.

   A federal watchdog agency issued the suspension June 29 in a letter
that accused university researchers and an oversight board of
repeatedly violating federal regulations meant to protect patients
in the three-year-old cancer trial. The letter was obtained by
USA TODAY.


   University officials say the study involved injecting vaccine
into patients who were seriously ill with melanoma, a deadly skin
cancer. Officials acknowledge that 26 patients died, but they
say there is no indication that the vaccine caused their deaths.
The study was canceled after an outside clinical research firm
hired by the university sharply criticized the trial and its principal
researcher, Michael McGee, who was vice chairman of the Department
of Surgery during the trial. He declined comment.

   The Office for Human Research Protections issued the suspension.
That office recently was established in the Department of Health
and Human Services. Its job: to protect the tens of thousands
of people who enroll in medical experiments, many desperate to
find a cure for their disease. Concern over clinical trials arose
after Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died in September 1999. He had been
a patient in a gene-therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Officials at the University of Oklahoma say their biggest concern
is patient safety. They say all 75 trials at the Tulsa campus
have been suspended pending an internal review. Moreover, the
university's president, David Boren, has set up a task force to
ensure that all trials comply with safety regulations.

   Ken Lackey, president of the Tulsa campus, says an internal review
of the vaccine trial is underway. "We have to find out what happened
here and make damn sure it does not happen again," he said in
an interview.

   The suspension letter was signed by Michael Carome, the chief
compliance official in the federal human protections office. Carome
criticized sharply the study's researcher, McGee, as well as the
Institutional Review Board (IRB) established at the Tulsa campus
to review all clinical trials. The IRB was supposed to make sure
that risks were minimized for patients, but it failed miserably
in the melanoma trial, Carome concluded. He said the chairman
of the IRB, Daniel Plunket, must be replaced. The university has
disbanded the IRB and removed Plunket from his administrative
duties at the College of Medicine. McGee was removed as vice chairman
of the Department of Surgery.

   According to university officials, McGee made his own vaccine
and headed the trial, which was conducted in Tulsa and at eight
other sites, mostly physicians' groups across the country.

   When the trial was put on hold in March, after an outside research
firm issued highly critical reports, McGee "misrepresented the
reasons for the suspension" in letters to surviving patients,
Carome wrote. Carome said the outside firm had found that some
vaccine had been made available for use without testing to ensure
safety and compliance with government regulations. McGee, however,
wrote patients that he was stopping injections because he no longer
had adequate supplies, according to Carome.



GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, Color, Frank Pompa, USA TODAY, Source: Pharmaceutical Research
and Manufacturers of America Foundation (Bar graph)

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2000


                             365 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 9, 2000, Sunday, REGION EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL, Pg. A0

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BYLINE: Q & A: GENE THERAPY

BODY:


   When can we expect gene therapy to become available?

   Not as soon as we once thought. "This definitely has not been a banner year
for gene therapy," says Dr. Richard Mulligan, director of the Harvard Gene
Therapy Initiative. The death of an 18-year-old patient at the University of
Pennsylvania in September had a chilling effect, reinforcing the perception that
many gene therapists were pushing harder than justified by their technical
knowledge. About 4,000 patients have been treated in almost 400 clinical trials
of gene therapy, Mulligan notes, with few real successes.

   So gene therapy doesn't work?

   It's not hopeless. The first gene therapy cures, in fact, have been reported
in just the past few months. A team of French scientists cured three boys who
were born with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, which usually requires
aggressive antibiotic therapy and bone marrow transplants. And Penn scientists
in March reported surprising early results from a trial of gene therapy for
hemophilia B, the form of the bleeding disease that afflicts a third of U.S.
hemophiliacs. As part of a safety test, they injected three boys with small
doses not expected to have a noticeable result, but two responded by producing
so much clotting factor that they required 80 percent fewer transfusions.

   What will be treated with gene therapy?

   Cancer, if we are to judge by what's being tested. Three out of every five
clinical trials of gene therapy have targeted cancers. It was once thought that
rare, single-gene disorders such as the severe immune deficiency cases would be
the best gene therapy candidates, but researchers have focused on complex,
multiple-gene disorders that are suffered by many people and have more
commercial potential.

   Will we ever clone people?

   No technical barriers are apparent. A better question is: Why would we want
to clone people? The idea may seem abhorrent, but researchers say many of us
someday may choose to clone ourselves, at least in embryonic form. From a cloned
embryo, scientists should be able to extract what may be the most valuable cell
known: the embryonic stem cell.

   Why are embryonic stem cells such a big deal?

   Scientists believe that embryonic stem cells can be used to produce almost
any specialized cell in the body. Cells produced from someone's cloned embryonic
stem cells could be readily transplanted into that person, without fear of
rejection. Liver cells could be produced to repair cirrhosis of the liver, heart
cells to repair damage from a heart attack, or pancreatic islet cells to produce
insulin in a diabetic.

   If stem cells are so effective, why would we need gene therapy?

   Many diseases, including diabetes, may well be treated better and sooner with
stem cells than by gene therapy. Even if embryonic stem cells can't be used
because of technical difficulties in using them or religious objections to
sacrificing embryos, researchers are isolating other types of stem cells from
the body that may well be used to produce many of these replacement cells.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2000


                             366 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                      July 9, 2000, Sunday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-15

LENGTH: 510 words

HEADLINE: Q & A: GENE THERAPY

BODY:


   When can we expect gene therapy to become available?

   Not as soon as we once thought. "This definitely has not been a banner year
for gene therapy," says Dr. Richard Mulligan, director of the Harvard Gene
Therapy Initiative. The death of an 18-year-old patient at the University of
Pennsylvania in September had a chilling effect, reinforcing the perception that
many gene therapists were pushing harder than justified by their technical
knowledge. About 4,000 patients have been treated in almost 400 clinical trials
of gene therapy, Mulligan notes, with few real successes.

   So gene therapy doesn't work?

   It's not hopeless. The first gene therapy cures, in fact, have been reported
in just the past few months. A team of French scientists cured three boys who
were born with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, which usually requires
aggressive antibiotic therapy and bone marrow transplants. And Penn scientists
in March reported surprising early results from a trial of gene therapy for
hemophilia B, the form of the bleeding disease that afflicts a third of U.S.
hemophiliacs. As part of a safety test, they injected three boys with small
doses not expected to have a noticeable result, but two responded by producing
so much clotting factor that they required 80 percent fewer transfusions.

   What will be treated with gene therapy?

   Cancer, if we are to judge by what's being tested. Three out of every five
clinical trials of gene therapy have targeted cancers. It was once thought that
rare, single-gene disorders such as the severe immune deficiency cases would be
the best gene therapy candidates, but researchers have focused on complex,
multiple-gene disorders that are suffered by many people and have more
commercial potential.

   Will we ever clone people?

   No technical barriers are apparent. A better question is: Why would we want
to clone people? The idea may seem abhorrent, but researchers say many of us
someday may choose to clone ourselves, at least in embryonic form. From a cloned
embryo, scientists should be able to extract what may be the most valuable cell
known: the embryonic stem cell.

   Why are embryonic stem cells such a big deal?

   Scientists believe that embryonic stem cells can be used to produce almost
any specialized cell in the body. Cells produced from someone's cloned embryonic
stem cells could be readily transplanted into that person, without fear of
rejection. Liver cells could be produced to repair cirrhosis of the liver, heart
cells to repair damage from a heart attack, or pancreatic islet cells to produce
insulin in a diabetic.

   If stem cells are so effective, why would we need gene therapy?

   Many diseases, including diabetes, may well be treated better and sooner with
stem cells than by gene therapy. Even if embryonic stem cells can't be used
because of technical difficulties in using them or religious objections to
sacrificing embryos, researchers are isolating other types of stem cells from
the body that may well be used to produce many of these replacement cells.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2000


                             367 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                     July 9, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 3298 words

HEADLINE: VISITING THE DOCTOR IN 2010;
GENETIC TESTS MAY CHANGE THE SHAPE OF EVERYDAY MEDICINE IN THE FUTURE

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   It is the morning of July 9, 2010. Gloria wakes up with a sore throat. John
feels a stabbing pain in his chest as he climbs the stairs to his office. Harold
dresses for an appointment with his cancer specialist.

   On this future Friday in Pittsburgh, all three will be making medical
decisions with the help of their doctors, just as they might today. But they
also will be guided by information gleaned from their own genes, if predictions
made by scientists in the Human Genome Project become reality.

   * On her way to her sales job Downtown in Nordstrom's shoe department, Gloria
stops at her neighborhood CVS/Eckerd-Aid. She takes a swab, rubs it on the
inside of her cheek and deposits the swab and her doctor's e-mail address at the
store's GeneCheck counter.

   At lunch, Gloria phones her doctor. Analysis of the cells from the swab, she
tells Gloria, shows a pattern of gene activation typical of how the body
responds to a viral infection. No antibiotics will be needed, she assures
Gloria, but tells her to drink plenty of fluids. The infection should run its
course in a few days.

   * One of John's coworkers drives him to Tenet-Passavant Medical Center, where
doctors confirm that his angina pains are caused by the buildup of fatty plaques
along his coronary arteries. No doubt his high blood cholesterol level is to
blame.

   By the time John ends up in a cardiologist's office, a genetic analysis shows
that he has several genetic mutations that predispose him to high cholesterol.
The doctor advises John to start a walking program, but decides not to order a
strict, low-fat diet. Given John's genetic makeup, a diet won't have much effect
on his cholesterol levels, so he prescribes a cholesterol-lowering drug instead.

   * It's been several days since Harold was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma and he's hoping the pothole he just hit on the soon-to-be-rebuilt Fort
Pitt Bridge is the only bump during his visit to the oncologist.

   The doctor has encouraging news. When DNA from his tumor was tested on the
patented Lymphochip, which checks thousands of genes typically active in the
immune system's B cells, the active genes in Harold's tumor fit a profile known
as the "GC B-like" subtype of B-cell lymphoma.

   The distinction is lost on Harold, but he takes some comfort in his doctor's
assurance that this subtype can be successfully treated with anthracycline-based
chemotherapy. His odds of survival would have been much worse if he had the
"activated B-like" subtype.

   Making predictions about technology is full of pitfalls. How else to explain
why we're not yet cruising in rocket cars and vacationing on Mars? But now that
scientists have figured out more than 90 percent of the sequence, or spelling,
of the human genetic code, it's natural to ponder how this new knowledge will
change our lives.

   One problem is that the people who know the most about these breakthroughs --
geneticists -- have their own biases.

   "If you ask a shoe repairman if you need soles and a shine, what's the answer
likely to be?" asked Dr. Ronald Bachman, chief of genetics at Oakland Kaiser
Hospital in California.

   Genetic profiling

   Simply knowing most of the spelling of the full set of human genes, called
the genome -- a feat announced by the international Human Genome Project and
Celera Genomics two weeks ago -- doesn't mean you can read it and make sense of
it. Researchers will labor for decades to understand the 3.1 billion letters in
the human genome and to figure out the multiple functions of the thousands of
genes spelled out in our DNA.

   When experts try to guess what the practical effects of this genome knowledge
will be, most put little emphasis on the technology that until now has hogged
the genetic headlines -- gene therapy. Over the past decade, as more genes have
been linked to specific diseases, people have speculated about curing those
diseases by replacing the defective genes or adding beneficial ones to
individual cells. But despite hundreds of clinical trials, gene therapy has had
few successes.

   "I bristle a bit when people think only about gene therapy," said Dr. Reed
Pyeritz, past president of the American College of Medical Genetics. Even if the
kinks get worked out, gene therapy probably will be used in only a select number
of patients whose condition makes its expense and risks worthwhile.

   The technology that will affect most patients in the near term, Pyeritz said,
is the one that already is widespread: genetic tests.

   Most people probably think of genetic tests as a way of confirming rare,
devastating diseases like cystic fibrosis or muscular dystrophy. But
increasingly, these tests will be used to add precision to cancer diagnoses and
to understand how heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, Alzheimer's disease and
other chronic ailments are likely to affect an individual.

   "Likely" is the key word here, because these chronic diseases are affected by
tens or even hundreds of genes; by environmental factors such as diet,
occupational hazards and lifestyle; and, of course, by time. A bad genetic
profile for a cancer or other chronic disease might increase someone's risk, but
it's no guarantee that the person will develop the disease.

   Still, genetic tests should enable doctors to prescribe lifestyle changes and
perhaps drugs that will prevent or delay the onset of a disease and, when
treating an illness, to select medications that are the most effective and least
likely to have serious side effects.

   "I see that emerging for virtually every common disease," said Pyeritz, a
medical geneticist at Allegheny General Hospital.

   Information explosion

   In one sense, the use of genetics in medical care is nothing new.

   When Ashkenazi Jews who are prospective parents are tested to see if they are
carriers of Tay-Sachs disease, that's genetics. When newborns are screened for
phenylketonuria, or PKU, that's genetics. When a doctor records a patient's
family history, taking note of relatives with heart disease or high blood
pressure or diabetes, that's genetics, too.

   And while gene therapy evokes the idea of microscopes and laboratories, some
treatments already amount to gene therapy. A liver transplant, for instance, can
overcome genetic abnormalities in the patient's original liver; the late Gov.
Bob Casey's 1993 liver transplant cured him of familial amyloidosis, for
instance.

   Even worries about the danger of tampering with our genetic makeup already
have some common counterparts today. In one sense, whenever a doctor warns a
pregnant woman not to take certain drugs, he is trying to prevent genetic
mutations that can harm her fetus.

   What will change is the sheer amount of genetic information available to
doctors and patients.

   Dr. Joseph Scherger, chairman of family medicine at the University of
California, Irvine and editor of "Hippocrates," a magazine for physicians, said
genetic profiles will become as ubiquitous in most medical practices as
comprehensive blood tests are today.

   "If there is information out there, we want to get it," he said.

   Individuals someday may have their entire genomes sequenced, perhaps at
birth, but Dr. Karoly Mirnics of the University of Pittsburgh neurobiology
department expects it will be another 20 years before the technology for this is
available.

   By 2010, however, it may be possible to scan a person's genome for 100,000
"single nucleotide polymorphisms," or SNPs -- single-letter variations in DNA
spelling that could be used to predict someone's susceptibility to certain
diseases, or select the best medications for them.

   How biochips work

   It's already possible, using new technologies called DNA microarrays or
biochips, to test for thousands of genes at once. At Pitt, Mirnics has set up a
facility for producing and using DNA microarrays, which can simultaneously test
a genetic sample against up to 10,000 different bits of DNA arranged on a glass
microscope slide.

   Researchers use these microarrays to determine which of a cell's genes are
actively producing proteins.

   It works like this: Messenger RNA, a molecule that carries the code of a gene
so a protein can be made, is extracted from the cell and labeled with
fluorescent tags. A mixture of RNA from a variety of active genes is then placed
on the microarray slide, which is covered with tiny bits of genes. Each gene
type has a designated spot on the slide.

   The fluorescently tagged RNA binds to the DNA fragments with genetic coding
that is complementary to that of the RNA -- RNA from gene A binds with the DNA
fragments of gene A, RNA from gene B binds with DNA fragments from gene B, and
so forth. The slide can then be scanned to determine the brightness of each
spot. In this way, the researcher can determine not only which genes are not
active in the cell, but get a rough idea of how much protein is being produced
by each of the genes that is active.

   A similar technology, developed by Affymetrix of Santa Clara, Calif.,
synthesizes bits of genetic sequences on a silicon chip in a method similar to
that used to produce computer chips. This biochip also relies on fluorescence to
determine which genes are active.

   These technologies are beginning to change genetic research, allowing
investigators to sort through thousands of genes to find the handful that might
be associated with a particular disease. So many scientists are seeking federal
grants for these biochip-aided fishing expeditions that grant reviewers at the
National Institute on Aging have come up with a name for them: Fish and Chips.

   One hope is that this technology will change the way cancers are detected,
said William Bigbee, leader of the molecular biomarkers group at the University
of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute.

   Until now, most cancer researchers have studied one gene at a time, or even a
single SNP or other genetic marker. The result, he noted, has been scientific
journals packed with study after study of promising markers that might be used
for early detection of cancers. But individually, most aren't very powerful, and
there hasn't been a good way to determine which combination of markers might
work best.

   Chip technologies, however, allow researchers to isolate cancer cells and
determine all of the genes that are turned on, or "expressed," inside them,
Bigbee said. In this way, the cells will tell the researchers which genetic
markers are important.

   The National Cancer Institute last year launched a new initiative, called the
Early Detection Research Network, to take advantage of these technologies and
set up a collaborative network for clinically testing promising sets of cancer
markers.

   At Pitt, for instance, Robert Ferrell of the Graduate School of Public Health
and Dr. Robert Edwards at Magee-Womens Hospital are looking for genetic markers
for ovarian cancer, which is difficult to detect at an early, treatable stage.
They are taking samples of ovarian tissue from women who have early- and
late-stage ovarian cancers and from women without ovarian disease and noting
differences in which genes are expressed and the degree of expression.

   Their hope is to find a genetic profile for ovarian cancer that can be
identified by a blood test or other screening test. Other Pitt researchers are
looking for markers for lung, colorectal, and head and neck cancers.

   Even after a cancer is detected, gene expression analysis can refine a cancer
diagnosis. Last year, researchers at the Whitehead Institute/MIT Center for
Genome Research first demonstrated that this was possible, showing that DNA
microarrays could be used to distinguish between acute myeloid leukemia and
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In February, scientists at the National Cancer
Institute and elsewhere used the same technology to detect previously unknown
subtypes of B-cell lymphoma.

   A doctor's question

   Dr. Michael Haggerty doesn't do genetic research. But as a practicing
cardiologist at St. Francis Medical Center, he grapples daily with genetic
conundrums and he eagerly scans the scientific literature in search of answers.

   Why, for instance, do some people seem to tolerate high blood pressure and
others develop heart failure? Part of the answer would seem to be genetic, and a
study published last fall by researchers at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
Calif., seems to offer an important clue.

   The scientists engineered mice whose heart cells lacked a receptor necessary
to use a protein made by the gp130 gene. The mice developed and functioned
normally, but when experimenters induced high blood pressure, most of the
gp130-deficient mice developed fatal cases of heart failure. Normal mice seemed
to tolerate the high blood pressure.

   Could the gp130 gene be important in predicting the outcome of human
patients? Does it suggest a way of preventing heart failure in some patients? No
one knows for sure yet, but Haggerty and his patients are looking for that sort
of guidance.

   "Why is it that we have people who smoke, have high blood pressure, have high
cholesterol, are under the same stress, yet have different outcomes?"

   Everyone knows or has heard tales of people who forsake exercise, smoke and
eat bacon and eggs for breakfast every day, yet live into their 80s or 90s.
Those stories, even if they are sometimes apocryphal, weaken suggestions by
physicians that patients improve their diets or lifestyles.

   "People are pretty smart," Haggerty said. "They ask about this stuff. And we
don't know a lot."

   That's why many authorities believe genetics will have its biggest impact on
preventive medicine, identifying the patients who have the greatest risk for a
particular disease.

   But that leaves unanswered the question of whether people will pay attention
to the information.

   Heeding the warnings

   "We all know how to live forever," Ferrell, a geneticist in Pitt's public
health school, wryly observed. Yet most people fail to follow general diet,
lifestyle and medical screening recommendations. The big question, as Ferrell
sees it, is: "If I know I have a [genetic] predisposition, will I change my
behavior?"

   Ferrell, Haggerty and others bet that you will, though studies show that many
people who are aware of their increased risk of disease may not be following
advice that could prevent the disease or pick up early signs of it.

   This spring, researchers at the University of Utah reported in the American
Journal of Preventive Medicine that many people with a family history of colon
cancer were not following the American Cancer Society's colorectal cancer
screening recommendations. While 84 percent of the 95 people surveyed said they
would be willing to take a genetic test, fewer than a third of those over 40 had
tested their stool for blood within the previous year, and just 59 percent had
their colons examined by colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy in the previous five
years.

   Doctors also may have problems carrying out the preventive side of medicine.

   A survey by Dr. Randall Stafford of Harvard Medical School of 10,942 doctor
visits by people with diagnosed heart disease found that doctors had prescribed
daily aspirin to only a quarter of the patients, despite the fact that aspirin
has been shown to reduce the risk of second heart attacks and other
cardiovascular problems.

   "We don't necessarily do a good job of using effective technology that we
already have," Stafford said, which suggests that the health system may be
ill-prepared to take full advantage of genetic breakthroughs. "Part of it may be
an issue of physician awareness and training. But it's also a reflection of a
medical system that's still heavily oriented toward acute care" -- treating
people after problems have occurred.

   Preventive medicine gets short shrift, Stafford said, although some health
systems have developed electronic systems to help identify patients who can
benefit from preventive therapies.

   He said the health care system also is driven too much by high-powered drug
marketing that is aimed at doctors and, increasingly, at the general public.
Existing, cheaper medications like aspirin and lifestyle and diet changes seldom
get the same promotional push, said Stafford, senior scientist at
Partners/Massachusetts General Hospital Institute for Health Policy.

   Unanswered questions

   In one way, the shift of most private health plans to managed care should
bolster the use of genetic testing for prevention of disease. Michael Weinstein,
a spokesman for Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield, noted that insurance
historically never covered the costs of screening tests for healthy people, but
managed care covers many more of those tests and thus may be more compatible
with the new age of genetic medicine.

   But Weinstein also emphasized that genetic testing raises issues that health
insurers have barely begun to address. Should plans pay to screen patients for
disorders that can't be treated? What level of care is suitable for a patient
with a genetic susceptibility to a disease, but no symptoms? And how much is all
of this going to cost anyway?

   "There are multiple issues that are just starting to be discussed because
this is just in its infancy," Weinstein said.

   Kaiser Permanente, the granddaddy of HMOs, thus far has embraced genetic
testing. At its hospital in Oakland, Calif., genetic testing is steadily being
integrated into patient care.

   Each year, 32,000 pregnant women are served by Kaiser in northern California
and each fills out a one-page questionnaire designed to detect people at risk
for genetic disorders and to offer counseling. Each patient also fills out a
half-page "ethnic screen," which identifies racial or ethnic groups that can
benefit from testing for sickle cell anemia or various forms of the blood
disorder called thalassemia.

   Pregnant women 35 and older are automatically referred to genetic counseling,
and about two-thirds accept the service, said Bachman, the hospital's chief of
genetics. In California, every woman must be offered the "triple marker" blood
test, which detects various congenital abnormalities, such as spina bifida.
Almost every prenatal patient undergoes ultrasound, which can identify problems
such as cleft lip and heart defects.

   In the last six months, Kaiser began a new program to test prenatally for
cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease that results in the production of thick
mucus. That's been controversial, Bachman admitted, because it's not clear
whether detecting the disease in the unborn results in better survival. The fear
is that it might cause some parents to abort an affected fetus.

   "We're not on a search-and-destroy mission," Bachman maintained, explaining
that the cystic fibrosis and other tests aren't intended just to find problems,
but to help the family prepare for children who will have special needs. Without
cystic fibrosis testing, affected babies often are mistakenly treated for
asthma, which can cause years of delay before the correct diagnosis is
determined.

   Genetics is well established in obstetric and pediatric practices, but
Bachman said it has been difficult to get internal medicine physicians
interested in the genetics of adults. It is hard to get internists to consider
such genetic conditions as the iron-overload susceptibility known as
hemochromatosis, which can be an underlying cause for diseases such as diabetes,
cirrhosis and arthritis.

   Most physicians around the nation aren't spending much time preparing for the
genetic revolution, added the University of California's Scherger. Until the new
technology is in their hands, many time-harried doctors simply won't think about
it.

   "The tendency in medicine is not to anticipate change," Scherger said.
"Physicians have a tendency to run looking at the ground."

   PART 3 OF 4

GRAPHIC: INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: James
Hilston/Post-Gazette; National; Geographic, Newsweek: (Major genetic diseases)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2000


                             368 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 9, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-15

LENGTH: 691 words

HEADLINE: AT LAST, THERE IS HOPE THAT TREATMENT FOR ALZHEIMER'S IS NEAR

BYLINE: SETH BORENSTEIN, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON --

BODY:


   In the race against an impending epidemic among aging baby boomers,
Alzheimer's disease researchers think they are pulling ahead.

   "There's a smell of success in the air," says Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
neurosciences director at the National Institute on Aging.

   "We've all been seeing the incremental changes in how we understand
Alzheimer's disease for many years. But I think this is the first time people
are really thinking that some treatments are just around the corner."

   Scientific advances, even breakthroughs, are coming fast: In the past six
weeks, scientific journals have reported three major advances in research. The
number of drugs available to fight Alzheimer's effects is approaching 60.
Researchers are turning from treating symptoms, such as forgetfulness, to the
disease's root causes.

   They promise more encouraging news at the World Alzheimer's Congress
convening today in Washington. More than 5,000 Alzheimer's scientists and
caregivers are expected to attend.

   "It doesn't mean we're there yet, but there's real true hope," said Dale
Schenk, vice president of Elan Pharmaceuticals, an Irish company whose research
lab is in South San Francisco.

   On Tuesday, Schenk plans to announce results of early human-safety tests of
an Alzheimer's vaccine that works in mice.

   A year ago, Schenk stunned the research community when he announced that he
could prevent a buildup of brain plaque -- which most researchers think is the
root cause of Alzheimer's -- with a vaccine that stimulates the immune system.

   "This is one of those rare projects and efforts where at least so far it just
seems to be unfolding wonderfully," Schenk said.

   Alzheimer's is a problem of growing urgency. "We're on the verge of an
epidemic with the baby boomers," said Bill Thies, vice president of medical and
scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's Association.

   The first of America's baby boomers will hit age 65 in 2011. By 2025, 18
percent of America's population will be 65 or older.

   About 10 percent of 65-year-olds have Alzheimer's. Nearly 50 percent of
85-year-olds develop it.

   Researchers are focusing on two physical manifestations of the disease in the
nervous system. Most are looking at excess brain plaque, called beta amyloid,
which shows up in large amounts in Alzheimer's patients. Others are focusing on
unusual tangled fibers -- called tau -- inside the neuron cells of Alzheimer's
patients. Scientists are split on whether the tau causes the plaque or vice
versa.

   Morrison-Bogorad said the beta amyloid research is "tantalizing" and the most
promising. Beta amyloids grow between nerve cells, where they block
communication and even kill cells. It's sort of like the brain's version of
cholesterol.

   The plaque consists of tiny fragments of a long protein that is normal in the
body. Alzheimer's patients just have lots more of those fragments.

   Recent research has identified two enzymes that cut the long protein into the
tiny fragments that clog cells, and scientists are trying to figure out how to
block the enzymes, Morrison-Bogorad said.

   Scientists also have isolated three separate genes, each of which can cause
overproduction of brain plaque.

   Other researchers say plaque-oriented scientists are looking at the wrong
thing. They think tangled fibers inside nerve cells are at the heart of the
mystery of Alzheimer's.

   "Alzheimer's disease is a million-piece puzzle, where 999,000 pieces don't
belong to the puzzle," said Khalid Iqbal, chairman of the department of
neurochemistry at the New York State Institute for Basic Research on Staten
Island.

   Other recent research to be discussed at the conference points to
environmental factors such as diet and blood pressure, Morrison-Bogorad said.
Genetic therapy is also being examined. Because Alzheimer's takes different
forms, she predicts its treatment will entail a mix of therapies.

   It's a burgeoning field. Twenty-five years ago, she noted, maybe two
scientific research papers a year were published on Alzheimer's. Now it's more
than 2,000.

   "It's almost impossible to keep up," Morrison-Bogorad said. "And that's
wonderful."

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2000


                             369 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                        July 9, 2000 Sunday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1H

LENGTH: 1922 words

HEADLINE: MAKING COMPANIES BLOOM;
VENTURE CAPITAL FUNDS FIND TILLABLE SOIL IN OHIO

BYLINE: By MARY VANAC; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Northeast Ohio venture capital funds may be only knee-high to their older
brethren on the East and West coasts.

   But the best-known local funds, Morgenthaler and Primus Venture Partners,
have profited admirably in the heady economic climate, growing to a combined
$1.5 billion in assets over the last 15 years.

   Their sheer size means they must make big investments in companies, often
outside Ohio, and frequently in the highest-growth sector - technology. And that
often means less startup capital for local entrepreneurs who need small amounts
of cash.

   Without venture capital, the high-risk money that feeds infant companies and
gives new life to older ones, such well-known giants as Microsoft, Federal
Express and Sun Microsystems would never have gotten off the ground.

   Local companies, too, have benefited from venture capital. Steris Corp. in
Mentor, known for its equipment that sterilizes delicate medical instruments, is
an $800 million company today partly because of venture capital from Primus. But
today's rising companies are more likely to get venture capital from outside
Ohio.

   Athersys Inc., perhaps Cleveland's most exciting biotechnology startup,
recently received $47.5 million in venture capital from several firms, including
such national funds as Invesco and Wagoner.

   Primus, in Mayfield Heights, and Ohio Innovation Fund, in Cleveland, also
participated in the latest round of financing for Athersys, which is perfecting
a technology that enables scientists to activate genes to see which ones cause
desired characteristics.

   But Athersys President Gil Van Bokkelen said it was local venture capitalists
who helped him discover that Cleveland is a fine place to raise a biotech
company, despite his intention in 1994 to stay only about six months and return
to California.

   "I think all the basic ingredients are in place for Northeast Ohio to achieve
a much stronger presence in several technology-based sectors," said Van
Bokkelen. One of the reasons Van Bokkelen stays is the technical and strategic
support, which he says is just as important to emerging companies as capital.

   Bill Mulligan, a managing director for Primus, and Tim Biro, a managing
partner for Ohio Innovation, sit on the Athersys board of directors.

   "Tim Biro has had biotech experience. He's also involved in lots of deals in
the biotech and health arenas," Van Bokkelen said. "Bill Mulligan doesn't have
biotech experience, but he really knows what Wall Street looks for."

   Both venture capitalists are based in Northeast Ohio. So it's easy to get
their attention when it's needed, Van Bokkelen said.

   And when technology-related start-ups need attention, they need it fast.

   "It's a race," said David Hunt, new chief executive of PlanSoft Corp. in
Twinsburg. PlanSoft is an Internet-based provider of services to convention and
meeting planners, a $1 billion industry, Hunt said.

   Through its Web site, PlanSoft enables meeting planners to find, negotiate
and book hotels, convention centers, transportation and other services for
participants in major events.

   PlanSoft recently got $30 million in venture capital to keep it and its 150
employees ahead of the competition, Hunt said. Primus, Cleveland Pacific Equity
Ventures and Key Mezzanine Capital (part of Cleveland's KeyCorp), are local
firms that participated in the recent round of financing.

   Most of the local venture capital firms started in the last 15 years. They
have done so well that a new generation of small venture capital firms and
networks of "angel investors" - wealthy individuals - now are stepping in to
provide the lesser funding needed by smaller startups.

   Investing began in '80s

   Entrepreneurs faced a vastly different landscape before the mid-1980s, when
business leaders at Cleveland Tomorrow identified a need for start-up capital in
Northeast Ohio. At the time, local industries were struggling to catch up with
more efficient manufacturers abroad, notably those in Japan.

   "The Midwest faced challenges," said Loyal Wilson, a managing director and
founder of Primus, which is Ohio's second-largest venture capital firm with $500
million in assets. "The landscape shifted. People needed jobs. Many people left
(corporations) and started businesses."

   Cleveland Tomorrow recruited Wilson, then a Chicago banker, to start Primus
in 1984. The goal for Primus was simple: Raise money largely from local sources
and invest it in local companies.

   "Primus was an experiment to see if venture capital could happen in this
area," said Shanti Mittra, a Primus director. "I think the results are out."

   Primus, which started with $30 million in its first fund, has grown almost
17-fold. Today, the firm usually invests up to $10 million mostly in Internet
and electronic commerce, telecommunications, business and education services,
and health-care companies.

   Primus likes to invest in start-up companies that already have a proven
product or service. The firm does not routinely comment on its returns.

   "I don't think any of our initial supports really had the expectations that
we could be as successful as we have been," Wilson said.

   Primus has been so successful that it's largely outgrown the markets for
small venture capital investments in the youngest of companies, often called
seed and early-stage capital.

   Although Primus often takes part in second-, third- or fourth-round financing
for Ohio companies, the firm sends more than half of its capital to areas
outside the Midwest, Mittra said.

   Coasts have advantage

   Areas such as Silicon Valley on the West Coast and Boston and New Jersey on
the East offer better-developed entrepreneurial networks and technology than
Ohio. And the deals are bigger.

   "What you have seen until recently is most of those dollars exiting this
region," said Ira Kaplan, partner and chairman of the corporate and securities
practice of Cleveland law firm Benesch Friedlander Coplan & Aronoff. "The deal
flow on the East and West coasts have been more substantial than we have seen
here."

   Venture Capital investments on the coasts also have offered triple-digit
returns in recent years. California alone attracted 41 percent of the nation's
venture capital last year.

   "It's up to the firms to invest in what they perceive as the highest return
for their clients," said Mike Gibbons, managing director and principal for
Brown, Gibbons, Lang & Co., a Cleveland investment banker.

   Morgenthaler Partners, Ohio's largest venture capital firm with $1 billion in
assets, also has partly outgrown the local scene.

   The Cleveland firm, started in 1968, focuses on early investments in
information technology and health-care companies.

   Morgenthaler typically earmarks 60 percent of its new funds for technology
start-ups on the East and West coasts. The firm has an office in Menlo Park,
Calif., in the heart of Silicon Valley.

   Four companies in which Morgenthaler invested had initial public offerings
this year, which is how large venture capital firms usually get their
investments back.

   The most successful IPO was a California optical components company called
New Focus. The company makes fiber-optic products for emerging optical
communications networks.

   Morgenthaler invested an undisclosed amount in the company in June 1999. New
Focus sold stock to the public in May. The stock has since more than tripled.

   If Morgenthaler were to sell its New Focus stock at current prices, the firm
would get more than $300 million - the initial value of the entire Morgenthaler
fund that made the investment, said Bob Pavey, a managing director.

   Still, Morgenthaler funds remain an investment source for local companies -
40 percent of Morgenthaler's money goes to buyouts.

   That practice, based in Cleveland, buys companies, beefs up their management,
combines them with other companies, and then sells them to the public or to
other investors, said John Lutsi, a general partner.

   Other local buyout firms include Linsalata Capital Partners, Kirtland Capital
Partners, Riverside Co., Brantley Venture Partners, Blue Point Capital Partners
and National City Capital Corp., said attorney Kaplan.

   Northeast Ohio has more buyout firms than venture capital firms investing in
start-up companies, Kaplan said. And until recently, there were few sources of
seed capital.

   Rust Belt slow to adapt

   This lack of start-up money probably stems from Northeast Ohio's industrial
roots.

   "This has been a rust belt economy for a long time," Kaplan said. "We've had
a lot of successes putting money behind concepts we're familiar with," such as
brick-and-mortar businesses rather than emerging technologies.

   That can be a deterrent to venture capitalists, said Robert Moen, president
and chief operating officer of Copernicus Therapeutics Inc. in Cleveland.

   But start-up money for area biotech companies is available. Copernicus
recently received $4.5 million in venture capital from BioAsia Investments, a
West Coast venture capital firm. Most of the capital came from a Hong Kong
investor who is used to biotech investing, Moen said.

   Local venture capitalists shy away from the field, Moen said, because
"they're more comfortable with metal bending." Another deterrent for investors,
he said, is that biotech companies take more time than other companies to
develop and market their products - from six to 12 years.

   Copernicus, for example, was founded in 1994 to commercialize technologies
developed at Case Western Reserve and Ohio universities. The technologies are
used to create and use a synthetic virus that delivers drugs, vaccines or DNA to
cells.

   So far, the virus is viable for only 20 minutes. Copernicus expects to use
its 18 months' worth of venture capital to ready its technology for clinical
use, Moen said.

   Meanwhile, a handful of small, technology-oriented funds have started in the
Cleveland area in the last three years to fill the local void left by the larger
funds.

   Two of the funds, Crystal Internet Venture Fund and Ohio Innovation Fund,
invest primarily in technology and other start-ups in Ohio. A third fund,
currently named Early Stage Partners, is being put together by Jim Petras and
Jamie Ireland, directors of Capital One Partners in Cleveland.

   "Given time, maturity and support, Ohio will become a center for start-ups,"
said Joseph Tzeng, managing director for the two Crystal Internet funds.

   Needed: Bands of 'angels'

   A growing number of local angel investors also could help start-up companies
and existing companies that need capital. That's where people like Mal Mixon
come in.

   Mixon is chairman, president and chief executive of Invacare Corp., the maker
of specialized wheelchairs and other health care equipment in Elyria. Several
years ago, he started MCM Capital, a $50 million venture capital fund, primarily
to do leveraged buyouts. The fund is invested in 25 Northeast Ohio companies.

   "If you've got a good business idea in Cleveland, getting money ain't an
issue," he said.

   Several retired business leaders also have started venture funds of their own
in the last few years, among them Jack Kahl, soon-to-retire CEO of Manco in
Avon, who has run his Duck Fund for 18 months.

   In Columbus, Mike Mizesko, principal with investment banker Helston Capital
Group, recently started OhioAngels.com, a private Internet portal for matching
Ohio investors with entrepreneurs.

   "Northeast Ohio's only drawback is historical. We're behind" in technology
start-ups, said Tzeng, managing director of the Crystal Internet funds. "Given
time, we could catch up."

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS:; PHOTO 1 (color) by JAMES A. ROSS / PLAIN DEALER:; Research
associates, left to right, Tina Dahl and Alison Klika set up gel extractions at
Athersys Inc., a Cleveland company working to develop drugs to treat
nervous-system disorders and AIDS-related muscle deterioration.; PHOTO 2 (color)
by LARRY HAMEL-LAMBERT / PLAIN DEALER PHOTOGRAPHER:; Research assistant Osman
Muhammad works in the lab at Copernicus Therapeutics, an emerging gene therapy
company located in the Edison Biotechnology Incubator in Cleveland. Copernicus
recently received $4.5 million in venture capital from a California fund.; PHOTO
3 by LARRY HAMEL-LAMBERT / PLAIN DEALER (on page 5H):; Robert Moen, president
and chief operating officer of Copernicus Therapeutics, said it is hard to find
venture capital from local funds because they don't yet understand biotechnology
start-ups.; PLAIN DEALER GRAPHIC:; Investing in Ohio companies; (SOURCES:
Thomson Financial Securities; Natinal Venture Capital Association); PLAIN DEALER
GRAPHIC (on page 5H):; Local companies that have received venture capital;
(SOURCES: The companies, venture capital firms, PricewaterhouseCoopers Money
Tree); PLAIN DEALER GRAPHIC (on page 5H):; Venture capital definitions

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2000


                             370 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                          July 9, 2000 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 2177 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL RESEARCH ENGINE SPUTTERS DESPITE ADVANCES;
NOT ENOUGH DOCTORS, TOO MUCH KNOWLEDGE

BYLINE: By Bruce Taylor Seeman Newhouse News Service

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   A serious problem is emerging in the corridors of medical schools and
pharmaceutical companies: There are not enough doctors to transfer new knowledge
into real medicine.

   This is an era of unprecedented medical promise, a time when the decoding of
genetics and other secrets of life is spawning wondrous strategies against
disease. But without specially trained clinical researchers, medical experts
say, test tube discoveries may languish in the lab -- no new drug to prevent
migraines, perhaps; no gene manipulation to block breast cancer.

   Experts say the researcher shortage is among several worries clogging the
gears of clinical research just when the enterprise should be shifting into
overdrive. Among others:

   - Some tests are financded by the government, others by drug companies or
foundations. No one is tracking how many studies are ongoing, or for what
diseases. Some tests may be redundant, and deserving illnesses may be getting
scant attention.

   - Not enough patients participate in tests. Fewer than 3 percent of adult
cancer patients, for example, enroll in clinical trials. Experts say sign-ups
are low because doctors rarely recommend the tests and patients are often
afraid.

   - The government continues to wrestle with how to protect patients. Although
the January death of a teen-ager in a gene therapy trial was a rare event, local
oversight boards often are too busy to properly monitor safety, a federal
investigator recently concluded.

   At a recent round table organized by the Institute of Medicine, part of the
National Academy of Sciences, leading doctors outlined an urgent need to
jump-start clinical research.

   "When we find a gene that affects a disease, the public is going to expect
life will change for the better," said Dr. William Crowley, a Harvard University
medical professor who directs clinical research at Massachusetts General
Hospital. "But if we don't deliver on that promise, we're going to see support
wane" for continued experimentation.

   --- The rules vary ---

   The realm of clinical research is complex and loosely defined. Some clinical
trials test new drugs or theories. Others examine current drugs for new uses, or
current drugs at new doses. Others give medical devices, like pacemakers, a
series of test runs.

   A trial may take five years or more, requiring cooperation among doctors at
several locations. Often, small armies of nurses and others conduct the tests
and compile the encyclopedic reports required to verify results.

   Lots of doctors and other health professionals oversee clinical trials --
50,000 or more, according to expert estimates. They might work for the federal
government, universities, drug companies or other health groups.

   But many don't stick with it because of modern health care pressures to see
patients and earn more for their practices or hospitals. Others lack the
extensive training the field requires.

   "It's been, 'Follow me around, see what I do, and you can be a clinical
researcher,' " said Dr. David Korn, a senior vice president at the Association
of American Medical Colleges. "It's been a very loose apprenticeship. An awful
lot of clinical researchers don't know how to do clinical research."

   The number of doctors who view research as their primary activity dropped 6
percent between 1980 and 1997, according to a study by the Federation of
American Societies for Experimental Biology, a Bethesda, Md., professional group
that represents biomedical scientists.

   The shortage is acute among doctors 45 or younger. Nominations to honorary
societies such as the American Society of Clinical Investigation have dipped 30
percent in the past decade, the study found.

   --- Difficult to measure ---

   It has proven difficult, analysts said, to measure the shortage of
researchers needed to study the growing wellspring of medical ideas. But
anecdotal evidence suggests some tests have been delayed, done improperly or put
on hold.

   "I got one call the other day for (a study on) ulcerative colitis, which is a
disease that affects the gastrointestinal system," said Dr. Adrian Dobs,
director of clinical trials at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. "And I
told the drug company, 'I don't have a doctor.' And I feel bad, because that's a
study that needs to be done."

   This all resonates deeply with patients like Patricia Delaney, 57, of
Washington, D.C. Delaney was diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease, a form of cancer,
in 1987. She enrolled in a clinical trial.

   Some patients received an experimental mix of drugs. Delaney, part of the
control group, received a different set of medicines that already had proven
promising against Hodgkin's.

   She remembers entering the study, being randomly assigned to the control
group, then having a severe allergic reaction to one of the drugs in her
treatment.

   But she remained enrolled in the test. Today, she understands that the
concoction of drugs that saved her life would not have existed had it not been
for earlier clinical trials.

   Had she been diagnosed in 1970, Delaney said, "I would have been dead. I
think I would have been dead in 1980."

   Clinical research occupies a narrow sliver of the medical endeavor. Defined
broadly, it involves transferring the findings of basic science into practical
understanding and applications for human health.

   It would be a basic scientist, for example, who would pinpoint the gene that
causes a specific mutation in yeast. It would be a clinical researcher, however,
who would discover that the same gene mutation makes people vulnerable to colon
cancer.

   Many regard the specialty as a calling.

   Top clinical research requires extensive training -- six or seven years for
dual medical and doctoral degrees, five years for postgraduate work, then two
more years for a research fellowship.

   That educational marathon might be twice the length of the training required
of the family doctor who goes to medical school and spends three years on
postgraduate work. Moreover, researchers typically earn less than peers who
perform surgery or fill their appointment books with patient exams. That reality
has become increasingly important in an era when medical school debts typically
top $80,000.

   "I remember the night I chose to be a researcher," said Dr. Daniel Foster,
chairman of internal medicine at University of Texas Southwestern Medical School
in Dallas. "I told my wife, 'I want to go into academic medicine. We're always
going to be poor, but that's what I want to do.' "

   --- New challenges ---

   Meanwhile, important changes have reshaped clinical investigation.

   New challenges confront researchers at university hospitals. Those doctors,
often relied on to explore ideas at the earliest stages, are feeling fiscal
pressures as managed care pushes them to concentrate more on seeing patients and
less on doing research.

   At the same time, revolutionary discoveries in genetics, cloning, tissue
engineering and other areas have prompted drug companies and other private
concerns to establish clinical research labs.

   In 1991, academic medical centers were responsible for 75 percent of clinical
research projects paid for by industry, said Kenneth Getz, president of
CenterWatch, a publisher that tracks the clinical trials industry. Today it's
down to 40 percent.

   Academic centers have lost much of the research enterprise because they were
too bureaucratic, unreliable and expensive given their high overhead, Getz said.

   All clinical trials, whether executed by public researchers or private
companies, must follow the same four-phase approval process for the safety,
effectiveness and side effects of a new drug or treatment.

   But it's the private companies, Getz said, that are most often hired to
conduct a test's final phases. Getz said about 10,000 research centers are now
competing to do about $3.5 billion worth of clinical trials each year. The
National Institutes of Health, which relies on academic institutions to conduct
its tests, spends about $2 billion a year.

   "There is a race against the clock," Getz said. "There might be competitors.
There might be public pressure. Companies start shifting a lot of research over
to the private sector."

   --- Reform is in the wind ---

   Regardless of who pays for the clinical trials, momentum is increasing for
reform in patient participation, safety and training for doctors.

   A new Web site, www.ClinicalTrials.gov, recruits for upcoming tests. It now
lists about 4,000 ongoing trials, most sponsored by the NIH. One test, for
example, is exploring if the drug tamoxifen blocks the "uptake" of estrogen and
fights breast cancer. Another tests DNA samples for genetic links in pancreatic
disorders. A third studies whether acupuncture eases carpal tunnel syndrome.

   Participation rates for clinical studies are low, analysts agree. Too few
patients get referred by doctors. Many patients fear they will get a placebo --
a do-nothing pill used to compare against new treatments -- even though that
happens only in special cases.

   To encourage enrollment, President Clinton recently ordered Medicare to begin
covering "routine costs" of clinical trials, such as lab tests and doctors'
office visits. Specifics are under review, but the change would help more older
people participate in clinical trials.

   Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Arizonan who died in January in a gene
therapy test in Philadelphia, represents a rare case of a patient killed in a
clinical trial. But federal investigators have warned about safety problems in
general.

   June Gibbs Brown, inspector general of the federal Department of Health and
Human Services, was particularly critical of the system that assigns test
oversight to 3,000 to 5,000 institutional review boards.

   The boards, composed of scientists and lay people, are overwhelmed by their
work and often make decisions about tests in a "rushed atmosphere," Brown said
in a June 1998 report.

   Another report authored by Brown this year concluded that HHS had made only
"minimal progress" in protecting patients. In May, the department issued a new
set of safeguards aimed at reinforcing testing standards.

   The new Office for Human Research Protection was established in June, as HHS
vowed to increase training of doctors and review board members. HHS also will
push for fines against researchers who don't properly inform patients of risks.

   In addition, HHS will require enhanced monitoring of clinical trials. New
conflict-of-interest rules are expected to more fully inform patients when
doctors have invested in a company that may benefit from research results.

   --- More focus needed ---

   Other groups are focusing on replenishing the ranks of qualified clinical
researchers.

   A plan to reduce the debt of young researchers is being advocated by FASEB,
the biomedical scientists group. The NIH now spends more than $25 million
annually on programs to recruit and retain clinical researchers, plus underwrite
university courses in research ethics and biostatistics.

   But beyond these efforts, some say, is a need for a more focused national
agenda for clinical research.

   "If you ask 200 researchers and 200 members of the public, I think you'd get
400 priorities about what's important," said Elaine Larson, a pharmaceutical and
therapeutic research professor at Columbia University.


   CLINICAL TRIAL PROCEDURES

   *Clinical trials test the safety and effectiveness of new drugs or therapies.
Ideas for the tests usually come form researchers, perhaps a medical school
professor or a drug company doctor.

   *All clinical trials must follow a protocol -- rules defining the kinds of
people eligible, the schedule of tests, the dosages of the drug and the length
of the study.

   Patients who enroll must give their "informed consent," a preliminary process
in which candidates learn about risks, what other treatments are available and
what researchers hope to learn.  Patients may quit at any time.

   *Before new therapies are tested on people, they must have shown promise in
animal or lab tests.  Once that hurdle is passed, the clinical test proceeds in
phases:

   Phase I: Researchers test a new drug or treatment in a small group of people,
perhaps 20-80, to determine a safe dosage range and identify side effects.

   Phase II: The drug is given to a larger group, maybe 100-300, to test
effectiveness and further evaluate safety.

   Phase III: In a larger study group, perhaps 1,000 to 3,000, the drug is
tested to confirm effectiveness, monitor side effects and compare the treatment
to others already in use.

   Phase IV: Completed after the drug or treatment is on the market, this test
measures effectiveness in various populations and measures long-term side
effects.

   *By the time a new drug is finally approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, the clinical testing process may have taken several years and
cost millions of dollars.

   *To protect patients along the way, each trial is monitored by an
Institutional Review Board, an independent committee of doctors, statisticians
and others.

    Source: National Institutes of Health

   NNS

GRAPHIC: Dr. William Crowley: Research must meet public expectations or suffer
lack of support

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000


                             371 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      July 9, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. B07

LENGTH: 932 words

HEADLINE: Genes and Dangers From the Unknown

BYLINE: Tom Delbanco

BODY:


   As the race to decipher the human genome ends its first phase, we are quite
properly amazed watching our genetic map unfold before our eyes. But it is far
too early to conclude that understanding our genetic substance will trigger a
leap forward in human "progress." One thing is certain: We are not spending
nearly enough time or money considering how society will cope with what
scientists are unleashing.

   Darwin taught us that progress from survival of those organisms most fit
occurs over thousands of years, as nature weeds out weaknesses. Now we threaten
to change the human organism virtually all at once, without affording the time
to reach balance and harmony. As science fiction writers love to speculate, we
may even generate a war within our own bodies.

   Might genetic interventions inadvertently trigger more trouble than success?
Look at the fine line between disaster and rescue that thalidomide illustrates.
In the past this drug disfigured newborns; now we hope it will help with cancer
and AIDS. Consider HIV therapy, how it alters cells and too often induces
resistance. Will genetically altered cells make good or bad neighbors to those
in adjoining tissues? Clinical investigators using genetically engineered
substances in Boston and Philadelphia have already watched death come to
patients before rescue.

   Genetic knowledge will never abolish all disease and suffering, and Americans
don't like to address rationing explicitly. We already spend about 15 percent of
our gross domestic product on health care, and there is no way our economic
resources can keep pace with the new technologies. Virtually every new
diagnostic and therapeutic manipulation adds costs. The rush by biotechnology
companies to profit from the new genetic discoveries makes it likely that the
new maneuvers will be the most expensive of all, and rarely do new discoveries
replace existing expensive tests and interventions.

   Who will have access to the new technologies and who won't? Will we end up
further widening the gap between rich and poor? When the United States has 45
million people without health insurance and many more who can't afford therapies
already proven worthwhile, how can we--and should we--find the money for new
genetic therapies that will cost a fortune?

   Consider how poorly our society is dealing with the elderly, the
beneficiaries of extended life expectancy that scientific, behavioral and social
changes have already provided. As doctors urge their patients to throw away
cigarettes, we rarely pause to take stock of the paradox that if everyone were
to stop smoking tomorrow, the burden on society from increased longevity could
prove enormous. Take that thought a step further. If genetic therapies that
increase life expectancy arrived tomorrow, they might bankrupt our health care
system or siphon vital resources away from education, human services and other
essential functions of society. Are we ready to deal with this kind of success?

   Will mapping genes help further discrimination and loss of privacy? How will
society address genetic tests for health insurance, jobs and life insurance?
What role is there for the marketplace vs. governmental regulation? And consider
the next step: full-blown eugenics. In today's narcissistic society, people
aspire increasingly to their notion of perfection: the cherished height, gender,
skin color. How will we build moral consensus, a code that stymies those who
would create a master race or a Frankenstein?

   Think about the anguish of those deciding whether to learn if they or their
children have genes that forecast Huntington's disease, or increase the
likelihood of breast cancer or dementia. Reflect on the uncertainties that
already attend the relatively primitive genetic tests that amniocentesis offers
the pregnant woman and multiply those dilemmas a thousand fold.

   How will we feel when fantasies of genetic perfection are destroyed? May we
not end up with loss of ambition, depression or even a shattered persona?
Learning about one's genetic map may induce far more pain than pleasure.

   What about responsibility, voluntary behaviors, the old-fashioned idea of
choosing right over wrong? Will we rush to "blame the gene" for every human
failure or transgression? Will genetic determinism weaken our will? Will it stop
our search for mystery, community, art, spirituality and the deepest pleasures?
Will the genetic map replace the dream?

   The human quest for knowledge will never abate, and we must mobilize quickly
to address the consequences of what we learn. Our government, universities,
industry, communities, schools, clergy, ethicists and each of us must prepare
for some exceedingly tough decisions, lest we end up expressing ex-post-facto
doubts like those of the Los Alamos physicists who, having detonated an atomic
bomb, looked back in horror at what they had wrought.

   It's time to build a national "Genome Commission" that is well supported,
broadly representative and has strong bipartisan teeth, analogous to the Atomic
Energy Commission, which helped us live with the consequences of splitting the
atom. We should also form an international counterpart that is truly global in
its reach.

   For every dollar we spend on the genome project and the attendant frantic
race for discovery, we should spend an equal amount to prepare for what we find.
The rush for that kind of enlightenment has hardly begun.



   The writer is Koplow-Tullis professor of general medicine and primary care at
Harvard Medical School and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.

LOAD-DATE: July 09, 2000


                             372 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     July 8, 2000, Saturday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY GIVES HOPE TO BRAIN PATIENT

BYLINE: CHRISTOPHER SNOWBECK, POST-GAZETTE STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   Italo Cappabianca has brain cancer, but that hasn't slowed him down much.
He's continued his work in the state's House of Representatives, he's
contemplating a run for mayor of his hometown of Erie and he has plans to visit
Sicily this fall.

   There's another trip Cappabianca has plans for.

   "I keep telling these guys, we're going for the Nobel Prize in medicine for
this -- at least a nomination -- and we'll all go to Sweden together," he said.

   Cappabianca yesterday became the first person to receive an experimental gene
therapy treatment at the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute that could
work like a vaccine against malignant glioma, a cancer of brain cells that hits
17,000 Americans every year.

   Dr. Hideho Okada made five injections of the vaccine into Cappabianca's upper
left leg. Okada and Dr. Frank Lieberman, both of the cancer institute, are the
"guys" that Cappabianca hopes to escort to Sweden once the vaccine cures him of
his disease.

   The odds aren't in his favor.

   Cappabianca, 62, was diagnosed with brain cancer last summer. The cancer came
back this spring, which means the loquacious Democrat is facing odds that he
might not live to see the 2001 election season. His doctors say that patients
with his type of brain cancer live an average of 6 to 9 months after recurrence.

   But that's not how Cappabianca sees it.

   When asked about the future, Cappabianca says: "I think of success -- I think
of a cure."

   It's been a controversial year in the world of gene therapy. At a time when
scientists have announced the successful decoding of much of the human genome
and observers have speculated on the future for genetic medicine, gene therapy
projects like the one Cappabianca is enrolled in are under more scrutiny than
ever.

   The federal government shut down the gene therapy program at the University
of Pennsylvania in January after the September death of an 18-year-old patient.

   It was the first fatality attributed to the controversial field of medicine.

   When Cappabianca heard about the controversy, he was scared -- not of going
forward with his treatment, but that his experimental treatment would be shut
down before it even began.

   Luckily, that didn't happen. Okada said UPCI researchers have maintained good
relations with the Food and Drug Administration in the wake of the Penn
controversy to make sure the local research project could continue safely and
speedily.

   The project is called a Phase I trial, meaning it seeks to show that a
proposed treatment doesn't harm patients. To develop the brain cancer vaccine,
doctors removed part of Cappabianca's tumor in April and multiplied some of the
cells for several weeks in a laboratory culture.

   Using a specially engineered virus, the researchers then inserted three genes
into his fibroblasts, cells that serve as connective tissue. One of the genes
produces an immune system stimulator called interleukin-4. Another makes an
enzyme called thymidine kinase, which makes the cells vulnerable to being killed
by a drug called gancyclovir, and the third gene produces a marker protein that
makes the cell easy to find.

   The scientists used the marker gene to locate and then isolate the
fibroblasts infected with the virus-gene combination. Those modified cells,
along with some of his tumor cells that were irradiated to prevent them from
multiplying, made up the vaccine given to Cappabianca yesterday. The idea is
that interleukin-4 will stimulate an immune system response to the tumor cells,
causing the immune system to seek and destroy other tumor cells.

   Eight days after the injection, the doctors will administer gancyclovir,
which will kill off the vaccine cells as a safety precaution.

   Cappabianca will spend much of the next month in Pittsburgh receiving
treatments. But doctors won't know for at least two weeks if the vaccine has had
any effect on his immune system. And even if the immune system does respond, it
won't be clear for another two weeks what impact it will have on his disease.
Doctors will use MRI scans at 30 days and 90 days to check whether the vaccine
is fighting the brain cancer.

   Cappabianca will visit the hospital often during his time in Pittsburgh, but
he will spend much of the time at the house of a sister who lives in Bellevue.
Two of his siblings, his wife and his brother's wife were with the politician
during the injection yesterday.

   "I'm looking out to help myself, obviously, but at the same time there's a
possibility I can help some other people," he said. "You've got to be
adventurous, you've got to be bold. You've got to go where no one else has gone
before, like they say in that starship. They're going to learn something from me
one way or another."

   UPCI researchers are not looking to enroll another patient in the study until
they've had time to monitor Cappabianca's progress.

   Still, anyone interested in getting information about the research project
can call UPCI at 1-800-237-4724.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Jack Hanrahan/Erie Times News: Linda Cappabianca hugs
her; husband, state Rep. Italo Cappabianca, before brain surgery at UPMC;
Presbyterian in April to compat brain cancer.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2000


                             373 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             July 8, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: Researchers see 'true hope' on Alzheimer's

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein; KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- In the race against an impending epidemic among aging baby
boomers, Alzheimer's disease researchers think they are pulling ahead.

   "There's a smell of success in the air," Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
neurosciences director at the National Institute on Aging, said yesterday.

   "We've all been seeing the incremental changes in how we understand
Alzheimer's disease for many years.  But I think this is the first time people
are really thinking that some treatments are just around the corner."

   Scientific advances, even breakthroughs, are coming fast: In the past six
weeks, scientific journals have reported several major advances in research.
The number of drugs available to fight Alzheimer's effects is approaching 60.
Researchers are turning from treating symptoms, such as forgetfulness, to the
disease's root causes.

   They promise more encouraging news at the World Alzheimer's Congress
convening tomorrow in Washington.  More than 5,000 scientists and caregivers are
expected to attend.

   "It doesn't mean we're there yet, but there's real true hope," said Dale
Schenk, vice president of Elan Pharmaceuticals, an Irish company whose research
lab is in South San Francisco.

   On Tuesday, Schenk plans to announce results of early human-safety tests of a
vaccine against Alzheimer's that works in mice.

   A year ago, Schenk stunned the research community when he announced that he
could prevent a buildup of brain plaque -- which most researchers think is the
root cause of Alzheimer's -- with a vaccine that stimulates the immune system.

   "This is one of those rare projects and efforts where at least so far it just
seems to be unfolding wonderfully," Schenk said.

   The problem of Alzheimer's is growing in urgency.  "We're on the verge of an
epidemic with the baby boomers," said Bill Thies, vice president of medical and
scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's Association.

   The first of the baby boomers will hit age 65 in 2011. By 2025, 18 percent of
the U.S. population will be 65 or older.

   About 10 percent of 65-year-olds have Alzheimer's. Nearly 50 percent of
85-year-olds develop it.

   Researchers are focusing on two physical manifestations of the disease in the
nervous system.  Most are looking at excess brain plaque, called beta amyloid,
which shows up in large amounts in Alzheimer's patients.  Others are focusing on
unusual tangled fibers -- called tau -- inside the neuron cells of Alzheimer's
patients.  Scientists are split on whether the tau causes the plaque or vice
versa.

   Morrison-Bogorad said the beta amyloid research is "tantalizing" and the most
promising.  Beta amyloids grow between nerve cells, where they block
communication and even kill cells.  It's sort of like the brain's version of
cholesterol.

   The plaque consists of tiny fragments of a long protein that is normal in the
body.  Alzheimer's patients just have lots more of those fragments.

   Recent research has identified two enzymes that cut the long protein into the
tiny fragments that clog cells, and scientists are trying to figure out how to
block the enzymes, Morrison-Bogorad said.

   Scientists also have isolated three separate genes, each of which can cause
overproduction of brain plaque.

   Other researchers say plaque-oriented scientists are looking at the wrong
thing.  Those researchers think tangled fibers inside nerve cells are at the
heart of the mystery of Alzheimer's.

   "Alzheimer's disease is a million-piece puzzle, where 999,000 pieces don't
belong to the puzzle," said Khalid Iqbal, chairman of the department of
neurochemistry at the New York State Institute for Basic Research on Staten
Island.

   Iqbal has found excess phosphorous in the tangled fibers of Alzheimer's
patients, making those fiber bundles, in effect, "a toxic molecule."

   On Tuesday, Iqbal will tell colleagues that he can get the fibers to tangle
in a test tube by manipulating the enzyme that regulates phosphorous.

   "That has never been done before," Iqbal said.

   Other recent research to be discussed at the conference points to
environmental factors such as diet and blood pressure, Morrison-Bogorad said.
Genetic therapy is also being examined.  Because Alzheimer's takes different
forms, she predicts its treatment will entail a mix of therapies.

   It's a burgeoning field.  Twenty-five years ago, she noted, maybe two
scientific research papers a year were published on Alzheimer's. Now the number
is more than 2,000.

   "It's almost impossible to keep up," Morrison-Bogorad said.  "And that's
wonderful."


LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2000


                             374 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             July 8, 2000 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: Pace quickens in Alzheimer's research and treatment

BYLINE: Seth Borenstein, KRT NEWS SERVICE

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In the race against an impending epidemic among aging Baby Boomers,
Alzheimer's disease researchers think they are pulling ahead.

    "There's a smell of success in the air," Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad,
neurosciences director at the National Institute on Aging, said yesterday.

    "We've all been seeing the incremental changes in how we understand
Alzheimer's disease for many years. But I think this is the first time people
are really thinking that some treatments are just around the corner."

    Scientific advances, even breakthroughs, are coming fast: In the past six
weeks, scientific journals have reported three major advances in research. The
number of drugs available to fight Alzheimer's effects is approaching 60.
Researchers are turning from treating symptoms, such as forgetfulness, to the
disease's root causes.

    They promise more encouraging news at the World Alzheimer's Congress
convening tomorrow in Washington. More than 5,000 Alzheimer's scientists and
caregivers are expected to attend.

    "It doesn't mean we're there yet, but there's real true hope," said Dale
Schenk, vice president of Elan Pharmaceuticals, an Irish company whose research
lab is in South San Francisco.

    On Tuesday, Schenk plans to announce results of early human-safety tests of
an Alzheimer's vaccine that works in mice.

    A year ago, Schenk stunned the research community when he announced that he
could prevent a buildup of brain plaque - which most researchers think is the
root cause of Alzheimer's - with a vaccine that stimulates the immune system.

    "This is one of those rare projects and efforts where at least so far it
just seems to be unfolding wonderfully," Schenk said.

    Alzheimer's is a problem of growing urgency.

    "We're on the verge of an epidemic with the Baby Boomers," said Bill Thies,
vice president of medical and scientific affairs for the Alzheimer's
Association.

    The first of America's Baby Boomers will hit age 65 in 2011. By 2025, 18
percent of America's population will be 65 or older.

    About 10 percent of 65-year-olds have Alzheimer's. Nearly 50 percent of
85-year-olds develop it.

   Researchers are focusing on two physical manifestations of the disease in the
nervous system. Most are looking at excess brain plaque, called beta amyloid,
which shows up in large amounts in Alzheimer's patients.

    Others are focusing on unusual tangled fibers - called tau - inside the
neuron cells of Alzheimer's patients. Scientists are split on whether the tau
causes the plaque or vice versa.

    Morrison-Bogorad said the beta amyloid research is "tantalizing" and the
most promising. Beta amyloids grow between nerve cells, where they block
communication and even kill cells. It's sort of like the brain's version of
cholesterol.

    The plaque consists of tiny fragments of a long protein that is normal in
the body. Alzheimer's patients just have lots more of those fragments.

    Recent research has identified two enzymes that cut the long protein into
the tiny fragments that clog cells, and scientists are trying to figure out how
to block the enzymes, Morrison-Bogorad said.

    Scientists also have isolated three separate genes, each of which can cause
overproduction of brain plaque.

    Other researchers say plaque-oriented scientists are looking at the wrong
thing. They think tangled fibers inside nerve cells are at the heart of the
mystery of Alzheimer's.

    "Alzheimer's disease is a million-piece puzzle, where 999,000 pieces don't
belong to the puzzle," said Khalid Iqbal, chairman of the department of
neurochemistry at the New York State Institute for Basic Research on Staten
Island.

    Iqbal has found excess phosphorous in the tangled fibers of Alzheimer's
patients, making those fiber bundles, in effect, "a toxic molecule."

    On Tuesday, Iqbal will tell colleagues that he can get the fibers to tangle
in a test tube by manipulating the enzyme that regulates phosphorous.

    "That has never been done before," Iqbal said.

    Other recent research to be discussed at the conference points to
environmental factors such as diet and blood pressure, Morrison-Bogorad said.
Genetic therapy is also being examined. Because Alzheimer's takes different
forms, she predicts its treatment will entail a mix of therapies.

    It's a burgeoning field. Twenty-five years ago, she noted, maybe two
scientific research papers a year were published on Alzheimer's. Now it's more
than 2,000.

    "It's almost impossible to keep up," Morrison-Bogorad said. "And that's
wonderful."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             375 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)



                      July 7, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: STATE, Pg. B-10, STATE

LENGTH: 240 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   STATE

   ERIE LAWMAKER

   Gene therapy for tumor

   An Erie County legislator will undergo experimental gene therapy for brain
cancer this afternoon at UPMC Presbyterian, Oakland.

   Doctors will inject state Rep. Italo Cappabianca, D-Erie, with a genetically
engineered anti-tumor vaccine made of brain cells removed from Cappabianca
during surgery this spring. In the laboratory, researchers grew the cells and
inserted into them genes for interleukin-4, a protein they hope will stimulate
Cappabianca's immune system to attack his cancer.

Cappabianca, who is running unopposed for his 12th term, was diagnosed last year
with malignant glioma, a common and highly lethal form of brain cancer.

   STATE SENATE

   Ex-aide sues Madigan

   A former staffer for a Pennsylvania state senator is claiming she was fired
because she refused to do campaign work for U.S. Rep. Don Sherwood on official
time.

   Connie Van Horn, a former secretary for state Sen. Roger Madigan, R-Bradford,
said she was told to organize fund-raising activities in Madigan's office in
Towanda, Bradford County, to support Sherwood's 1998 election bid.

   Horn said she was fired this year when she refused to help Sherwood win
re-election in 2000, the Sunday Review of Towanda reported.

   Such actions are against state ethics rules. The State Ethics Commission
declined to comment on whether it was investigating.

   Both Madigan and Sherwood denied the charges.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2000


                             376 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         July 6, 2000 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A13

LENGTH: 236 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS MAKE GAINS AGAINST BLOOD DISEASES

BYLINE: By Robert Cooke Newsday

BODY:

   New experiments in mice are showing it is possible to treat hemoglobin
diseases, including sickle cell anemia, with gene therapy, scientists said
Wednesday.

   The experiments involved taking a bone marrow sample from animals with a
hemoglobin disorder, beta-thalassemia. From the marrow, researchers separated
out stem cells, which can produce all kinds of blood cells, infected them with
an engineered virus, and put them back into the mice. It worked.

   "For the first time, we were able to get the intact gene into enough red
blood cells to increase production of hemoglobin," said molecular geneticist
Michel Sadelain at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York.

   In thalassemia, the bad hemoglobin is unable to carry normal amounts of
oxygen, leading to severe, disabling anemia, and even death.

   In humans, Sadelain said, "the severe forms of thalassemia, if untreated, are
lethal, usually in the first five years" of life. But thanks to blood
transfusions, such patients can now live to age 20, or even longer. The
thalassemias are the most common genetic disorders known worldwide, especially
in the Mediterranean area, Africa and Southeast Asia. About 100,000 children are
born with beta-thalassemia each year, 2,000 of them in the United States. An
estimated 80,000 Americans, mostly of African descent, have sickle cell anemia.

   The new experiments were reported Wednesday in Nature.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2000


                             377 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      July 5, 2000 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 01A

LENGTH: 1410 words

HEADLINE: Search just begun for genome secrets;
Putting research to use will be the next step -- and the most controversial one

BYLINE: CHARLOTTE SCHUBERT of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   More than $1 billion has been spent on sequencing the human genome.
Thousands of people have worked countless hours on the project. And when the
announcement came last week that more than 90% was sequenced, it made
international news.

   But for some researchers in Wisconsin and across the world, making sense of
the human genome and then taking that knowledge to the next step has just begun.

   "This is quite a different thing than an endpoint," said University of
Wisconsin-Madison genetics professor Fred Blattner, who directs the Genome
Center of Wisconsin. "It's a milestone, it's a progress report."

   Much of the sequence is still a meaningless readout of A's, G's, C's and T's
-- the chemical shorthand for the tiny molecules that are used over and over
again in a strand of DNA. Making sense of that readout will occupy biologists
for decades.

   "It's not all that complete, and it's not all that correct, and it's not all
put together," said David Schwartz, a UW professor of genetics and biochemistry
who has developed techniques that will help complete the sequence.

   Not only is the sequence in disarray, but many of the genes have not been
found. Genes are the parts of DNA that can instruct the creation of proteins.
And next to water, proteins make up most of our body and regulate many of the
functions that keep us alive. Scientists do not even know how many genes there
are; estimates range from 38,000 to 120, 000. Blattner estimates that about half
of the genes could be identified by next year and more 90% within five years.

   So why all the fanfare last week when Craig Venter, president of Celera
Genomics, and Francis Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research
Institute, got together to announce the completion of a "rough draft" of the
human genome?

   The short answer is that there may be no specific reason; the announcement
could have been made earlier or later.

   But it is worth noting that in genome research, there may be no defined
endpoint. Sequencing the very last fragment of recalcitrant, and likely
meaningless, piece of human DNA could take more than a century. Even piecing
together all the existing chunks in the right order could take years. Waiting
for those things to happen would miss an opportunity to acknowledge all the work
done so far, and to talk about the potential medical breakthroughs from the
sequence as it now stands.

   In addition, public and private sequencing efforts had competed against each
other, and there were some fears that the acrimony between the two camps would
get in the way of acknowledging the sequence as a step forward for everyone.
With that in mind, the decision to make a joint announcement, wrapped in images
of camaraderie, was perhaps as much political as scientific.

   "The decision to make peace and announce this milestone together was an
attempt to get the project to move ahead on a solid footing, get away from the
emphasis on the horse race, and concentrate on the analysis of data," Blattner
said.

   Within the next 10 years, that analysis could result in routine screening for
genetic predisposition to 25 major causes of illness, Collins said.

   Although humans are 99.9% similar in their genetic sequence, it's the
differences that make us unique. Thousands of A's, G's, C's and T's can be
linked to make a gene, but just a single substitution, such as an A for a T, can
mean a deadly disease such as cystic fibrosis or sickle cell anemia.

   Other diseases involve multiple genes or the interaction of genetic makeup
with lifestyle and environment. Many types of cancer, diabetes and some mental
illnesses likely are due to a combination of factors.

   "It was a big job to get this far. But once you have it (the sequence), it's
easy to get the same thing from a different individual," said Steve Henikoff, a
geneticist at Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, who has
developed computer programs to help make sense of the sequence.

   Venter has said that within his lifetime, cancer potentially could be cured
-- but that is just one of many optimistic predictions, and even he is not sure.

   "My guess is that sometime in the next decade we will have accomplished some
cures for some cancers, but which cancers they are, how soon it will happen and
even if it will happen is not known," said Howard Jacobs, director of human
molecular genetics at the Medical College of Wisconsin.

   Collins has reached further, predicting that by 2020, doctors could rely on
individual genetic variations in prescribing new and existing drugs and choosing
the dosage. He said that by 2040, gene therapy and gene-based drugs will be
available for most diseases.

   Will designer humans one day roam the planet? That would require the ability
to change DNA inside an egg or a sperm or to clone a human. Those processes may
someday be possible. And the thought of applying the techniques to humans seems
to frighten most responsible scientists as much as average "Star Trek" fans.

   Many laboratories still are doing the work of finding out how different genes
function and how they relate to disease.

   "By having the human genome, we just saved two years of work," said Michael
Gould, professor of oncology and medical physics at UW. Gould studies genes that
are involved in breast cancer in rats. It's the genes that help prevent cancer
that most interest him.

   His laboratory has been chasing the identity of several of these genes for
years. For one such rat gene, he has narrowed the search to a huge strand of DNA
that contains a small number of genes: just 25.

   In that strand of DNA, the rat and the human genes are similar and in the
same order. That will help him find the one gene involved in breast cancer.
Knowing what that one gene is would enable him to ask whether people who are
predisposed to cancer have defects in that gene.

   It could also lead to the development of drugs designed against specific
molecular targets. The potential benefits from research like Gould's have a flip
side that worries many people, including scientists themselves.

   "What I am personally worried about, and everybody I know is, is the right to
privacy, " he said.

   Like many geneticists, he is quick to point out that having a set of bad
genes does not always mean you are hard-wired for hardship. The environment
plays a role, too.

   "A good example is we will be able to find genes that interact with smoking
to cause lung cancer," he said. If someone avoids smoking, the cancer is less
likely appear.

   The most immediate problem for the next couple years for some gene experts is
finding the genes in the reams of sequence information. Only about 3% of the DNA
sequence of a human being is thought to contain genes. The rest is called
"junk."

   Sorting the junk from the genes is a problem that plagued scientists working
on the genome of the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster earlier this year.

   To solve it, they convened an intense 11-day session this spring. About 45
biologists and computer experts sat side by side to compare data from different
labs and genome databases, and to refine computer programs.

   They called the session a "jamboree," or, in the words of Science magazine,
"a Woodstock for science nerds." The result was a compendium of most of the
13,600 genes in Drosophila.

   "That kind of unity that was there I don't think you are going to find for
the human genome," Henikoff said.

   One reason for that lack of unity is potential profit. Although the
definition of what can be patented is in flux, finding a gene with commercial
value propels some of the rush.

   No one can currently patent a sequence of DNA without at least having a clue
as to its potential applicability -- although in some instances that clue can be
pretty meager, according to Paulanne Chelf, a patent agent at the Wisconsin
Alumni Research Foundation.

   The rules are still being hammered out in the courts, Chelf said.

   To Henikoff and many other scientists, all that -- the race to identify
genes, the question of patents -- is not where the excitement is.

   " I don't care who does it," said Henikoff, the Seattle geneticist. "I find
the science very interesting."

   "Scientists are elated," said Jacobs of the Medical College, referring to the
progress on the human genome project. "But the public has to realize that this
is the beginning. We have to take these nuggets and mine them into ore."

   ------------

   The New York Times contributed to this report.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000


                             378 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 5, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 800 words

HEADLINE: CITY CELEBRATES IN HIGH STYLE SCIENTISTS WIN LIBERTY MEDAL FOR DNA
WORK

BYLINE: Sandy Bauers, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The large, golden medal seemed almost incongruous against the slender frame
of 72-year-old James D. Watson as he stood, white hair feathering his face,
recalling a pivotal moment.

   "When I was a child, I wanted to have a great idea," he said, smiling almost
shyly. "And we had a great idea."

   The fortuitous notion - that all the building blocks of life are contained in
the wisps of an entwined cellular structure known as DNA - was celebrated
yesterday as Watson and his research partner, Francis H.C. Crick, received the
2000 Philadelphia Liberty Medal.

   The 224th anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence
continued with a ceremonial tapping of the Liberty Bell, a parade down Benjamin
Franklin Parkway, and an Earth, Wind & Fire concert followed by fireworks, not
to mention scores of community celebrations, backyard picnics and typical Shore
traffic snafus.

   Yesterday's Liberty Medal was but one among several awards, including the
Nobel Prize, Watson and Crick have received. Although the two elders of science
discovered the double helix of DNA nearly 50 years ago, their medal-worthy work
is only now beginning to fulfill its promise.

   Genetic therapy is considered the frontier of medicine. And it was just 10
days ago that scientists announced that they had essentially finished mapping
DNA's 3.2 billion pairs of chemical units, unlocking possible cures for cancer,
AIDS and other diseases.

   Bestowing the award in front of Independence Hall, Mayor Street said the
recipients, the first scientists to receive the award, "embody our nation's
spirit to improve the human condition."

   William J. Avery, chairman of Greater Philadelphia First, which administers
the medal, said that Watson and Crick - one American, one British, respectively
- "launched a revolution in genetic science that has changed our lives forever."

   And one that has awed even its discoverers.

   "The extent and speed of these advances are truly remarkable," said Crick,
83, in a taped message from his home in Southern California, which he rarely
leaves. "Few people, a generation ago, would have guessed that so much would
have been achieved by now."

   Through genetics, Watson said, "the inborn equality of all humans that
[Thomas] Jefferson so forcefully believed in, we now see arising from our common
ancestor that existed in southern Africa only some 100,000 years ago.

   "Underlying the close resemblance of all humans to each other is the close
similarity of our books of DNA instructions," he said.

   The two scientists' remarks showed them to be men with a sense of humor,
still almost giddily pleased with the elegance of DNA. Crick noted that the
license plate on his car reads "AT GC," after the letters for the bases of the
four strands in the double helix.

   "Even now, many people don't know what it signifies," he said. "If they ask
me, I tell them: 'That's the secret of life!' "

   In remarks after the ceremony, Watson said that fears about genetic research
were so far only hypothetical.

   "None of the bad scenarios have happened," Watson said. On the other hand,
"all the good we prophesied has happened," he said, not only in medicine, but in
the development of pest-resistant crops and the cloning of domestic animals.

   Watson said the social-justice system may see the "biggest long-term effect"
of DNA research, which "is going to make men a lot more honest" as it assists
police in identifying perpetrators at a crime scene.

   "A free society," he added, "has to be a just society."

   Crick, too, foresees "vast new regions of biology to explore. It will take
many scientists, worldwide, many, many years of hard work before we can begin to
understand exactly how our bodies and our brains work, how they developed in the
womb, and how they evolved since life began on Earth several billion years ago."

   Portions of the ceremony were stippled by brief harangues from abortion
protesters, who waved photographs of aborted fetuses. They were organized by
Missionaries to the Pre-Born, based in Milwaukee, Wis.

   "Notice how the founding fathers listed life No. 1 among the freedoms," said
Stephen Grottke, of Marshville, Wis., who said he did not know who was receiving
the award, nor did he realize it was related to genetic research. "Without life,
there is no liberty."

   Oddly enough, although Watson was talking of research and genetics rather
than taking a political or ethical stance, he noted that "every successful
society must possess citizens gnawing at its innards and threatening
conventional wisdom. . . . Now, more than ever, successful nations must be free
societies where diversity of thought is not only tolerated but seen as the
intelligent response to a constantly changing world."

   Sandy Bauers' e-mail address is sbauers@phillynews.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             379 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 4, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. F1

LENGTH: 1847 words

HEADLINE: THE MAN WHO FIXES BRAINS EVAN SNYDER OF CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL IS CLOSING
IN A ONCE-UNTHINKABLE GOAL: GROWING NEW BRAIN CELLS TO REPLACE DAMAGED ONES

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Again and again, Dr. Evan Snyder checks a big nitrogen-cooled freezer in his
lab at Children's Hospital, as anxious about its smooth operation as he might be
about an ailing child.

   "I've even driven halfway home, turned around and come back," he admits, just
to make certain the unit is humming along as it should, chilling its contents to
exactly 220 degrees below zero, Fahrenheit.

   Call him obsessive. Snyder, laughing at himself, agrees.

   But keep in mind that the freezer contains the stuff of a medical revolution
in treating everything from Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease to strokes and
spinal cord injuries.

   Snyder lifted the freezer's lid recently to reveal hundreds of small vials
containing clumps of brain cells, frozen in suspended animation. These neural
stem cells - immature, generic brain cells most abundant in fetuses and young
children - can develop into any of the specialized cells that make the brain
work.

   Snyder was the first to isolate and grow these stem cells in the lab about a
decade ago, and since then he has rocketed to prominence on the hope of using
them to heal a wide range of presently incurable brain disorders.

   Now, for the first time ever, the traditional view of the brain as an organ
where, after maturity, damaged or dead cells cannot be replaced may be
tottering. And the neural stem cells are acting as the battering ram.

   "Stem-cell biology is enormously exciting right now and holds promise for
really novel therapies - not just symptomatic therapies, but maybe cures," says
Dr. Gerald Fischbach, director of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke.

      Snyder is even bolder, predicting the first human trials of stem-cell
therapy may be only a year or two away, based on the rapid progress in lab
animals.

   "Before the decade is out," he said, "there will be some therapeutic
benefits" from treating disease with neural stem cells. Parkinson's disease,
caused by the death of brain cells in a certain region, might be one of the
first targets for stem-cell treatment, he said; another is Lou Gehrig's disease,
or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, because it kills so quickly and there's no
treatment.

   For the victims of incurable brain diseases and their loved ones, Snyder is a
beacon of hope, an optimist in the face of some of the cruelest afflictions
known to humanity. His optimism and openness to new ways of conducting research
has made him a magnet for support and advocacy groups for diseases from
ataxia-telangietasia, or A-T, to the rare Canavan syndrome.

   "Scientists like Evan Snyder are like first-round draft picks: Every disease
group wants to get their hands on someone like this," said Brad Margus, founder
of the Florida-based A-T Children's Project.

   Margus has two sons increasingly disabled by A-T, whose victims lose control
over their body beginning at a young age and are highly susceptible to cancer.
That Snyder is both a pediatrician and a lab researcher "means a lot to me,"
Margus said, because he has both compassion for his patients and the skills to
do cutting-edge research.

   "We often have a dilemma with a medical doctor who has noble reasons for
being in medicine but doesn't understand the research process, or a PhD who gets
turned on by working at the lab bench, but can't seem to remember that these are
people they're dealing with," Margus said.

   The excitement about Snyder's work is fueled in part by neural stem cells'
astonishing ability to migrate through the brain, homing in on nerves that have
been damaged and transforming themselves into specialized nerve cells of the
appropriate type.

   "Somehow, the damage is sending out cries for help - 'We need neurons now!' -
and the stem cell can become a neuron" and send out new "wiring" that makes the
right connections to repair damage, Snyder said.

   "I have a lot of admiration for Evan," said Dr. Paul Sanberg, chairman of
neuroscience at the University of South Florida who also does neural
transplantation. "He has started to focus on ALS and Parkinson's diseases, but
his real love is these rare disorders in kids and preemies."

   In the most dramatic animal experiment, Snyder implanted neural stem cells
into the brain of the mutant "shiverer mouse," a lab creation afflicted with
continuous, severe tremors. Snyder found that the implanted cells repaired the
damage and eased the mouse's shivering. More recently, he's moved some of the
stem-cell work into monkeys, since they more closely resemble humans.

   "The notion that you can place [neural stem] cells in the nervous system and
have them take on the characteristics dictated by the local environment is
really revolutionary," said Fischbach of the National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke. The next big push, already underway, is to identify the
signals that call the cells to damaged areas, and try to duplicate them with
drugs.

   Snyder and other scientists also are exploring a strategy for treating
inoperable brain tumors by inserting toxic genes into neural stem cells that
would deliver the genes to the tumor and its spreading tentacles, like a suicide
bomber. What's hoped for is that the gene-carrying stem cells can follow the
same pathways the tumor cells take as they weave their way inextricably into the
brain.

   That goal is a very personal one. A close friend of Snyder died from a brain
tumor in his 40s, and Snyder vowed to find a way of attacking tumors with his
stem cells. He's reminded of this pledge whenever he attends formal functions -
his tuxedo used to be that of his friend.

   As the excitement about this new attack on brain diseases ripples through the
medical field and into public awareness, Snyder, a pediatrician and neurologist
at Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, is increasingly in the
limelight.

   As a result, he's in nearly perpetual motion. Flying here and there, he
caroms from one scientific meeting to another, writes papers, supervises his
laboratory and keeps in touch with myriad scientists with whom he's
collaborating.

   "He is amazing in that regard. He's definitely like having a hyperactive kid
- the good part," said Xandra Breakefield, a gene therapy researcher at
Massachusetts General Hospital with whom Snyder is attempting to use stem cells
against brain tumors.

   Besides being a coveted speaker at scientific meetings - he's given more than
35 such talks so far this year - Snyder is much in demand by the media. Engaging
and possessing a boyish, telegenic presence, he's recently been on the "Today"
show, National Public Radio, local television, and innumerable print stories on
the new frontier in brain science.

   Snyder's method for isolating and growing neural stem cells is licensed to
Layton Bioscience Inc. of Atherton, Calif., which plans to develop stem-cell
treatments. But, despite the potential for profit, Snyder is not a
wealth-seeking entrepreneur, said Gary Snable, the chief executive officer at
Layton.

   "He's tremendously dedicated to solving some of the childhood disorders, but
he has no interest whatsoever" in the business part of it, Snable said.

   Snyder allows himself a modest bit of flash with his car, a sporty 1990 Honda
Civic, which he said is something of a statement about himself.

   "It's fast, it's compact, it's fire-engine red - but old," he said. Age, in
fact, is a sensitive topic. Snyder won't reveal his, saying, "Nobody knows how
old I am," though he graduated from college in 1973, making him mid-to-late 40s.

   Snyder's scientific portfolio, aside from his many publications, is his
collection of slides he uses for talks. In addition to numerical data, many of
the slides are photographs of brain slices showing the work of neural stem
cells. Like the freezer, Snyder obsesses over his slides. He adds or removes
slides for different audiences, and, after every talk, jots down which slides he
used and how well the presentation went.

   The A-T Children's project and several other disease groups have been funding
Snyder directly - bypassing the federal system of research grants - to expand
his team to focus on the rare diseases. As a result, he said, "We're progressing
at a pace that is every scientist's dream, but it's very important not to
sacrifice our scientific integrity" in the rush toward a cure.

   Nor can the research move into humans before the safety of stem cells is
known. "Can these things be controlled once they're implanted?" Fischbach asked.
In addition, the Food and Drug Administration will want assurance that the
versatile cells won't produce cancers, and that the cells can be produced with
consistent quality control.

   Fortunately for Snyder, his neural stem cell research doesn't carry the
ethical baggage of embryonic stem cell research because the nerve cells don't
have to be harvested from human embryos. Snyder's cells were taken originally
from a fetus that was aborted for other reasons several years ago. Now that the
cells can be maintained and their numbers increased in the lab, he said he
doesn't need to use any more fetal material.

   Though he's driven, like many top researchers, and is prone to letting work
dominate his life, Snyder has a wide range of interests besides neural stem
cells, such as linguistics and theater.

   While attending the University of Pennsylvania, where he majored in
psychology, Snyder worked in summer camps for emotionally disturbed children. He
continued on to medical school at Penn, and at a time when most medical students
are overwhelmed with studies, Snyder found time to start the Philadelphia
Children's Theater Group.

   "I found that, in front of kids, I could really open up," Snyder said.

   The amateur theater group, which performed in children's hospitals around
Philadelphia, offered more than a creative outlet for Snyder: He met his future
wife after one of the shows when she asked to meet the writer of the
production's songs.

   Angela Vieira, Snyder's wife, is now a lawyer in the counsel's office at New
England Medical Center, and she's also a semiprofessional singer with groups
such as the Tanglewood Festival Chorus. They live in Jamaica Plain.

   But Snyder has difficulty squeezing in a personal life these days, in part
because be is so committed to the people he works with as well as their
scientific goals.

   "He really takes care of everyone in his lab; he's loyal and he's just so
supportive," said Kurtis Auguste, now a medical student in California who
carried out a research project with Snyder while a Harvard undergraduate.

   Even Snyder is feeling a need to rest a bit from the frantic pace. In the
past, he said, he hasn't really taken vacations; instead, bringing his wife
along to scenic or luxurious places he's been invited to speak.

   But Snyder said she's wearied of waiting while he spends most of the time
talking shop with other researchers, and he's turning over a new leaf.

   "We're going to take a real vacation this summer," he said, "and I define a
vacation as someplace where you don't take along your slides." SIDEBAR: NEURAL
STEM CELLS PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA

GRAPHIC: CHART, Dr. Evan Snyder pulls a container of neural stem cells from a
nitrogen-cooled freezer. GLOBE STAFF PHOTO / WENDY MAEDA

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2000


                             380 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 3, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1785 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY EFFORT STALLS IN THE REGION SAFETY AND ETHICAL CONCERNS
PUT DISEASE RESEARCH ON HOLD

BYLINE: By Alice Dembner, and Liz Kowalczyk, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Skittish patients, safety issues, and concerns about financial conflicts are
forcing a reduction and rethinking of gene therapy experiments in New England,
just as the mapping of the human genome opens endless research possibilities.

   The retreat in a field involving hundreds of New England researchers and
patients may slow development of life-saving treatments in diseases ranging from
cystic fibrosis to cancer. It also represents a setback to prominent medical
centers working to establish leadership positions in the field and may threaten
small biotech companies that could run out of capital before their therapies are
proved successes or failures.

      A Globe survey found that as many as 10 out of the approximately 30 gene
therapy experiments underway or recently concluded in New England are on hold or
have had trouble recruiting patients.

   In Maine, a researcher recently gave up on a trial in ovarian cancer because
she could not persuade enough people to participate. Two doctors at
Massachusetts General Hospital said progress on their experiments slowed when
they, too, enrolled fewer participants than expected.

   At Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, meanwhile, safety concerns raised by
a Harvard oversight committee blocked a planned experiment. And a clinical trial
that might have been held in Boston is being conducted in England, in part
because of a Massachusetts General Hospital researcher's desire to avoid a
financial conflict of interest.

   Major studies at two other hospitals in Boston remain on hold - at St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center because of FDA concerns about inadequate protection
for participants, and at Beth Israel Deaconess because of an institutional
review of the experiment's safety.

   Nationally, similar problems are affecting experiments seeking to treat a
variety of diseases by inserting genes into the body to replace missing or
defective ones. Several trials that had been placed on hold because of FDA or
institutional concerns have been discontinued, while others have resumed
enrolling participants with additional safeguards. Many are struggling to enroll
participants. The University of Pennsylvania, where an 18-year-old became gene
therapy's only official fatality last September, has yet to resume human gene
trials.

   It is likely to be months before all the trials are back on track.

   Some ethicists and scientists say the field needed shaking up because the
research had expanded far too fast and without thorough patient protections.

   "The field is chastened in a way that will ultimately help it," said Dr.
David T. Scadden, codirector of the Massachusetts General Hospital AIDS Research
Center and principal investigator of several gene therapy experiments for HIV.
"The problems have slowed things down and cast a shadow over what many in the
field regard as a promising new area for therapeutics. The more we can do to
avoid ethical or safety issues that undermine the science the better."

   Scadden and other New England gene researchers said they do not and would not
conduct human experiments with any product in which they have a financial
interest, because of the potential for conflict. At both UPenn and St.
Elizabeth's Medical Center, the institutions and the researchers overseeing the
trials had a financial stake in the outcome.

   In addition to the Pennsylvania death, there have been numerous others in
nearly 400 gene therapy experiments nationally, although none definitively
caused by the therapy itself. Many of the deaths and other serious side effects
were not properly reported to federal authorities.

   Reporting issues were among the problems at St. Elizabeth's, where two of 45
participants died, and at Beth Israel, where three of six died. In both cases,
the participants had long histories of serious illness. Researchers said they
believe the patients died of those illnesses and not of the gene therapy,
although the timing of the deaths has raised questions.

   Leaders of human gene experiments in New England, who number more than two
dozen, say they have strengthened safety measures, expanded information given to
participants about potential risks, and become much more vigilant about
reporting problems to oversight committees.

   Based on safety concerns, a Harvard committee overseeing gene therapy trials
twice this spring rejected a proposed experiment in which genes would be
injected into the hearts of people with serious heart disease to stimulate blood
vessel growth. The two people who died in the St. Elizabeth's experiment
underwent a similar procedure.

   Andrew Onderdonk, a pathology professor and chairman of the Harvard Biosafety
Committee, said Genzyme Inc.'s protocol did not call for a control group -
patients injected with a placebo - that would help them determine whether side
effects were due to the drug or the disease. He said neither the national
climate of opinion nor the deaths at St. Elizabeth's had anything to do with the
committee's decision.

   Nationally, the Department of Health and Human Services ordered tougher
protections and expanded safety plans, and both the Food and Drug Administration
and the National Institutes of Health launched programs to inspect more ongoing
research. The 70 additional FDA inspections will be made at sites with small
gene trials, and the NIH has selected 10 of the largest sites conducting all
types of human research, including Harvard Medical School. The Harvard visit
will be July 19-20.

   "We have to welcome all public scrutiny. That will just make us better," said
Dr. Antonio E. Chiocca, a surgeon at Massachusetts General Hospital who is the
principal investigator of a gene trial for patients with advanced brain cancer.

   But concern about the risks of gene therapy is taking its toll.

   Dr. Tracey Weisberg of the Maine Center for Cancer Medicine in Scarborough
said she canceled the center's gene therapy trial for ovarian cancer in April
because of low enrollment. Primary care doctors in the region were not referring
many patients, and the dozen who were referred were too worried about harmful
side effects to enroll, she said.

   "With all the news in the paper, they weren't willing to take that kind of
risk," Weisberg said. The trial is continuing in other parts of the country.

   At MGH, Scadden said he enrolled only half the number of participants he had
planned for in a study using genetically altered stem cells to fight HIV. "There
was a lot of concern about potential toxic effects," he said. "Unless people are
in a position where this is their only hope, they're not willing to go through
it until they can be sure there are going to be no adverse effects."

   Scadden said there was one death in his study and that he believes it was
unrelated to the gene transfer. The man had treatment-resistant lymphoma and
suffered a relapse of the tumor in his brain, Scadden said.

   The study was closed last month by its sponsor, SyStemix, a subsidiary of the
drug company Novartis, he said.

   "The results did not meet what they would see as a commercially viable level
of success," Scadden said.

   Nationally, a decade of human gene experiments has resulted in only glimmers
of success. This spring, French scientists reported that gene treatment of four
babies with severely defective immune systems had resulted in nearly complete
recovery. The prognosis for a fifth infant was not as good.

   Combining with safety issues, much of the national concern about gene
transfer experiments has arisen from the financial investment of some
researchers in their own work and questions about whether that would bias them
or lead them to bypass safety rules.

   In the two most prominent instances of potential conflict, both UPenn and St.
Elizabeth's have denied that financial motives affected the studies. But UPenn
has barred its Institute for Human Gene Therapy from conducting any clinical
trials. St. Elizabeth's has said that Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, who helped found a
company to develop gene therapy, will not take part in final tests of that
therapy. In addition, the hospital's financial interest will be disclosed to all
future test subjects, officials said.

   But that may not go far enough. The American Society of Gene Therapy adopted
a policy in April that bars its members from any involvement with human
experiments sponsored by companies in which they have equity. The society's
immediate past president, Savio Woo, said the society was monitoring Isner's
situation to see whether the hospital allows him to resume oversight of early
human tests. If so, the society would consider expelling Isner unless he
divests, Woo said.

   St. Elizabeth's "should probably turn over those trials to other medical
centers," said Dr. Mel H. Epstein, a Brown University neurosurgeon who oversaw
one of the first gene therapy trials nationally to reach the final stages - a
test of genetically altered herpes simplex virus in brain tumors called
glioblastomas. "I don't think anyone should own stock in a company and
simultaneously be testing that product in patients. And I don't think public
disclosure changes that," Epstein said.

   Across New England, there appear to be few others with such direct potential
conflicts, although much of the research is funded by pharmaceutical or
biomedical firms.

   Chiocca, of MGH, said he avoided such a conflict by not participating in
human experiments that were testing an approach he developed along with
researchers at Boston University and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. That
approach was licensed to Oxford BioMedica, a British company, and the hospitals
and researchers received fees and royalties. The trial is being conducted in
England.

   "Our role [as experiment leaders] is to determine whether something is an
exciting new treatment or toxic to patients," Chiocca said. "We have to make
that judgment in the most unbiased manner. . . . If the success of my trial
would make me rich, or if there's any suggestion I would benefit financially,
then I should not be doing the trial."

   Scadden said he believes it's critical that gene researchers exercise special
vigilance about potential conflicts. "The field is being affected in a negative
way, and we don't want to have it stalled because of these concerns," he said.
"This is a field that needs to be squeaky-clean." SIDEBAR: Gene therapy in New
England A look at experiments using human volunteers at academic medical centers
throughout New England. Most are in the early stages of safety testing. Ongoing
trials are still enrolling participants, although several are having trouble
signing up people. Completed trials are listed if they concluded recently.
PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR CHART DATA. GLOBE STAFF CHART

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    CHART, 1. Dr. David T. Scadden, an AIDS researcher, says
conflicts of interest are hurting gene research efforts. / GLOBE PHOTO / JAY
PREMACK 2. Dr. Jeffrey M. Isner, who helped found a company to develop gene
therapy, has been told not to take part in final tests of that therapy. / GLOBE
STAFF PHOTO / DAVID L. RYAN

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2000


                             381 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                      July 3, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. D18

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: STUDENT NEWSLINE;
MAPPING THE HUMAN GENOME

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - In an achievement so profound that no metaphor seemed able to
capture it, scientists last week said they have pieced together a "rough draft"
of the human genome - the entire set of DNA scripts in our cells that strongly
influence health and illness, behavior, special abilities, and how long we live.

   Competing teams said they had mapped about 3 billion letters of DNA code and
had sequenced, or identified, 85 percent to 99 percent of the genome. The
research pouring out of these sequencing projects is giving biomedical
researchers an avalanche of data they believe will revolutionize medicine.

      It will take another year or two to fill in the gaps and correct errors in
the genetic map, but what has been achieved so far has been more successful and
less expensive than anticipated when the audacious plan was crafted about a
decade ago.

   The two rival scientific groups - one public, the other employed by a biotech
company - put aside wrangling for a day to announce in a joint appearance that
they had reached about the same place in sequencing the genome.

   President Clinton called the information in the draft - really an immense
string of chemical letters, a 100,000-page-long sentence, that tell cells how to
make proteins - "the most important, most wondrous map ever produced."

   He said it was more important than the map with which Lewis and Clark opened
America's way to the West. At the White House ceremony, the achievement was also
compared to Galileo's discoveries in the solar system; the invention of the
printing press; the production of the first atomic bomb; and the space program
that landed men on the moon.

   "We have caught a glimpse of an instruction book previously known only to
God," said Dr. Francis Collins, the geneticist who led the public scientific
group, which was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the Department
of Energy.

   J. Craig Venter, president of Celera Genomics Inc., the private company that
entered the genomic race just 20 months ago, said the information provides the
potential to wipe out cancer and other diseases "in our lifetime."

   But even the most ebullient scientists sobered as they warned of dangers that
individuals' unique genetic messages, which could reveal future disease risks or
be linked to purported behavioral traits, might be used against them. Collins
urged the rapid passage of legislation to protect genetic privacy.

   Obtaining the genetic sequence information is only a starting point; the raw
DNA messages have to be analyzed to find out what genes they contain, what
proteins the cells make from those gene recipes, and how the proteins interact
with one another to build the body and regulate its function.

   With just the DNA sequence, "We have the encyclopedia, but we don't have
'Hamlet,' " said Shirley Tilghman, a Princeton University geneticist who worked
on the genome project.

   Although 16 research centers contributed to the public genome project, the
push in the past year and a half was credited to the five largest. One, operated
by the Whitehead Institute and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, churned
out about one-third of the DNA code by itself - about 1.2 billion chemical
letters of DNA, the biggest production of any of the centers.

   Tilghman said Eric Lander, the Whitehead scientist who led the effort, was
"one of the heroes" in the public effort, and praised his "creative,
out-of-the-box thinking" that stepped up the pace.

   Genetic tests that predict what illnesses a person will be prone to and gene
therapy that treats diseases by correcting the genetic errors that cause them
are now possible.  Eventually, people may have gene tests at birth that predict
their health patterns.

GRAPHIC: DIAGRAM

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2000


                             382 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      July 3, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A18; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 294 words

HEADLINE: More, Not Less, Monitoring by NIH

BODY:


   My nephew, Jesse Gelsinger, lost his life in a gene therapy experiment last
September. Until seven months after his death, no one could claim any real
benefit from such experiments, until French scientists reported this spring the
first documented benefits from gene therapy for infants born with
"boy-in-the-bubble" disease. Before injecting the gene therapy into the ill
infants, however, they did the therapy first in the lab with the infants' own
body cells, but outside their bodies. Only when they had evidence that the
therapy was working, did they inject the genes into the children with positive
results.

   So I read the June 29 article "NIH Panel Backs Easing Of Gene Therapy Rules"
with concern. Instead of relaxing rules for experimenters to wait "as long as a
year to report serious illneses or death among volunteers," the National
Institutes of Health should be demanding the kind of experimentation and
techniques the humane French scientists have developed that do not put people
such as Jesse at risk. Although living with a genetic condition, Jesse managed
well with medication and had a prognosis for a long and normal life.

   In the present culturally corrupt American environment that nonchalantly
mixes science with profit, should the NIH really make its job as overseer of
medical experimentation easier by relaxing its rules for reporting problems?

   In my nephew's case, research doctors decided that a young man with an
approximately 7 percent functioning liver was an excellent candidate for
experimentation affecting his liver. Common sense says the experiment should
never have moved ahead.

   The NIH needs to increase its activities to monitor medicine, not relax its
efforts.

   CHARLES F. GELSINGER

   Los Angeles



LOAD-DATE: July 03, 2000


                             383 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                          July 2, 2000, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE ,1C

LENGTH: 1022 words

HEADLINE: Genome hell is revealed in many forms
 Concerns: Decoding the human genome has opened a Pandora's Box filled with
moral and ethical questions sparked by commercialization and the ready
availability of genetic information.

BYLINE: Ralph Brave

BODY:

   WHEN Francis Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research
Institute, stood before the world's television cameras on Monday to announce the
deciphering of the 3.1 billion units of DNA that make up the human genome, he
declared, "This is a happy day for humankind."

    But last summer he shared a different view at a gathering of the nation's
pre-eminent geneticists.

    "We are going to be going through hell, folks, because we will get to our
diagnostic abilities ... but we won't have those therapeutic magic bullets that
we hoped for," he said. "We will be going through hell."

    So which is it, happy day for humankind or hell? Both are true.

    Because we've just experienced a week of the media's gee-whiz genomic
heaven, perhaps there is value in exploring the other place.

    Conversations with local clinicians and researchers show this hell has many
forms. For example, the commercialization of genetic science has raised new
ethical questions about who gets access to our personal genetic information and
how that information is used.

    "We used to think in medicine as a general principle that the more
information the patients have, the better decisions they could make," says Dr.
Eric Wulfsberg, director of the Clinical Genetics and Dysmorphology (birth
defect) Program at the University of Maryland Medical Center. "But clearly when
it gets to the area of genetics, too much knowledge is not necessarily a good
thing."

    Wulfsberg notes a Swedish study in which parents were informed that their
children had inherited a gene predisposing them to early-onset emphysema. The
parents were told that avoidance of smoky environments would help prevent the
disorder. But knowledge of their children's risk so heightened the parents'
anxiety that they increased smoking, and the study was halted.

    Recent studies of patients' reactions to receiving diagnoses of a gene
mutation that increases the risk for breast cancer showed similar negative
effects, including feelings of guilt by those escaping the diagnostic fate
suffered by another family member.

    Wulfsberg's concerns extend to how translating medical information into
genetic diagnoses can undermine a patient's will to live.

    "If you tell someone their cholesterol is high, they'll say, 'Oh, well, I
guess I need to change my diet or I need to take a drug to lower my
cholesterol.'

    "If you tell someone that they have a 10 times higher risk of having heart
disease because they have an altered gene, they're going to say, 'Poor me, it's
in my genes. There's nothing I can do about it.' "

    Jerry Winkelstein, director of the Pediatric Division for Allergy and
Immunology at Johns Hopkins Hospital, asks you to suppose that a genetic test
reveals you are a carrier of a gene that could result in a child with a
life-threatening disease.

    "When do you tell someone you're dating that you carry the gene ?"
Winkelstein says. "First date? After you're married? Or after a child is born?
Would you ever tell them? ... Would you always keep it a secret? If you always
keep it a secret you might as well not know yourself since it will have no
practical benefit. So, there are lots of social, emotional, ethical, moral and
cultural factors that could potentially impact your decision to even know
whether you're a carrier," of the disease gene .

    Suppose you want a test for a particular genetic disease. Can you get access
to the test?

    Maimon Cohen, director of the Harvey Institute for Human Genetics at the
Greater Baltimore Medical Center, says not always.

    "Some of the charges on these tests to license them have really put them
beyond the scope of utilization in everyday medicine," Cohen says.

    He mentions Canavan's disease, a genetic degenerative brain disorder for
which the patent for the test is held by the Children's Hospital of Miami.

    "The Canavan's disease test has a hefty licensing premium which really puts
the price of that test out of reach," he says. "So it has been dropped from
several community screening panels because of this charge."

    Commercialization is also having effects on basic biomedical research.

    Roger Reeves, a professor of physiology at the Johns Hopkins School of
Medicine, has no doubts about the potential for the human genome decoding to
assist his nearly two-decade-long researches into understanding Down syndrome, a
disorder affecting one in every 700 live births around the globe.

    But Reeves says that on occasion he's had a "hard time" securing some of the
biological tools needed for his research due to proprietary interests. Even when
he's able to obtain them, the market lurks as a shadow over his progress.

    "I may put years of work into demonstrating something, and then it turns out
that somebody sequenced 50 base pairs chemical units of that DNA five years ago,
and now they own everything that ever comes out of it. That doesn't seem very
balanced," Reeves says.

    The tension between research and commercial interests might have contributed
to the death of a teen-ager last year during a genetic therapy trial at the
University of Pennsylvania, according to Karen Rothenberg, dean of the
University of Maryland School of Law.

    Rothenberg sat on the federal committee that approved the protocols for the
Penn doctor conducting the genetic therapy experiments. Referring to the fact
that the doctor who performed the clinical experiment also owned a significant
share of the company that would hold the patent on the therapy procedure if
successful, Rothenberg says, "If you've got stock in a company, and you're doing
research in the company, you're only a human being, right?"

    However hot hell might get, there's no turning back. As Francis Collins
advised colleagues last summer, this hell "is just something we are going to
have to go through. And the sooner we come out the other end the better."

    However long that takes, " The horse is out of the barn," says GBMC's Cohen.
"Genetics today is no longer the province of geneticists. It belongs to
everybody."

    Ralph Brave is a writer based in Davis, Calif. He is working on a book on
the post-genome era.


LOAD-DATE: July 19, 2000


                             384 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                        Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.

                             Daily News (New York)

                              July 2, 2000 Sunday
                              SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 1004 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAP RAISES QUESTIONS POSSIBILITY OF CUSTOM-DESIGNING HUMANS IS
TROUBLING

BYLINE: By MARY JANE FINE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   President Clinton called the near-completion of human genome mapping "a
stunning, humbling achievement" and "the most wondrous map ever produced by
humankind." But just what does unscrambling the human genetic code mean to us
all?

   The easy answer: We don't really know yet, but the potential is enormous.

   Here are a half-dozen questions often asked about recent advances in genetics
and the answers provided by scientists, doctors and ethicists that provide a
glimpse into the future:

   * Could parents replicate a favorite child using existing genetic technology
like cloning?

   Theoretically, yes - and a handful of fertility clinics around the country
reportedly are working on human cloning. But people are more than the sum of
their genetic components. Case in point: Even identical twins, which are like
clones, aren't exact copies of each other.

   So although it would be possible to clone a child, you couldn't really expect
a true duplicate.

   "First of all, the child would be younger than the one you cloned," explains
Dr. Eric Cassell, a public health professor at Cornell Medical College and a
member of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission. "Second, the parents would
be different from when they'd had the first child. The [growing up] environment
would be different."

   No one knows how successful cloning human beings might be. Even the cloning
of animals - Dolly the sheep, for example - involved considerable trial and
error before researchers obtained a viable egg, implanted it successfully, and
brought a live embryo to term.

   And this does not even begin to address the theological issues raised by
human cloning - the deeply held belief that creating human life belongs only in
God's hands.

   The National Bioethics Advisory Commission has strongly advised against
cloning people.

   "Leaving aside all the other issues," says Cassell, "it isn't safe."

   * Could replacing faulty genes slow down or halt the process of aging,
resulting in longer life?

   Yes. Aging isn't the product of "faulty" genes, but rather a process built
into the system of every living thing. Cells come to maturity, do their work,
and then are programmed to die. No one knows yet which genes control aging or
how to access them.

   So, could humankind alter the aging system?

   "In theory," says Ken Goodman, director of bioethics at the University of
Miami. "But an equally interesting question is, 'Should we?' "

   The problem with manipulating cells, Goodman says, is the unknown
consequences. Genetic changes, including possibly flawed DNA, could be passed on
to future generations. Living longer might subject people to as-yet-unknown
diseases - much as cancer has increased as people routinely live into their 80s.

   And if everyone lived for 200 years, he asked, "Can you imagine Medicare
funding it?"

   * Is it possible to cure major illnesses, such as cancer or Parkinson's
disease, with new genetic therapies?

   Not yet, but researchers are hard at work to make that a reality. Hundreds of
gene-therapy clinical trials are underway at hospitals around the country. So,
while gene therapy is still in its infancy, it has the potential to treat or
cure cancer, cystic fibrosis, the overproduction of cholesterol and other
diseases - and even to prevent them.

   The field remains highly controversial, however. Within the past year, two
patients have died during clinical trials, which are closely monitored by the
government.

   * Is it possible to "grow" humans in the laboratory from certain types of
brain tissue?

   No. Brain stem cells are incapable of growing placentas, so they can't be
used to produce human beings.

   But researchers are on the verge of converting stem cells into other types of
tissue, such as nerve or heart or muscle tissue, with the eventual hope of
regrowing organs.

   "So I think we'll continue to grow people like we always have," says Alta
Charo, a professor of law and medical ethics at the University of Wisconsin and
a member of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission. "It's a lot more fun -
and much cheaper."

   * What about growing organs in animals that could be transplanted into
humans?

   Scientists already are looking at animals whose organs are most similar to
humans' - like pigs, for example, which have hearts that closely resemble ours.
The challenge now is to genetically engineer pigs immunologically so a
transplanted heart wouldn't be rejected by its human host.

   That would involve implanting the correct sequence of human genes into the
earliest pig embryos so the pig tissue would develop a "human signature,"
recognizable by the human body.

   Future researchers might also clone successfully engineered pigs into herds
to meet the demand for short-term transplant use.

   Technically speaking, such genetic engineering may not be so far off, but a
heated debate still rages over the risk of viruses that might be transferred
from one species to another.

   * If humans can be cloned or otherwise reproduced artificially, couldn't
these new genetic technologies be used in the wrong hands to create a class of
worker-drones - or, on the other hand, a highly intelligent master class?

   Probably not. Real-life genetics has no connection to Hollywood-style mad
scientists, Stepford wives or Frankenstein monsters, says University of
Pennsylvania ethicist Arthur Caplan.

   "It's very unlikely anyone could mass-produce a group of people secretly," he
points out. "It would take too many people. It would take too long" to breed
them, then wait until they reached maturity.

   Even if it were possible, Caplan adds, you couldn't genetically engineer the
desired behavior. That would be like expecting teenagers to play the piano or do
their homework just because you've brought them up to value those things.

   As for creating a "designer baby" - ordering up a red-haired, green-eyed
daughter who loves music, for instance - Caplan offers a maybe-someday scenario:
"But the motive will be to give your kid an edge - a better memory, better
vision without glasses - not because you want a Barbie or a Derek Jeter."

   GENES ARE US?

   An ethicist looks at the "book of life."

GRAPHIC: LIFE A human fetus at 4 1/2 months is already more than the sum of its
genes.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2005


                             385 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Daily News, L.P.
                             Daily News (New York)

                   July 2, 2000, Sunday SPORTS FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 1024 words

HEADLINE: GENE MAP RAISES QUESTIONS      POSSIBILITY OF CUSTOM-DESIGNING HUMANS
ISTROUBLING

BYLINE: By MARY JANE FINE DAILY NEWS STAFF WRITER

BODY:
President Clinton called the near-completion of human genome mapping "a
stunning, humbling achievement" and "the most wondrous map ever produced by
humankind." But just what does unscrambling the human genetic code mean to us
all?

   The easy answer: We don't really know yet, but the potential is enormous.

   Here are a half-dozen questions often asked about recent advances in genetics
and the answers provided by scientists, doctors and ethicists that provide a
glimpse into the future:

   * Could parents replicate a favorite child using existing genetic technology
like cloning?

   Theoretically, yes - and a handful of fertility clinics around the country
reportedly are working on human cloning. But people are more than the sum of
their genetic components. Case in point: Even identical twins, which are like
clones, aren't exact copies of each other.

   So although it would be possible to clone a child, you couldn't really expect
a true duplicate.

   "First of all, the child would be younger than the one you cloned," explains
Dr. Eric Cassell, a public health professor at Cornell Medical College and a
member of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission. "Second, the parents would
be different from when they'd had the first child. The [growing up] environment
would be different."

   No one knows how successful cloning human beings might be. Even the cloning
of animals - Dolly the sheep, for example - involved considerable trial and
error before researchers obtained a viable egg, implanted it successfully, and
brought a live embryo to term.

   And this does not even begin to address the theological issues raised by
human cloning - the deeply held belief that creating human life belongs only in
God's hands.

   The National Bioethics Advisory Commission has strongly advised against
cloning people.

   "Leaving aside all the other issues," says Cassell, "it isn't safe."

   * Could replacing faulty genes slow down or halt the process of aging,
resulting in longer life?

   Yes. Aging isn't the product of "faulty" genes, but rather a process built
into the system of every living thing. Cells come to maturity, do their work,
and then are programmed to die. No one knows yet which genes control aging or
how to access them.

   So, could humankind alter the aging system?

   "In theory," says Ken Goodman, director of bioethics at the University of
Miami. "But an equally interesting question is, 'Should we?' "

   The problem with manipulating cells, Goodman says, is the unknown
consequences. Genetic changes, including possibly flawed DNA, could be passed on
to future generations. Living longer might subject people to as-yet-unknown
diseases - much as cancer has increased as people routinely live into their 80s.

   And if everyone lived for 200 years, he asked, "Can you imagine Medicare
funding it?"

   * Is it possible to cure major illnesses, such as cancer or Parkinson's
disease, with new genetic therapies?

   Not yet, but researchers are hard at work to make that a reality. Hundreds of
gene-therapy clinical trials are underway at hospitals around the country. So,
while gene therapy is still in its infancy, it has the potential to treat or
cure cancer, cystic fibrosis, the overproduction of cholesterol and other
diseases - and even to prevent them.

   The field remains highly controversial, however. Within the past year, two
patients have died during clinical trials, which are closely monitored by the
government.

   * Is it possible to "grow" humans in the laboratory from certain types of
brain tissue?

   No. Brain stem cells are incapable of growing placentas, so they can't be
used to produce human beings.

   But researchers are on the verge of converting stem cells into other types of
tissue, such as nerve or heart or muscle tissue, with the eventual hope of
regrowing organs.

   "So I think we'll continue to grow people like we always have," says Alta
Charo, a professor of law and medical ethics at the University of Wisconsin and
a member of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission. "It's a lot more fun -
and much cheaper."

   * What about growing organs in animals that could be transplanted into
humans?

   Scientists already are looking at animals whose organs are most similar to
humans' - like pigs, for example, which have hearts that closely resemble ours.
The challenge now is to genetically engineer pigs immunologically so a
transplanted heart wouldn't be rejected by its human host.

   That would involve implanting the correct sequence of human genes into the
earliest pig embryos so the pig tissue would develop a "human signature,"
recognizable by the human body.

   Future researchers might also clone successfully engineered pigs into herds
to meet the demand for short-term transplant use.

   Technically speaking, such genetic engineering may not be so far off, but a
heated debate still rages over the risk of viruses that might be transferred
from one species to another.

   * If humans can be cloned or otherwise reproduced artificially, couldn't
these new genetic technologies be used in the wrong hands to create a class of
worker-drones - or, on the other hand, a highly intelligent master class?

   Probably not. Real-life genetics has no connection to Hollywood-style mad
scientists, Stepford wives or Frankenstein monsters, says University of
Pennsylvania ethicist Arthur Caplan.

   "It's very unlikely anyone could mass-produce a group of people secretly," he
points out. "It would take too many people. It would take too long" to breed
them, then wait until they reached maturity.

   Even if it were possible, Caplan adds, you couldn't genetically engineer the
desired behavior. That would be like expecting teenagers to play the piano or do
their homework just because you've brought them up to value those things.

   As for creating a "designer baby" - ordering up a red-haired, green-eyed
daughter who loves music, for instance - Caplan offers a maybe-someday scenario:
"But the motive will be to give your kid an edge - a better memory, better
vision without glasses - not because you want a Barbie or a Derek Jeter."

   GENES ARE US?

   An ethicist looks at the "book of life."

   IDEAS & OPINION, Page 46

GRAPHIC: LIFE   A human fetus at 4 1/2 months is already more than the sum of
its genes.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2000


                             386 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                      July 02, 2000, Sunday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 471 words

HEADLINE: Damaged liver can recruit help from bone marrow, scientists report

SOURCE: Scripps Howard News Service

BYLINE: LEE BOWMAN

BODY:

   A damaged liver can recruit master cells from bone marrow to give the organ
its ability to regenerate, researchers report.

   The discovery opens a new pathway to treating liver disease and blood
disorders and holds promise for ending the chronic shortage of livers for
transplant.

   "This is an exciting finding, and incredibly surprising, because the bone
marrow has never been considered as a source of liver cells," said Dr. Diane
Krause, an assistant professor at Yale University School of Medicine and
co-author of the study, published in the journal Hepatology.

   According to conventional wisdom, bone marrow stem cells are supposed to
produce only blood cells and liver cells turn out only liver cells.

   Only in the past year or so have scientists started to find that master
replacement cells from one organ system can be moved and reprogrammed to make
repairs in another.

   Scientists already knew that the liver is "an incredibly regenerative organ,"
said Dr. Neil Theise, an associate professor of medicine at New York University
School of Medicine and co-author of the report. Even if half the organ is
removed, it can grow back with breathtaking speed, and many of the new cells are
produced right in the liver. But the sheer pace of the response takes outside
help.

   "We've proven that in humans there are stem cells for the liver in the bone
marrow," said Theise. "And we're talking about significant amounts of functional
liver tissue (derived from bone marrow stem cells) - up to 40 percent in one
case we've studied. The whole notion of a bone marrow cell traveling around,
becoming anything it wanted, is the first time I've had an idea that I couldn't
see the limits of."

   The liver is the body's workhorse for a number of metabolic functions, and it
also supplies blood-clotting factors. According to the American Liver
Foundation, 26,000 Americans die each year from chronic liver disease and
cirrhosis.

   According to the researchers, stem cells could not only potentially provide a
patient with his or her own liver-cell transplant but might also be used to
colonize artificial livers and become a living component that can gradually
replace a damaged organ. The stem cells might also be used to deliver gene
therapy, taking repair genes into the liver's cells.

   The study involved two women with leukemia who received bone marrow
transplants from male donors as part of their therapy, and four men with severe
liver disease who received liver transplants from female donors. The researchers
used the Y chromosome, which is found only in males, to keep track of stem
cells.

   In leukemia and some other cancers, a patient's diseased bone marrow is
removed prior to high-dose chemotherapy in order to kill cancer cells. Then
marrow from a healthy donor is injected into the patient.










LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2000


                             387 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       JULY 2, 2000 Sunday DCITY EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. D01

LENGTH: 1454 words

HEADLINE: MAGIC BULLET OR PANDORA'S BOX, GENOME IS AN ETHICAL DILEMMA

BYLINE: Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   With a technological advance as awe inspiring as the sequencing of the human
genome, it is exhilarating to imagine the wonderful benefits that could flow
from it.

   As President Clinton said Monday, when two separate teams of researchers
announced that they had deciphered the chemical sequence of the genome, this is
"profound new knowledge" with "immense power to heal."

   But in any such advance lie the seeds of ethical dilemmas or social
injustices, which are much more troublesome to confront.

   Will doctors be able to fix genetic defects so that no child need suffer
cystic fibrosis and no woman fear hereditary breast cancer? If so, is there also
the potential to create "designer babies" with Miss America features or
Shaquille O'Neal athletic ability?

   Would such an application be appropriate? Where is the line between
acceptable and unacceptable changes?

   Is there the potential to know, through genetic profiling, how a person will
respond to a drug? If so, does that imply that there also will be available
genetic information about people that could be used against them by employers or
insurers?

   If genetics-based treatments, such as drugs and gene therapy, become
expensive, as seems likely, will they be available to the poor or the uninsured?
If not, will the existence of this technology widen the gap between society's
favored and its forgotten?

   If we begin to believe - wrongly, scientists say - that our destiny lies in
our genes, does that open the way for new attacks on people?

   Scientists say it will be years before the genome begins to give up its
secrets. Having reached the point of knowing its code, we still have to crack
it, to find the genes hidden in the genome so that we can study them and learn
more about their role in the growth and health of the body.

   That gives us some breathing room on the moral front, time that we should be
using to wrestle with the difficult issues, ethicists say.

   "Just as we need to find out about the effects and functions of those strings
of letters, we need to find out what our moral and ethical position is toward it
and have them grow together," said Ignacio Chapela, an ecologist at the
University of California at Berkeley. "We cannot wait until everything is known
and we are deploying [genetic knowledge] left and right."

   The "strings" refer to the letters used to designate the four chemicals
strung in 3.2 billion pairs along the genome, or DNA. When scientists said
Monday that they had "sequenced the genome," they meant that they had discovered
the order of nearly all of those pairs.

   Even now, there are questions about the privacy of medical records and
concerns about ethnic stigmas and socioeconomic divides. The new genomic
information will only magnify these.

   Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a bioethics think tank in
Garrison, N.Y., looks ahead to the day when a drug may be marketed together with
a genetic test to determine whether a particular individual would benefit from
it.

   "This will probably raise the cost, and if we retain the current structure
for paying for health care, there is definitely the potential to widen the
divide" between those who can afford to buy the benefits of the genomic
revolution and those who cannot, he said.

   As for privacy, Murray said the trend in some states to pass laws protecting
genetic privacy is missing the boat by focusing too narrowly on genetics.

   "We should be protecting all medical privacy, not just carving out laws to
protect genetic information," he said. "Our health records now aren't as well
protected as our video-rental records."

   What disturbs Stuart A. Newman, professor of cell biology at New York Medical
College and a board member of the Council for Responsible Genetics, is
increasing talk of operating on babies in the womb to make permanent, inherited
modifications.

   "This is the scariest aspect," he said. ". . . It was science-fictiony until
there started to be conferences of academics promoting it."

   Even if doctors understood enough to perform such surgery reliably, which
they do not, Newman considers it unacceptable to think about creating "people
who might somehow be considered a higher form."

   But what if the changes were made to eliminate a disabling genetic condition,
such as Huntington's disease or sickle-cell anemia? Chapela, who, like other
ethicists, sees much promise in genetic medicine, said there was "a fine and
difficult line between attacking medical problems and enhancing human beings," a
line that must be closely monitored.

   To move from curing to the notion of enhancing life is easy, he fears, and
from there it would be only a small step to eugenics, with its taint of aiming
to eliminate lives considered not worth living.

   The specter that genetic knowledge could be used as a marker to separate
"worthy" from "less worthy" or "unworthy" people is one that troubles many
ethicists, including LeRoy Walters, director of the Kennedy Institute of Ethics
at Georgetown University. How will we react, he asked, as we learn more about
the genetic predispositions of ethnic groups to specific diseases?

   "We will have to deal with that information in some way that doesn't
stigmatize people, or regard any group as lesser or greater," he said.

   More broadly, he wonders: "Will the genome project change how human beings
look at themselves? If we aren't careful, might we come to view human beings as
genetically determined, as nothing but their DNA?"

   That, scientists, as well as ethicists, say, would be a massive misreading of
the importance of genes and DNA. Although DNA is often referred to as "the
blueprint for life," that term vastly exaggerates the role of genes in
determining who we are.

   "As a rule of thumb, I would say that 40 to 50 percent of who we are is
strongly influenced by genetics and 50 to 60 percent is strongly influenced by
environment," Walters said.

   He means environment in a broad sense: the mother's health before a baby is
born, early nutrition, the stimulation provided by parents and caretakers, and
other such influences all through life.

   "Genes have an influence," Walters said, "but the notion of a gene for a
complex trait like personality or intelligence is a gross oversimplification."

   The question, of course, is whether society will take this opportunity to
confront these issues or whether stock options, pennant races and household
crises will crowd them out.

   Chapela believes that "society is ready to pay attention to it."

   "I think there is no question that this is the opening of a new era, so there
is no problem attracting attention," he said. "But we need to make space for the
discussions, in Congress but also at the town-hall level."

   Walters is encouraged that many media reports on the sequencing of the genome
have included consideration of the ethical, legal and social issues.

   "I think we are at a different place from where we were 10 years ago," he
said.

   He noted that, over the last five years, he has been in touch with scientists
involved in the government-funded sequencing project and has worked with a
parallel government-funded program on ethical, legal and social issues.

   "I have been impressed," Walters said. "The scientists said openly that every
next step of the way will be loaded with ethical questions and [that] we need to
work together."

   Andrea Knox's e-mail address is aknox@phillynews.com

   Genes: What they are, what they do

   Genome is another name for DNA. It is a double-stranded string of chemical
units. The strings twist around each other in a double-helix shape.

   The cells of all living organisms contain DNA. In human beings, a DNA strand
is about three-feet long and comprises 3.2 billion pairs of chemicals. Two
strands, one from each parent, are in the nucleus of each cell, wound up like a
ball of yarn.

   There are four chemicals in DNA, each present in a multitude of sequential
arrangements. The chemicals are represented by the letters A, C, G and T, for
adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine.

   Scattered throughout the DNA are short sequences called genes, which control
the manufacturing of proteins. Proteins play a crucial role in growth, body
functioning and disease.

   A single gene may consist of several noncontiguous stretches of DNA.
Researchers working with proteins and DNA fragments have found about 60,000
pieces of genes, but it is not known how many genes there are. Estimates range
from 40,000 to 140,000.

   Scientists say having the full sequence of the genome will aid in finding all
the genes, which should help in understanding how proteins work and, ultimately,
in creating drugs that can modify harmful interactions or encourage beneficial
ones.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2002


                             388 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              July 2, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: OPINION;Pg. G-4

LENGTH: 567 words

HEADLINE: What does it all mean? Here's a Q&A on genomes

BYLINE: Matt Crenson; AP NATIONAL WRITER

BODY:
 Some questions and answers relating to Monday's announcement that scientists
and researchers have virtually completed a rough draft of the human genetic
code:

   Q: Do genes determine everything about us?

   A: Genes and environment work together to shape who we are.  Because
environment includes everything we experience and come into contact with from
conception through death, it also plays an awesome and extremely complex role.

   Q: What is a gene?

   A: Even scientists disagree on exactly how to define a gene.  Generally, a
gene is a sequence of DNA that codes for a single protein.  Proteins do the work
of the body, building structures and catalyzing biochemical reactions.

   Q: How many genes are there?

   A: Because what scientists announced Monday is basically a string of 3
billion letters, not even scientists know how many genes there are.  In a
betting pool set up recently by one scientist, estimates ranged from about
34,000 to 140,000.

   Q: How genetically similar are we to one another?

   A: Individual humans share 99.9 percent of their DNA. That means that of the
3 billion letters in the human genetic code, each of us differs in about
300,000. Remarkably, those variations are scattered throughout the species
without regard to what we think of as race.

   Q: How genetically similar are we to other species?

   A: Scientists have been amazed at how genetically similar humans are to other
species.  Humans share 80 percent of their genes with mice and about 99 percent
of their DNA with chimpanzees.  That means chimps are more closely related to
humans than to gorillas.

   Q: Will this lead to a cure for cancer and other serious diseases?

   A: Virtually every disease has some genetic cause.  Some are simple
misspellings that may be compensated for by drugs or corrected with gene
therapy, a technology that is still in its infancy.  Other diseases, such as
schizophrenia, are processes set off by multiple unknown genes that interact in
complex ways.  As scientists gain more knowledge about genes, they will develop
new treatments based on that knowledge.  The outlook is especially good over the
next few decades for some cancers and Alzheimers disease.

   Q: Will anybody be able to use my genetic information against me?

   A: There are great concerns that genetic technology will be used to
discriminate against people in employment, insurance coverage and other areas.
People also worry that the discovery of a "violence gene" could be used to deny
the civil rights of individuals based on their perceived potential to commit
crimes in the future.  Although President Clinton recently signed an executive
order forbidding federal employment discrimination on the basis of genetics and
Congress is considering legislation, many of these issues remain unresolved.

   Q: Why all this fanfare if the job won't be finished for another two years?

   A: In their experience cataloguing the genes of dozens of other species,
scientists have learned that the last few letters of code are the toughest.
Monday's announcement covered 99 percent of the genome, leaving only a few gaps
and regions of uncertainty.  The remaining 1 percent will take another year or
two to complete.  But for practical purposes, the human genome is ready to use.
Later this year scientists will publish a paper announcing that fact, and hold a
conference to share everything they know about how the genes work.


LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000


                             389 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              July 2, 2000 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: PERSPECTIVE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1097 words

HEADLINE: After genome mapping, the hard work of finding cures

BYLINE: John Mangels

BODY:

   Now that the Human Genome Project has announced success after its 10-year
effort to solve the human genetic code, it's easy to believe new treatments and
even cures for gene-caused diseases are just around the corner.

    There's no doubt the project eventually will produce big payoffs for
patients. But researchers caution that, just as Neil Armstrong's first dusty
steps on the moon didn't immediately enable us to colonize the heavens,
exploitation of the wealth of genetic material will take time. Knowing what a
gene's components are and where to find them on the endless, twisting strands of
our DNA is a long way from understanding how those genes work and how to fix
them when they falter. Often, the answers raise more questions, scientists say.

    A case in point: cystic fibrosis.

    The single gene whose failure causes this fatal disease of mucous-choked
lungs was discovered and deciphered 11 years ago, in a miniature version of the
just-completed genome project. Although researchers say knowledge of the gene
has resulted in a much better understanding of what happens in cystic fibrosis
and some ways to affect the process, there have been no breakthrough treatments
yet.

    "That was the hope - we'd find the gene, and that would get us through the
bottleneck," said Mitchell Drumm, a geneticist at the Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine.

    As a graduate student, Drumm was part of the international team that for
months painstakingly combed through a million bits of genetic material on
Chromosome 7 until finally locating the cystic fibrosis gene in 1989.

    "Ten years isn't all that long in terms of the research process, but it's
half the life span of a CF patient," Drumm said. "That's frustrating. We really
understand how ignorant we were before about what was happening at the molecular
level."

    Genes are recipe books that hold the instructions for making proteins. The
gene that causes cystic fibrosis is supposed to make a protein that manages the
movement of salt components into and out of the cells that line the lungs,
pancreas and intestinal tract. The salt components, sodium and chloride, in turn
dictate the flow of water.

    The defective cystic fibrosis gene starts a cascade of problems. It makes a
faulty protein, which then can't direct the conveyor belt that moves chloride
out of cells. Chloride builds up and combines with sodium to form salt, causing
the cells to suck water from their surroundings to try to restore a balance.

    The water gets pulled from mucous that normally coats the lining of the
breathing passages and the gut. The mucous becomes thick and sticky. It clogs
the lungs and traps bacteria that cause repeated infections. And it blocks the
pancreas, preventing digestive chemicals from getting to the intestines where
they are needed to break down food.

    Cystic fibrosis patients used to die in childhood from malnourishment. As
doctors have gotten better at treating the digestive problems, patients now
typically live until their late 20s but eventually succumb to lung infection and
damage.

    Dr. Pamela Davis remembers the elation she felt when word came that the
cystic fibrosis gene had been identified. As chief of the division of pediatric
pulmonary disease at Rainbow Babies' & Children's Hospital in Cleveland and
co-director of University Hospitals' Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center, Davis had
grown close to her patients and their families. And she had seen the survival
curve that had risen so dramatically from the 1960s to the'80s flatten out as
treatments reached their limits.

    Patients just couldn't live much past their late 20s without breakthroughs.

    "God was trying to tell us we had gone as far as we could go," Davis said.
"Having the gene was tremendous. It was tremendous excitement. Now we had a key.
We were all naive and hopeful."

    The attitude was "who cares about chloride transport? Let's do gene therapy
."

    That idea - to replace the faulty gene with one that works properly -
sounded like a simple, ideal solution. Although cystic fibrosis genes are in
virtually every cell in the body, the ones that really need to be fixed are
those lining the airway passages - an easy place to reach with inhaled
medication.

    But that's about the only thing that has proved easy in cystic fibrosis gene
therapy, researchers say. For one thing, airway cells regularly die and are
replaced, so any fix of the bad gene they contain wouldn't be permanent. It
would have to be repeated, and scientists don't yet know how often. Correcting
the gene in the "parent" cells that spawn all airway cells would be a better
solution, but those haven't been found yet. Gene fixes would have to be done
early in a patient's life, too, because the lung damage from repeated infections
soon becomes irreversible.

    Another difficulty is how to get the corrected gene into patients' cells.
Like the perfect furniture mover, the carrier has to be big enough to
accommodate the hefty chunk of genetic material, stealthy enough to get past the
body's defense system and precise enough to deliver the gene to the right
position on the chromosome so it can work properly.

    "This is not a trivial problem," Davis said, in part because repeated lung
infections have revved up patients' immune systems.

    They are especially sensitive to invaders, even beneficial ones.

    Tests of several types of gene carriers, such as tamed viruses and tiny fat
capsules, are under way in a small number of patients to determine their safety
and effectiveness. The studies will take several years to complete.

    Gene therapy "has got to work," Davis said. "We're just not smart enough to
do it yet."

    Meanwhile, Drumm and other researchers are looking at ways of boosting the
ability of the faulty conveyor-belt protein to move chloride out of cells and
getting other cellular transport machinery to take over some of the work.

    All of that research has been helped along by the discovery of the cystic
fibrosis gene in 1989, but progress has been gradual. And the disease is caused
by only one flawed gene. Many other diseases involve multiple genetic defects
that will each have to be dealt with.

    "It has taken us a decade to exploit the gene, but the puzzle pieces are on
the table now," said Dr. Preston Campbell, executive vice president for medical
affairs of the National Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "We have the blueprint for
the disease. I think I was overly optimistic when the gene was discovered. My
unbridled optimism was tempered by the magnitude of the problem and the
knowledge we had to gain. Now we're ready to move on. I'm very optimistic
today."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             390 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     July 1, 2000, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NATION/WORLD, Pg. 15

LENGTH: 687 words

HEADLINE: Some things you don't want to know;

BYLINE: FREDERICK PAOLA;

BODY:


   In the Genesis story, man eats from the tree in the middle of the garden and
comes to know good  and evil. The price he pays for such knowledge includes
having to suffer and sweat for his bread  and being expelled from the garden.

   Now modern man has tasted the fruit of the tree of genetic knowledge. No
doubt, much good will  come of this, including advances in diagnosis, treatment
and prognostic ability. But what price  will man pay for his genetic knowledge?

   Much attention has already been focused on the threat to privacy posed by
genetic advances. Who  will have access to an individual's genetic information?
Will it be available to employers or  insurance companies, who might decline to
employ or insure based on that information?

   Privacy aside, the most direct casualty of sequencing the human genome might
be the individual's  loss of ignorance about his own future. While the "loss" of
ignorance might seem more a benefit than  a cost or casualty, it is in fact
both. Hans Jonas wrote of the importance of the "right to  ignorance," or the
"right of each human life to find its own way and be a surprise to itself." To
the  extent that an individual knows he is genetically programmed to live only
so many years, or to  possess an IQ only so high, or to possess or not possess
any number of physical or mental  attributes, he is less likely to be a surprise
to himself. To the extent that an individual has  advance knowledge about his
future, his life is not a narrative unfolding over time, but a  snapshot, a
still life.

   On the treatment side, gene therapy will be used to treat and cure diseases;
but how will the  new genetics affect our understanding of what is and is not a
"disease"? About what should and should  not be treated? What will the new
genetics tell us about heredity and sexual orientation? About  heredity and
pathologic aggression?

   Likewise, given our societal penchant for cosmetic surgery, it seems likely
that gene therapy  will also be employed to improve or enhance traits (such as
intelligence) in normal individuals. As  Edward Berger has pointed out, at least
initially gene therapy is likely to be costly and available  only to the
wealthy, making it possible that economic and class differences could be
geneticized.

   On a more abstract level, recall that in Genesis, man - having eaten from the
tree of knowledge -  is expelled from the garden so that he could not eat from
the tree of life and live forever. Will  modern man use his newfound knowledge
to take aim at bodily immortality? Will he seek to slow the  aging process and
to prolong life indefinitely? Would doing so be a transgression of his mortal
human nature, just as human cloning would be a transgression of man's sexual
human nature? And  putting aside for a moment concerns about human nature, to
the extent he succeeds in adding years  to life, what price might he pay for
those additional years? Might that price include, as Leon Kass  has suggested,
boredom, meaninglessness and the loss of appreciation of beauty and moral
excellence?

   FINALLY, THERE IS the ever-present danger that we will buy into genetic
reductionism or  essentialism, which posits that personal traits are
predictable, permanent and genetically  determined at conception. It is perhaps
best illustrated by the story of the geneticist who, at a  public speaking
engagement, held up a map of the human genome and told his audience "This is
you." At  its best, this is an oversimplification, since much of what we are is
found in our genetic  material, and much is not. At its worst, this is fodder
for high-tech prejudice.

   In moving forward through our newfound Eden, we would do well to keep in mind
the following  thought from Padovano's "The Estranged God": "To see man as a
thing or an object is to un-man man. It  is to frustrate not only his human
potential but his divine possibilities. ... All that we do must  take the
dignity of man first into account."  Frederick Paola is a physician and
professor at the University of South Florida College of Medicine.

GRAPHIC: SIGNATURE

NOTES: SATURDAY FORUM

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2000


                             391 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      June 30, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A29; THE FEDERAL PAGE

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: NIH Panel Backs Easing Of Gene Therapy Rules; Reporting of 'Adverse
Events' at Issue

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   The National Institutes of Health advisory committee that oversees human gene
therapy experiments yesterday endorsed a plan that would allow researchers to
wait as long as a year before reporting certain serious illnesses or deaths
among volunteers--a change from current rules that demand "immediate" reporting
of all such "adverse events."

   The recommended rule change comes just six months after NIH officials
revealed that gene therapy researchers had in recent years failed to report
promptly, as required, more than 650 serious adverse events among volunteers in
gene therapy experiments.

   That revelation had led some patient advocates to call for stricter
enforcement of NIH's reporting rules, and a few lambasted yesterday's decision
as a case of bringing lax researchers into compliance by merely loosening the
rules.

   "The gene therapy community in the past has shown that it was not willing to
comply with rules which were in place to protect patients' and subjects'
rights," said Alan Milstein, the Philadelphia lawyer representing Tucson
handyman Paul Gelsinger, whose son Jesse died in September in a University of
Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment. "It's a very dangerous step to respond to
that deficiency by eliminating the very requirement which gene therapy
investigators in the past refused or neglected to comply with."

   But members of the NIH Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) said the
change would harmonize the reporting requirements of the NIH and the Food and
Drug Administration. The FDA insists that researchers immediately report only
those serious adverse events that are unexpected or that the researchers believe
may have been caused by the experimental therapy. Others may be summarized in
annual reports.

   The RAC has long required that even those serious ill effects not believed to
have been caused by the treatment had to be reported immediately. In part, that
was because the science--which seeks to cure patients by changing their
genes--was young and complex and NIH overseers were not sure they could tell if
an adverse event was caused by the treatment. Also, NIH, unlike the FDA, has a
mandate favoring full and rapid public disclosure of all that it oversees.

   Yesterday's vote by the RAC to relax its reporting requirements was its first
definitive action on the controversial topic since three events last fall pushed
the panel to review its rules.

   First, the RAC had begun to receive adverse-event reports from pharmaceutical
and biotechnology company researchers stamped "confidential," a practice that
committee members found worrisome and possibly illegal.

   Then 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died. The Penn study was later cited by the
FDA as being in violation of several federal rules; the cited infractions
included inadequate reporting of the serious side effects suffered by previous
volunteers in the study.

   Third, as the NIH looked into Gelsinger's death, it became clear that
hundreds of adverse events had not been reported to the NIH and the RAC as
required--although the vast majority were apparently not caused by the
treatments. When pressed to adhere more closely to reporting rules, though, some
researchers and drug company representatives complained that they were
overburdened by the NIH requirements and started lobbying for "harmonization."

   Yesterday's recommendation, which came after several public discussions, will
be forwarded to acting NIH Director Ruth Kirschtein, who can either promulgate a
rule change or invite a final round of public comment.

   W. French Anderson, the University of Southern California researcher who led
the first U.S. gene therapy study in 1990, applauded the proposed change. "It's
right to only report immediately those events that truly flag a problem," he
said. "Otherwise, you have all this stuff flooding in and it doesn't even get
properly looked at."

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2000


                             392 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                       June 28, 2000 Wednesday 2D EDITION

SECTION: DENVER & THE WEST; Pg. B-10

LENGTH: 512 words

HEADLINE: EDITORIAL Gene codes a privacy issue

BODY:

   The draft map of the human genetic code promises great progress  in medicine
and science. But it also could create consumer  nightmares as people are denied
jobs, credit and insurance.  America's pitifully weak privacy laws permit
widespread  dissemination of the most intimate details about a person,  possibly
including, in the future, any risk of genetic disease.

   The law is behind science terribly. The answer is not to shut  down research.
It's for Congress and state legislatures, including  Colorado's, to enact
meaningful privacy laws.

   Already, genetic science has brought tremendous medical  progress, and could
offer more, as genetic markers for serious  illnesses are identified and
treatments developed.

   But the discoveries could cause headaches. No federal law bars  employers
from refusing to hire or deciding to fire employees with  genetic risks. No
national law prevents employers from snooping  into employees' genetic profiles.
In the future, people's most  personal information may be used against them
without their  consent or knowledge.

   Health insurers also will covet customers' genetic data.  Thirty-two states
have laws barring discrimination based on  genetic information in individual
health insurance policies,  including Colorado. But 28 states do not, and no
federal law fills  in the gap.

   Moreover, Congress recently let banks merge with other  financial companies,
and enabled different arms of the same  companies to share customer information.
The alarming invasion  expanded the industry's marketing power - that is, to
bury you in  more junk mail and e-mail spam.

   But it also means that your health insurance company could  share your
medical records with your bank. That's right. In  America, a bank officer might
look at your most personal medical  information when deciding whether to issue a
credit card or home  loan. Now think what those same financial conglomerates
would do  with a customer's genetic profile.

   Future genetic medical treatments also could worsen the chasm  in the quality
of health care between rich and poor. Today, cancer  patients sometimes can't
get the latest, most effective treatment  programs, not because the medicines
aren't available, but because  their HMO won't pay for them.

   So when gene therapies come on the market, they're likely to be  marketed to
the rich, and denied to the working and middle class.

   These immediate policy worries are in addition to the many  moral conundrums
about humanity's new ability to tinker with our  very genetic core.

   None of these concerns is a reason to stop genome research.  The work being
conducted, including the contributions of  University of Colorado scientists to
the genetic mapping  technique, could prove as valuable to humanity as the
discovery of  antibiotics and surgery painkillers were in past generations.

   But citizens should demand that Congress and their state  legislatures
protect the most fundamental of human rights:  privacy.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000


                             393 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    June 28, 2000 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1186 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC CODE IS NO IMMEDIATE CURE

SOURCE: JOHN MANGELS - Newhouse News Service Oz Hopkins Koglin of The Oregonian
staff contributed to this report.

BODY:

   Summary: Researchers are still a long way from knowing how to use such
information to treat disorders including cystic fibrosis

   Now that the Human Genome Project has announced success after its $3 billion,
10-year effort to solve the human genetic code, it's easy to believe that new
treatments and even cures for gene-caused diseases are just around the corner.

   There's no doubt the project eventually will produce big payoffs for
patients. But researchers caution that, just as Neil Armstrong's first dusty
steps on the moon didn't immediately enable us to colonize the heavens,
exploitation of the wealth of genetic material will take time.

   Knowing what a gene's components are, and where to find them on the endless,
twisting strands of our DNA, is a long way from understanding how they work and
how to fix them when they falter. Often, answers raise more questions,
scientists say.

   The draft of the human genome "gives us this giant book of information from
which we can now work," said Dr. Peter Kohler, president of Oregon Health
Sciences University. But the complexity of gene function is yet to be
understood, he said.

   OHSU is expanding its attempt to explain the role of genes in disease at its
new Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, which will move to its own building in
Hillsboro this fall.

   "The fact that we know what the gene is does not mean we are going to have an
immediate cure or prevention for the problem," Kohler said.

   A case in point: cystic fibrosis.

   The single gene whose failure causes this fatal disease of mucus-choked lungs
was discovered and deciphered 11 years ago, in a miniature version of the
just-completed Genome Project. Although researchers say that knowledge of the
gene has resulted in a much better understanding of what happens in cystic
fibrosis and some ways to affect the process, there have been no breakthrough
treatments. Patients such as Brandy Stroeder, the McMinnville teen-ager who
needs a lung-liver transplant, continue to suffer organ failure.

   Cystic fibrosis is just the tip of the iceberg of the problem of finding a
gene but not a fix, said Dr. Robb Moses, chairman of the department of molecular
and medical genetics at OHSU. He noted that sickle cell anemia was the first
disease understood on a molecular basis in the 1950s, and yet there is no
therapy based specifically on the knowledge of the sickle cell gene.

   And in another setback, gene therapy trials at several research centers are
now on hold after the death of an 18-year-old at the University of Pennsylvania
last year.

   Breakthrough leads to frustration Mitchell Drumm, a geneticist at the Case
Western Reserve University School of Medicine, was part of the international
team that for months painstakingly combed through a million bits of genetic
material on Chromosome 7 until locating the cystic fibrosis gene in 1989.

   "Ten years isn't all that long in terms of the research process, but it's
half the life span of a CF patient," Drumm said. "That's frustrating. We really
understand how ignorant we were before about what was happening at the molecular
level."

   Genes are recipe books that hold the instructions for making proteins. The
gene that causes cystic fibrosis is supposed to make a protein that manages the
movement of salt components into and out of the cells that line the lungs,
pancreas and intestinal tract. The salt components, sodium and chloride, in turn
dictate the flow of water.

   The defective cystic fibrosis gene starts a cascade of problems. It makes a
faulty protein, which then can't direct the conveyor belt that moves chloride
out of cells. Chloride builds up and combines with sodium to form salt, causing
the cells to suck water from their surroundings to try to restore a balance.

   The water gets pulled from mucus that coats the lining of the breathing
passages and the gut. The mucus becomes thick and sticky. It clogs the lungs and
traps bacteria that cause repeated infections. And it blocks the pancreas,
preventing digestive chemicals from getting to the intestines where they are
needed to break down food.

   Cystic fibrosis patients used to die in childhood from malnourishment. As
doctors have gotten better at treating the digestive problems, patients now
typically live until their late 20s, but eventually succumb to lung infection
and damage.

   Dr. Pamela Davis remembers the elation she felt when word came that the
cystic fibrosis gene had been identified. As chief of the division of pediatric
pulmonary disease at Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital in Cleveland, and
co-director of University Hospitals' Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center, Davis had
grown close to her patients and their families. And she had seen the survival
curve that had risen so dramatically from the 1960s to the '80s flatten out as
treatments reached their limits.

   Patients just couldn't live much past their late 20s without breakthroughs.

   "God was trying to tell us we had gone as far as we could go," Davis said.
"Having the gene was tremendous. It was tremendous excitement. Now we had a key.
We were all naive and hopeful."

   The attitude was "who cares about chloride transport? Let's do gene therapy."

   Solutions are complex That idea -- to replace the faulty gene with one that
works properly -- sounded like a simple, ideal solution. Although cystic
fibrosis genes are in every cell in the body, the ones that really need to be
fixed are those lining the airway passages -- an easy place to reach with
inhaled medication.

   But that's about the only thing that has proved easy in cystic fibrosis gene
therapy, researchers say. For one thing, airway cells regularly die and are
replaced, so any fix of the bad gene they contain wouldn't be permanent. It
would have to be repeated, and scientists don't yet know how often. Correcting
the gene in the "parent" cells that spawn all airway cells would be a better
solution, but those haven't been found yet. Gene fixes would have to be done
early in a patient's life, too, because the lung damage from repeated infections
soon becomes irreversible.

   Another difficulty is how to get the corrected gene into patients' cells. The
carrier has to be big enough to accommodate the hefty chunk of genetic material,
stealthy enough to get past the body's defense system and precise enough to
deliver the gene to the right position on the chromosome so it can work
properly.

   "This is not a trivial problem," Davis said, in part because repeated lung
infections have revved up patients' immune systems.

   They are especially sensitive to invaders, even beneficial ones.

   Tests of several types of gene carriers, such as tamed viruses and tiny fat
capsules, are under way in a small number of patients to determine their safety
and effectiveness. The studies will take several years to complete.

   Gene therapy "has got to work," Davis said. "We're just not smart enough to
do it yet."

   Oz Hopkins Koglin of The Oregonian staff contributed to this report.

   TO LEARN MORE

   For information about cystic fibrosis, call the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation at
503-226-3435 or visit its Web site at www.cff.org


GRAPHIC: Graphic -- Ciagrams and text by Knight Ridder Tribune -- GENE THERAPY
FOR CYSTIC FIBROSIS - The gene that causes cystic fibrosis was discovered 11
years ago, but researchers have not been able to develop a successful gene
therapy to treat the disease.  ; What is cystic fibrosis?  Abnormal cell
Corrected cell The experimental therapy...

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2000


                             394 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                      June 28, 2000 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: EDITORIALS & FORUM; Pg. 11B

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: MEDICAL TRIALS NEED NEW RULES;
MONEY MUST NOT BE ALLOWED TO CORRUPT GENE THERAPY RESEARCH

BYLINE: By Douglas Starr

BODY:

   There's been a lot of concern lately about the safety of experiments
involving gene therapy. Shocked by the death of a young man who took part in a
gene-transfer experiment at the University of Pennsylvania last year, Congress
held hearings in which one expert after another urged stricter oversight of such
testing.

   A few weeks ago, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala proposed
tough new standards, with fines of $1 million for institutions and $250,000 for
individuals. But these standards don't adequately protect participants in
gene-therapy research. In the wake of the bad publicity, scientists report
they're having trouble recruiting volunteers for gene-therapy research trials.

   It's no wonder people have become skeptical of gene-therapy work.
Researchers' credibility has been seriously eroded. But the source of the
erosion was not government, the media or the experimental nature of gene
therapy. The problems confronting this new technology are no different from
those facing conventional medical research: money, and its corrupting influence
on drug-related research.

   It wasn't always so. Medical researchers once considered themselves above the
profit motive. In 1954, for example, Jonas Salk, who developed the polio
vaccine, was asked who would control the patent. "There is no patent," he
replied incredulously. "Could you patent the sun?"

   Several developments have since created a world in which Salk's view seems
quaint. The first was the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, which accelerates the transfer
of scientific discoveries from universities to the marketplace. The act allows
universities to claim patents on technologies they invented using federal
funding and urges them to cooperate with private industry to commercialize the
developments. The act is a boon to scientists, universities and industry.
Scientists no longer have to choose between academic prestige and industrial
money. Universities can retain their professors and attract new money as well.
Industry gains access to some of the country's brightest minds.

   Meanwhile, another development made medical research increasingly commercial:
the modern pharmaceutical boom. By the 1980s and '90s, the basic research that
had been going on for decades yielded lucrative applications. The industry is
producing many new drugs and profits to go with them.

   That, in turn, gave rise to yet another new enterprise: the big business of
testing new drugs on people. Before entering the marketplace, all new drugs
undergo clinical trials to ensure safety and efficacy. To conduct these trials,
drug companies pay medical centers, doctors and private companies to recruit
volunteers willing to take an experimental drug. This branch of the industry has
become a cash cow worth an estimated $3.3 billion a year.

   All these factors created today's big-money climate in which a company might
spend hundreds of millions of dollars to bring out a new drug. There's nothing
wrong with using private capital to develop and test drugs. But questions arise
when formerly independent researchers become too entangled in the business
aspects of their careers.

   The medical community knows several cases in which companies have influenced
the design of a trial, pressured investigators for certain results or suppressed
findings that criticized their product. Despite the notoriety of these cases,
the entanglements continue. Earlier this month, the New England Journal of
Medicine printed a study in which the authors praised a certain antidepressant.
The journal has strict financial-disclosure rules requiring all authors to list
their links to the drug industry. The authors of this study have so many
drug-industry ties that the journal had to list them on its Web page, because
there was no room to print them.

   If we're concerned about the influence of money in medical studies, we should
seriously worry about its role in genetic research. This technology, based on
inserting new DNA into patients' cells, is a high-risk, high-payoff venture in
which a company's stock price can skyrocket or crash depending on the result of
a single trial. It attracts competitive, hard-driving individuals, and promises
billions to those who can successfully bring a new drug to market.

   Such an environment can also set the stage for sloppiness and abuse,
especially when researchers test their own drugs.

   Patients who take part in clinical trials must sign a document giving their
"informed consent" to the procedure. It's important not to simply inform
patients, but truly educate them. Patients need to understand what a long shot
genetic-therapy treatments represent. Of the 400 genetic-transfer therapies
tested on people since 1989, only 10 percent have even made it past basic
toxicity testing. Not one has become a licensed medicine.

   A firewall between researchers who test drugs and the money that sponsors
them must be built. Disclosure is not enough. The only solution would be to
forbid doctors from having any financial stake in the therapies they're testing,
or at least strictly limit them. Harvard Medical School recently took such a
position when it refused to relax its strict financial guideline on
human-subjects research. Unfortunately, few other medical centers have done the
same.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000


                             395 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     June 27, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition,
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: News; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 1500 words

HEADLINE: Genetic code map a milestone;
 But hurdles remain to conquer disease

BYLINE: Jeff Nesmith, M.A.J. McKenna, Staff

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
A map with no street names. A dictionary in an unknown language. A disassembled
jigsaw puzzle.

   Experts used those descriptions to explain how much work still must be done
before the rough draft of the human genetic code --- announced with great
fanfare Monday by two scientific teams --- can move from the lab to medical
uses.

   Yet all three also hint at the inherent promise of mapping the human genome
--- nature's instructions for making and maintaining human beings: At some
point, this newly achieved genetic information will allow medical procedures of
enormous subtlety and sophistication.

   The government-led Human Genome Project and the private Celera Genomics of
Maryland said they have identified 97 percent of the nearly 3.2 billion bits of
chemical information found in every cell that make up the operating instructions
for human life.

   But experts noted that human genome researchers have not yet put the pieces
in order or figured out what they do.

   "We're in the position of possessing a recipe book for everything the human
body needs to develop, and we know what page each recipe is on, but we don't
know what any of the recipes make," said Angela Trepanier, a genetic counselor
at Atlanta's Emory University. "We know where the genes are, but we don't know
yet how mutations in the genes affect the disease process, and we don't know
what genes work together to cause certain diseases.

   "Most diseases, such as heart disease or high blood pressure, are probably
caused by multiple genes and by environmental factors. We will have to know what
all the genes are that affect heart disease, plus how environmental factors
affect its development, before we can design interventions to prevent heart
disease."

   At a White House press conference, researchers from the government project
and from Celera set aside a bitter scientific competition and joined President
Clinton in announcing that nearly all of the genome has been defined and
sequenced.

   "Today we are learning the language in which God created life," Clinton said.
"We are gaining ever more awe for the complexity, the beauty, the wonder of
God's most divine and sacred gift."

   "This is a great day," he said.

   Craig Venter, president of Celera, said understanding the genome eventually
could lead to reducing cancer deaths to zero.

   Venter, a pioneer genetic researcher, formed Celera two years ago and set out
to use supercomputers and laser-driven molecular analyzing techniques to rapidly
decipher the sequence of the more than 3 billion "base pairs" that form the
spiraling double helix of human DNA.

   He announced Celera had sequenced the genome of five individuals --- two
males and three females --- who identified themselves as Hispanic, Asian,
Caucasian and African-American

   Standing beside Clinton and Venter, Dr. Francis Collins, head of the Human
Genome Project, announced an international network of scientific collaborators
had produced a "rough draft" of the genome.

   The two groups have agreed to publish their separate --- and apparently
nearly identical --- genetic maps in a yet-to-be-determined scientific journal
in September.

   Noting that personal genetic information could be misused, Collins and Venter
hailed Clinton's efforts to get laws enacted to protect Americans from
discrimination by insurance companies, employers and others on the basis of "
predictive" genetic information the new maps will make possible.

   "If we ever needed a wake-up call to say it's time to do this, isn't today
that day?" Collins said. "The train is coming very close. It is bearing down on
us."

   The race between Celera and the public genome project became intense in the
last year and led to name-calling on both sides --- most frequently by
unidentified sources.

   "I am happy that today the only race we are talking about is the human race,
" Collins said.

   He said he went to an intermediary in early May and asked whether Venter
would be interested in a joint announcement. This led to a series of meetings
between the two scientific rivals and, ultimately, to Monday's announcement.

   Collins said the cost of the genome project has been about $ 300 million, or
a nickel for each of the Earth's 6 billion people.

   His project has posted the results of its sequencing work on the Internet,
with updates every 12 hours.

   Venter's company was founded with a $ 1 billion investment by the Perkin-
Elmer Corp., now known as PE Corp., maker of telescopes, microscopes and other
scientific instruments.

   Venter said Celera did not expect to make a profit by commercializing the
gene code, but through selling the expertise it acquired in the sequencing work.
The company's stock rose sharply on the Nasdaq stock exchange Monday.

   Among about 100 scientists and their guests who gathered at the White House
for the press conference was Dr. James D. Watson, who in 1953 co-authored a
scientific paper describing the structure of DNA. Nine years later, Watson and
his fellow scientist, British biochemist Francis Crick, received the Nobel Prize
for their discovery.

   Watson compared the mapping work to the invention of the printing press. "
Now, let's print some books," he said.

   Genetics experts hailed the work, but were quick to note that it will
probably be decades before successful gene therapies are developed for the range
of diseases that have genetic components --- in part, because such techniques
will have to account for minute genetic variations between individuals.

   "In reality, all our genomes are slightly different," said Dr. Stephen
Warren, Timmie professor of Human Genetics at Emory University School of
Medicine and an investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute."That is why
we look slightly different from each other, and why people in families look
slightly more alike than people outside their families do; that is why some
people seem to be protected from certain diseases and others are predisposed to
them. We will have to see if we can correlate the variations to particular
diseases or treatments."

   Warren said knowledge of the human genome is likely to have its most
immediate impact in improving development of traditional drugs. "The genomic
sequence is going to allow much better conventional drugs to be developed," he
said.

   Venter announced at an afternoon press conference that another pharmaceutical
company had contacted Celera about doing business together.

   Monday's news probably will disappoint people who hoped for instant cures.
Researchers are likely to discover genetically based disorders before they
develop treatments. That has been the case with breast and colon cancers,
Alzheimer's and other diseases.

   "People may expect more than is actually available: The cystic fibrosis gene
has been identified for eight years now, for instance, and yet we still don't
know how to fix CF," Trepanier said.

   Collins, head of the Human Genome Project, has predicted that within 10 years
tests will be widely available for genetic predisposition to the 25 major causes
of illness and death in this country --- including diabetes, coronary artery
disease and certain cancers.

   But most people probably will shun genetic testing unless effective therapies
exist to prevent particular disorders. It won't be until later in the century
that more significant medical developments will come from the genome research,
Collins said, projecting that:

   By 2020, doctors will rely on individual genetic variations to prescribe new
and old drugs.

   By 2030, clinical trials will be under way to extend human life spans through
genetics.

   By 2040, gene therapy and gene-based drugs will be available for most
diseases.

   While the project is frequently described as an effort to decode the human
blueprint, scientists haven't actually begun the work of deciphering the code.

   To date, much of the effort has been devoted to entering their findings into
a giant computer database to form a rough copy of the story of the human genome.
But no one can yet read the story, and most of the genome is written in a
language scientists don't understand.

   "Understanding this genome is going to take us another 100 years, maybe
more," said Harold Varmus, president of the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center in New York City and former director of the National Institutes of
Health.

   The genetic code tells an organism how to turn itself from an embryo into an
adult composed of 10 trillion cells, go about its daily business, reproduce and
die. Other factors also play a role: diet, environment, lifestyle. But at its
most basic, life is a set of genes directing an intricate biomolecular symphony.
To really understand genes, scientists have to determine how they interact with
each other and also how proteins work. That field, functional genomics, is in
its infancy.

   But despite the qualifications, experts hailed Monday's announcement as a
defining moment that merits comparison to the missions to the moon in the 1960s
and 1970s.

CORRECTION-DATE: June 29, 2000

CORRECTION:
page A/2: A news article Tuesday about mapping the human genome referred
incorrectly to Celera Genomics' stock price. It rose in early trading Monday but
finished that day at $ 113 a share, down $ 12.25.

GRAPHIC: Graphic
WHAT HAPPENED TODAY
Scientists announced they have virtually deciphered the human genetic code, the
so-called "Book of Life" that contains the formula for making human beings. The
breakthrough could open the door to a war against disease at its genetic roots
and prolong people's lives.
THE HUMAN GENOME
The biological instruction for how an individual is formed and how the cells in
the body function. The human genome contains more than 50, 000 genes. Each gene
has thousands of "base pairs"-or DNA subunits.
The human genetic code is written into the ladderlike molecule called DNA.
Biologists usually refer to the four base molecules of DNA by the initials A, C,
G and T. At 3 billion subunits-or letters-long, the human genetic code could
fill 200 Atlanta telephone books.

BLUEPRINT FOR THE FUTURE
The rough draft of the human genome is the start of a long scientific journey.
It will take years for practical applications to emerge.
Possible advance in genetic science
2002-2003: Mapping of entire human genome 100% complete.
 2002-2010: First tests of genetic screening against risk of cancer, diabetes
and strokes.
2020: Medical treatments, tailored to the genetic makeup of each individual,
available.
2040: Doctors able to correct genetic flaws, controlling some congenital
diseases.
2050: Average life span reaches 90-95 years.
Increased knowledge of population and aging genes.
Source: Associated Press, Knight Ridder Tribune, wire reports
/ MICHAEL DABROWA / Staff
Photo
Two project leaders, Francis Collins (right), of the Human Genome Project at the
National Institutes of Health, and J. Craig Venter, of Celera Genomics,
celebrate Monday in Washington. / DENNIS COOK / Associated Press
Graphic
READING THE FULL HUMAN GENETIC CODE
To read the full human " genome," or genetic code, geneticists use specialized
chemicals and computers to analyze each unit in the long chainlike DNA molecule.

Every human cell contains two sets of 23 chromosomes. Each one is a tightly
twisted packet of genetic material called DNA. Unraveled, it forms a spiral
ladder known as a double helix.
DNA structure
Connecting the two sides of the DNA ladder are four chemicals, which are
identified by letters.
Reading the code
Just as letters in the alphabet form words, combinations of the subunits create
" words" or genes that are the building blocks of "sentences" that convey
genetic instructions.
Points on a map
By decoding what all of those genetic sentences-or sequences-mean, scientists
are mapping the entire human genome.
 Clues to diseases
A simple mistake--or mutation--in a gene sequence can cause a genetic disease or
predispose a person to a disease.
Source: American Medical Association

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2000


                             396 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 27, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 379 words

HEADLINE: RESPECTING THE BOOK OF LIFE

BODY:

   In hailing the completion of the rough draft of sequencing the human genome,
scientists and political leaders reached far yesterday in their choice of
comparisons. They likened it to the first accurate mapping of the solar system,
to the landing on the moon, to the discovery of antibiotics, or to the
deciphering of the periodic table of the elements. One landmark in mankind's
understanding of the natural world that got little if any mention was the
mastery of the atom, which has led to both nuclear weapons and the troubled
technology of nuclear power.

   Yet in many respects it is that quantum leap in human knowledge that bears
the strongest similarity to the progress scientists have made by decoding the
book of life. Understanding nuclear physics has given humans the godlike power
to destroy the Earth - or at least make it uninhabitable. Making sense out of
the bewildering jumble of nucleotides that twist upon each other on human
chromosomes gives us the godlike power to change the genetic makeup of
generations to come.

      Yesterday's momentous achievement now must be followed up by an
international conversation on where we go from here.

   Under the pressure of war, the United States in 1945 used atomic bombs before
there could be any public discussion of the wisdom of doing so. Because the
completed sequencing of the genome is such a preliminary step in both gene
therapy and the manipulation of genes in reproductive cells, there should be
more time now to take on the ethical issues that yesterday's announcement brings
to the fore. The most immediate is how to protect individuals from being
discriminated against by employers or insurers on the basis of their genes.

   Beyond that is the deeper question of tinkering with our genetic legacy to
create "designer babies." It is tempting, for instance, to eliminate the gene
that causes sickle cell anemia, and then we are reminded that the same gene
protects against malaria. Nature took 4 billion years to write the book of life;
should we decode and change it in a decade?

   Congratulations to the scientists for reaching this stage faster than anyone
thought possible. Now it up to us - and our political and spiritual leaders - to
decide how best to use this new gift of knowledge.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             397 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     June 27, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 1111 words

HEADLINE: DECODING OF GENOME DECLARED RIVALS PRESENT ROUGH FINDINGS

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - In an achievement so profound that no metaphor seemed able to
capture it, scientists yesterday said they have pieced together a "rough draft"
of the human genome - the entire set of DNA scripts in our cells that strongly
influence health and illness, behavior, special abilities, and how long we live.

   Competing teams said they had mapped about 3 billion letters of DNA code and
had sequenced, or identified, 85 percent to 99 percent of the genome. The
research pouring out of these sequencing projects is giving biomedical
researchers an avalanche of data they believe will revolutionize medicine.

      It will take another year or two to fill in the gaps and correct errors in
the genetic map, but what has been achieved so far has been more successful and
less expensive than anticipated when the audacious plan was crafted about a
decade ago.

   The two rival scientific groups - one public, the other employed by a biotech
company - put aside wrangling for a day to announce in a joint appearance that
they had reached about the same place in sequencing the genome.

   President Clinton called the information in the draft - really an immense
string of chemical letters, a 100,000-pagelong sentence, that tell cells how to
make proteins - "the most important, most wondrous map ever produced." He said
it outstripped in importance the map with which Lewis and Clark opened America's
way to the West. Other comparisons floated during a White House ceremony and
news conference were to Galileo's discoveries in the solar system; the invention
of the printing press; the Manhattan Project, which produced the first atomic
bomb; and the space program that landed men on the moon.

   "We have caught a glimpse of an instruction book previously known only to
God," said Dr. Francis Collins, the geneticist who led the public consortium,
which was funded by the National Institutes of Health and the Department of
Energy.

   J. Craig Venter, president of Celera Genomics Inc., the private company that
entered the genomic race just 20 months ago, said the information provides the
potential to wipe out cancer and other diseases "in our lifetime."

   But even the most ebullient scientists sobered as they warned of dangers that
individuals' unique genetic messages, which could reveal future disease risks or
be linked to purported behavioral traits, might be used against them. Collins
urged the rapid passage of legislation to protect genetic privacy.

   Obtaining the genetic sequence information is only a starting point; the raw
DNA messages have to be analyzed to find out what genes they contain, what
proteins the cells make from those gene recipes, and how the proteins interact
with one another to build the body and regulate its function.

   With just the DNA sequence, "We have the encyclopedia, but we don't have
Hamlet," said Shirley Tilghman, a Princeton University geneticist who worked on
the genome project.

   Although 16 research centers contributed to the public genome project, the
push in the past year and a half was credited to the five largest. One, operated
by the Whitehead Institute and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, churned
out about one-third of the DNA code by itself - about 1.2 billion chemical
letters of DNA, the biggest production of any of the centers.

   Eric Lander, the Whitehead scientist who led the effort, said the center had
gone from a "dark horse" in the sequencing race to excelling because of
innovations in organization.

   Tilghman said Lander was "one of the heroes" in the public effort, and
praised his "creative, out-of-the-box thinking" that stepped up the pace.

   The biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries have pounced on the
information the Human Genome Project Gene released as it went along. They are
predicting a new era of personalized medicine.

   Genetic tests that predict what illnesses a person will be prone to and gene
therapy that treats diseases by correcting the genetic errors that cause them
are now possible.

   Eventually, people may have gene tests at birth that predict their health
patterns.

   Collins said the project's scientists estimate that it requires 3.15 billion
chemical letters - a four-letter alphabet of repeating As, Cs, Ts, and Gs - to
spell out the DNA instructions by which an individual develops from an embryo to
an adult.

   The federal project has determined the exact sequence of those chemical
letters in about 85 percent of the genome, Collins said. About $300 million has
been spent on the public effort so far, he said.

   Venter reported a similar estimate for the size of the genome - 3.12 billion
letters - and said his company's supercomputers had assembled sequence
information equivalent to 99 percent of the genome.

   But scientists on both sides of the contest said those numbers cannot
accurately be compared because the government's information has been checked an
average of seven times per chemical letter, while Celera's has been checked only
about four times per letter.

   Celera plans to make money by giving subscribers a first look at the sequence
information packaged with other research , as well as computer programs that
will aid in translating the sequence and help them use it.

   Venter said Celera, which used robotic DNA sequencing machines, began
decoding the human genome last September and tested Venter's strategy for
speeding up the process by sequencing the genome of Drosophila, the fruit fly.

   The biggest source of conflict between the two projects was Venter's refusal
to release Celera's sequence data publicly until subscribers had a chance to
view it and search it for patentable genes. Moreover, about 30 percent of
Celera's sequence data came from the public GenBank database into which the
Human Genome Project has been depositing its data daily.

   Venter said Celera obtained DNA from five people of different ethnicity and
of both sexes. Their identities will remain confidential, he said.

   The publicly funded genome effort used DNA from a "library" containing the
genetic material of anonymous donors. Male DNA was obtained from sperm, and
female DNA was extracted from blood cells.

   The genes of one individual differ from another by about one chemical letter
in every 1,000. Those slight differences, known as SNPs, are believed to be
responsible for most of the diseases that affect humans.

   Companies and academic scientists are engaged in a new aspect of the genome
race: searching for hundreds of thousands of SNPs that will have value in
understanding illness and in devising more effective treatments.  SIDEBAR: THE
BODY'S BLUEPRINT GLOBE STAFF GRPAHIC PLEASE REFER TO MICROFILM FOR GRAPH DATA

GRAPHIC: PHOTO    GRAPH, 1. Two people who were instrumental in the genome
project, J. Craig Venter (left), president of Celera Genomics Inc., and Dr.
Francis Collins, the geneticist who led the public consortium, discussing the
endeavor in Washington, D.C., yesterday. / AP PHOTO 2. At the White House
yesterday, President Clinton congratulated Dr. Francis Collins on the landmark
scientific achievement. / AFP PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000


                             398 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                      June 27, 2000, Tuesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. 10B

LENGTH: 611 words

HEADLINE: WOMEN'S CLUB FORUM AT CHAUTAUQUA TO KICK OFF WITH CAMPAIGN;
TALK

BYLINE: TOM BUCKHAM; News Staff Reporter

DATELINE: CHAUTAUQUA

BODY:


   The 2000 presidential election, advances in biotechnology and the future of
public education will be among the topics explored in this year's Contemporary
Issues Forum lectures, sponsored by the Chautauqua Women's Club.

   The series will open at 3:30 p.m. Wednesday with an analysis of "Campaign
2000" by David Kozak, a professor of public policy at Gannon University, and
continue at 3 p.m. Saturday with an examination of world environmental and
humanitarian challenges by Julia Taft, U.S. assistant secretary of state for
population, refugees and migration.

   Both events will take place in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Subsequent programs in the series:

   Contralto Juanita Wallace Jackson will sing spirituals and discuss their
influence on American music at 3:30 p.m. July 5 in Elizabeth S. Lenna Hall.

   Martha Reitman, chief executive officer of Reitman Corp., will discuss such
recent biotech research developments as gene therapy for heart disease and
cancer growth factors at 3 p.m. July 8 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Dramatist Lee Wolf will probe the lives of novelist F. Scott and Zelda
Fitzgerald and present a dramatic monologue in Zelda's character at 3:30 p.m.
July 12 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   James E. Barker, Erie, Pa., public school superintendent and a widely
recognized educational innovator, will discuss failing schools at 3 p.m. July 15
in the Hall of Philosophy.

   A British perspective on education in the new millennium will be offered by
William Glover, academic director of Brighton College School of Excellence, at
3:30 p.m. July 19 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Wendell Minor, an internationally known illustrator, will talk about book
covers he designed for authors such as David McCullough and Doris Kearns Goodwin
at 3 p.m. July 22 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   The status of Muslim women in America will be discussed by Azizah Al Hibri, a
University of Richmond law professor, lawyer and feminist, at 3:30 p.m. July 26
in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Humorist Frances Weaver will offer insights and anecdotes on enjoying later
life at 3 p.m. July 29 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   "Peace Jam," a program that brings teenagers of various faiths, races and
cultures to work with recipients of the Nobel Peace Prize to change the young
people's schools and communities, will be detailed by co-founders Dawn Engle and
Ivan Suvanjieff at 3:30 p.m. Aug. 2 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Stephen Szabo, associate dean of the Nitze School of Advanced International
Studies, will speak about Europeans' struggle for new identities in the era of
both Europeanization and globalization at 3 p.m Aug. 5 in the Hall of
Philosophy.

   The identity problems people everywhere face in a rapidly changing world will
be explored by Ori Z. Soltes, a Georgetown University professor of philosophy
and comparative religion, at 3:30 p.m. Aug. 9 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   Shirley Anne Warshaw, a Gettysburg College political sicence professor, will
give her thoughts on what it will take to win the fall presidential election at
3 p.m. Aug. 12 in the Hall of Philosophy.

   "The Crown Jewels of Fine Art: the Akeley Collection," will be discussed by
Sharon Smith Thobald, senior appraiser of the Smithsonian Institution, at 3:30
p.m. Aug. 16 in Smith Wilkes Hall.

   David Kozak will return to the Hall of Philosophy from the Democratic
National Convention at 3 p.m. Aug 19 to give his perspective on events in Los
Angeles.

   Political oratory from the old-fashioned stump speech to the modern
television sound bite will by reviewed by Parker Payson, a Public Broadcasting
System documentary producer, at 3:30 p.m. Aug. 23 in the Hall of Philosophy.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2000


                             399 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     June 27, 2000 Tuesday Two dot Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Dr. Mark Hughes of Wayne State University calls the Human Genome
Project's gene map a genetic "Rosetta Stone."; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 794 words

HEADLINE: Ethical concerns raised;
Findings could lead to discrimination, invasion of privacy

BYLINE: Jodi S. Cohen

BODY:

   Imagine you could cross your personality traits with those of your fiancee to
determine if you will have a successful marriage. Would you do it?

   What if you know that your unborn child will die within five years from a
painful, debilitating disease. Would you have an abortion?

   Who should have access to your genetic information?

   Are there ways to ensure equal access to expensive gene-related therapies?

   There are more than 3.1 billion subunits of DNA -- the chemical map for a
human being -- and just about as many complex ethical, legal and social
questions about how the genetic information should be used. At the top of the
list are concerns about genetic privacy and discrimination.

   "The more we understand how life is constructed, the more chance we have to
shape that construction," said Richard Lempert, a University of Michigan law and
sociology professor. "That raises profound questions of who we are, what values
we should be pursuing and about equal access to the technologies we're
developing."

   Indeed, researchers say it eventually will be possible to identify which
genes or gene mutations put people at risk for cancer, heart ailments and other
diseases. People will know years in advance if they -- or their children and
relatives -- will get sick.

   There are good implications of that because the genome map could provide
early-warning information that could lead to treatments or cures for some of the
deadliest diseases.

   But there are negative implications if private information gets into the
wrong hands. Health and life insurance companies could decide who to insure
based on whether that person has the propensity for certain diseases. Employees
could decide to cut costs by not hiring people whose genes show that they may
require expensive treatments, experts say.

   President Clinton already has issued an order forbidding genetic
discrimination against federal employees, but there is no similar protection for
the rest of the public. Anti-genetic discrimination laws have stalled in the
U.S. House and Senate.

   Some experts believe that there needs to be a federal law forbidding genetic
discrimination, similar to laws against racial, ethnic and sexual
discrimination.

   "One major concern that people are talking about is privacy and what will
happen with this information if insurers or employers have access," said Shelley
Coe, project administrator for the Communities of Color and Genetics Policy
Project at U-M, a $1-million project funded by the National Human Genome
Research Institute. "Will people be discriminated against based on their genetic
information?"

   The study, based on focus-group interviews by researchers at U-M and Michigan
State University, found that African Americans and Latinos are concerned about
cloning, privacy, genetic testing, genetic engineering, genetic counseling, gene
therapy, access to information and benefits and the role of the government.
African Americans stressed their interest in being a part of genetics research
and their distrust of the government, Coe said.

   Researchers will use the findings to provide recommendations to Congress and
other policy makers.

   Arthur Caplan, director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of
Pennsylvania, said there should be requirements that nobody be tested without
their permission.

   "You could have your DNA tested without your knowledge. I can get it from a
urinal, coffee cup, toilet seat," said Caplan, an international leader in
bioethics. "Intimate information -- if you're adopted, if you have a mental
illness -- could be detected, and it could get into the wrong hands."

   The first phase of U-M's study into the values of genome technology led to a
dozen policy recommendations, including an emphasis on genetic counseling and
enhancing public and medical education about genetics and reproductive issues.

   "It is important to think about these ethical and value issues before they
have to be decided at the moment," said U-M's Lempert. "There are many, many
questions. These developments open up new questions. They also make more vivid
questions that have existed for a while."

   What it means

   The possibilities

   * Researchers believe doctors will tailor treatment to individuals and even
correct genetic flaws before birth.

   Curing cancer

   * About 2,000 people die daily from cancer. By mapping the genome, that
number may be reduced to zero.

   Early warning

   * The project brings medicine a step closer to an automated system that will
scan anyone's genome. A drop of blood may produce a list of a person's inborn
disease susceptibilities -- and strengths.

   Brave new world

   * Ethicists worry gene technology will be used to discriminate against people
in employment, insurance coverage and other areas.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             400 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     June 27, 2000 Tuesday One dot Edition

SECTION: FRONT; Pg. 5A

LENGTH: 667 words

HEADLINE: How it happened; Decoders rushed to make history;
Human Genome Project Private, public sectors spent millions, worked long hours
and wrapped up research early

BYLINE: Jeremy Pearce

BODY:

   The race for the human genetic blueprint has from its start been a race with
a public purpose.

   "We are poised to totally change the way medicine is practiced, and it goes
well beyond cancer," said Dr. John Stevens of the American Cancer Society in
Atlanta.

   Some 3.1 billion pieces of genetic information tracked by universities and
the private company, Celera Genomics of Rockville, Md., will be used in part as
a library to check defective genes.

   Eventually, the genome will probably lead to more effective drugs tailored
for treatments and "gene therapy" -- the direct replacement of defective genes.

   Other scientists, although encouraged by the progress, argue that the
knowledge must be sheathed in legal safeguards for patient privacy.

   "It's an exciting day, but we will have to be exceptionally careful not to
misuse this," said Dr. David Hunter, director of Harvard University's Center for
Cancer Prevention.

   The public side of research took five years and at least $300 million. In the
United States, universities including Baylor, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Washington University in St. Louis were instrumental in decoding
gene sequences. No universities in Michigan were directly involved.

   "We've constantly had to find ways to do things faster and better," said Dr.
John McPherson, co-director of Washington University's gene research. "We knew
that other scientists found our information to be valuable. That spurred us on."

   A project worldwide, other sequencing work was prepared by experts in the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Japan and China. Early estimates predicted the
work would be completed in 2005. Two years ago, that date was revised to 2003.

   The announcement on Monday put the date forward yet again, by another two
years -- remarkably rapid progress that was aided by improvements in computer
programs.

   Last year, Celera Genomics, a private corporation, began its own crack at
mapping the genome, harnessing computers that coupled university findings with
their own research. Public and private efforts will be compared in coming months
to ensure accuracy.

   Celera Chief Scientist J. Craig Venter joined Dr. Francis Collins, leader of
the entire Human Genome Project and former University of Michigan professor, on
Monday at a White House ceremony. Venter and Collins complimented each other for
overcoming competitive anger that sometimes boiled over into public controversy.

   "This is such a historic occasion, we felt we had to come together for a
joint announcement," Venter said. Collins responded in kind: "The only race
we're interested in is the human race."

   In time, Human Genome Project information could be used to warn potential
cancer victims to steer clear of jobs, chemicals and situations that create
risks for disease.

   Discussing the role of genes, scientists use a analogy that compares a human
cell to a set of encyclopedias, since both, at base, are troves of information.

   If a cell represents a complete set of books, a chromosome stands for only a
single volume. Within a volume, there are many paragraphs; these are the genes.
And within the paragraphs are letters. These letters are our DNA, or
deoxyribonucleic acid, the basis for life.

   A gene is said to mutate when DNA is damaged or in some way shuffled and
reordered. If the damage is severe, a gene mutates and changes form, sometimes
to cancer.

   In the far future, medical research may lead to tailoring drugs to a
patient's genes, and not to a patient's breasts, lungs or skin. All agree that
surgery, chemical chemotherapy and radiation treatments tied to bodily sites of
cancer are crude cures in comparison.

   But most medical experts still speak of accurate genetic diagnosis and
"cures" as marvels of the future.

   "Have this record is certainly going to make identifying diseased genes
easier," said Dr. Michael Imperiale, a University of Michigan geneticist
studying gene therapy. "But just finding a defect doesn't mean we'll have a
therapy."

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002
