
                             601 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 1, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 01G

LENGTH: 640 words

HEADLINE: For most of us, genetic testing not cost-effective

BYLINE: MARILYNN MARCHIONE of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   Hardly a week goes by now without a gene discovery or report of a new genetic
test. It begs the question: If such tests are available, why shouldn't everyone
get them, especially for such common and feared diseases as breast and colon
cancer?

   The simple answer is that they cost too much for the number of cases they'd
detect if the whole population were to be screened.

   But like many things that at first blush seem simple, the issue is more
complicated than that -- which is what many people learn when they ask a doctor
about getting tested.

   The public's interest in genetic testing has been piqued by the Human Genome
Project, which is producing an encyclopedia of human DNA, and reports like the
one last week that gene therapy appears to have given normal immune function to
two babies born severely immune- compromised.

   "Everyone is fascinated by this because of the potential opportunities it
opens" to detect diseases early and treat them years before symptoms appear,
said Betsy Adrian, executive vice president of the Milwaukee County Medical
Society.

   People with gene defects that raise their risk of colon cancer can have
frequent exams and get polyps removed before they turn deadly, and "you can step
up the mammograms if you're carrying the marker for breast cancer," she points
out.

   But genetic tests simply aren't warranted for most people.

   "Errors in our genes, our genetic material, are responsible for an estimated
3,000-4,000 hereditary diseases, including Huntington disease, cystic fibrosis
and Duchenne muscular dystrophy," says a primer on genetic testing published by
the National Academy of Sciences (Web site: www. BeyondDiscovery.org). Most are
rare, so testing everyone for them would be silly.

   That's true of cancer, too, given the current state of knowledge and cost of
the tests. All cancers are genetic in that they're caused by mutations usually
acquired throughout life. Inherited mutations account for less than 10% of all
cancers, so it makes no sense to test everyone for them. Also, genetic tests
usually detect only the few most common mutations.

   "The big problem in a lot of genetic diseases is that the genes can be very
large and the mutations can be very different in different families," said Dan
Bellissimo, director of molecular diagnostics at the Blood Center of
Southeastern Wisconsin.

   Many genetic tests cost around $1,000, too expensive to meet the
$50,000-per-year-of-life-saved standard that's widely used to determine whether
a screening test is cost-effective. By comparison, mammograms, which cost from
$80 to $120 apiece, cost $21,400 per year of life saved for women ages 50 to 69.

   The expense of genetic tests is due to their complexity and to patents. Most
use a complicated technique called Southern blot analysis or polymerase chain
reaction, PCR, which has become the base of genetic research because it's a way
of rapidly amplifying DNA so it can be analyzed. Hoffmann-LaRoche holds the
patent on PCR, and anyone using a test that includes it must pay 10% of the
test's costs in royalties.

   For all those reasons, genetic testing is only for people who have reason to
believe they're at increased risk of a disease.

   The genetics screening program at Froedtert Memorial Lutheran Hospital and
the Medical College of Wisconsin suggest these factors for when genetic testing
and/or counseling should be considered:

   -- The same kind of cancer occurs in several closely related family members,
or on one side of a family, maternal or paternal.

   -- Cancer that occurs at an early age.

   -- Cancer in both breasts or kidneys.

   -- Multiple primary cancers in the same person.

   -- Unusual or rare cancers, such as breast cancer in men.

   ---------- --

   Marilynn Marchione can be reached at (414) 224-2338 or by e-mail at
mmarchio@onwis.com.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             602 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 1, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 03G

LENGTH: 145 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy used;
Compiled by Journal Sentinel reporter Marilynn Marchione from recent reports

BYLINE:  Compiled by Journal Sentinel reporter Marilynn Marchione from recent
reports.

BODY:

   French scientists have used gene therapy to give normal immune function to
two babies born with a rare, life-threatening immune disease, according to a
report in the most recent issue of the journal Science.

   It's far too soon to know if the babies are cured, experts cautioned.

   The babies have SCID, or "severe combined immunodeficiency disease," which
prevents babies' bodies from producing lymphocytes, the immune cells that ward
off infection, leaving them vulnerable to death from minor germs.

   One of the most well known cases is David, the Houston "bubble boy" who lived
in a germ- proof plastic enclosure.

   Many SCID patients get bone marrow transplants to give them stem cells that,
among other things, produce lymphocytes. But that's not always successful.

   (For more on the gene therapy issue, see today's To Your Health column on the
Health cover.)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             603 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                        May 1, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: HEALTH AND SCIENCE; Pg. 4G

LENGTH: 455 words

HEADLINE: Fit News

BODY:

   Exercise and addiction

   There is little evidence of exercise addiction in women who don't already
have some type of eating disorder such as bulimia or anorexia, according to a
recent study in the British Journal of Sports Medicine.

   For years, mental health officials have wondered whether the compulsive need
to exercise was a disease in women who are preoccupied with body image.

   Researchers from the University of Birmingham analyzed exercise patterns of
women who were members of fitness clubs, professional athletes and those with
eating disorders.

   The women underwent testing for psychological symptoms, personality traits,
self image and self esteem, exercise beliefs and levels of physical activity.

   The researchers concluded that women who don't have an eating disorder but
who exercise excessively had none of the personality traits or psychological
problems that would merit defining their behavior as addictive or
psychologically unhealthy. In fact, those women had healthy self-esteem, the
authors said.

   "Taken together . . . these results argue against the notion that primary
exercise dependence is a pathology and certainly undermine the claim that it is
a prevalent pathology," the researchers wrote.

   New therapies

   Gene therapy and tissue engineering may be standard treatments for many
sports injuries in the coming decade, according to a panel of surgeons at a
recent meeting of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.

   Scientific research using therapies such as genes, stem cells and tissue
engineering may speed up healing from orthopedic injuries, the panelists said.

   For instance, in a typical muscle injury it might take two weeks before
muscle regeneration begins.

   Often the healed muscle has a lot of scar tissue that can cause
complications.

   "Our research shows that by adding gene therapy to the treatment program,
muscles heal with less scar tissue, creating a near complete recovery of the
muscle," said Johnny Huard, one of the panelists.

   The panelists said that while gene and cell therapies still are in the
research phase, the new therapies should be standard treatment in the next 10
years.

   Advantage, tennis

   Tennis scored an ace in 1999.

   The number of tennis players ages 12 and older increased from 19.5 million in
1996 to 20.8 million in 1999, according to information supplied by the Sporting
Goods Manufacturers Association.

   The number of frequent tennis players, those who played at least 21 times a
year, increased from 4.9 million to 5.4 million.

   Sales of tennis equipment through the third quarter of the year also were up.

   Racket sales were up 7% and ball sales were up 3.5%.

   ------------

   Compiled and written by Journal Sentinel reporter John Fauber.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             604 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                              May 1, 2000, Monday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 789 words

HEADLINE: Hope for reversing memory loss grows; Success reported in UCSD
scientists' study with monkeys

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 UCSD scientists have reversed the process of deterioration in brain cells of
older monkeys, a discovery that is building high hopes for a similar approach
now approved for testing in humans with early signs of Alzheimer's disease.

   Dr. Mark Tuszynski, director of UCSD's Center for Neural Repair, reported the
gene therapy's success in monkeys yesterday at the weeklong annual meeting of
the American Academy of Neurology.  The meeting has drawn more than 10,000
neuroscientists and clinicians from around the world to the San Diego Convention
Center.  The academy highlighted his team's report.

   The trial in Alzheimer's patients is the first gene therapy effort involving
a disease of the brain other than cancer, Tuszynski said.  UCSD is looking for
eight patients from the San Diego area to test the technique for safety and
toxicity.

   If the approach passes, Tuszynski hopes to enroll more patients in a larger
study starting next year to see if the technique can actually reverse the loss
of memory that is characteristic of Alzheimer's disease, now diagnosed in 4
million Americans.

   In the monkey study, the research team focused on the cholinergic system, a
network of neurotransmitters that are believed critical for memory and cognitive
function, and which is known to wither and weaken in people with Alzheimer's
disease.

   As normal monkeys age, the density of the cells involved in this system drops
by 43 percent from when the monkeys were young, roughly equivalent to the aging
that occurs when a human turns 70.

   The researchers found, however, that they could restore the density of these
connections by transplanting a gene that releases a protein called nerve growth
factor, which is known to maintain connectivity for complex brain communication.

   Tuszynski said his team compared the brains of three groups of monkeys whose
average age was 22 years, equivalent to a 70-year-old human.  One group of
monkeys received grafts of cells with nerve growth factor, the second received
grafts of a control substance, and the third received no treatment.

   The researchers discovered that the monkeys treated with nerve growth factor
showed much greater restoration of their cholinergic system density than either
of the other two groups.

   "We were surprised by the magnitude of the ability of these genetically
modified cells to reverse the effects of aging," Tuszynski said, adding that
"it's not a far stretch to suggest this may be useful in the treatment of
Alzheimer's disease."

   Gene therapy is an experimental approach that involves inserting genetic
sequences that express specific proteins found lacking or malfunctioning in
patients with certain diseases or conditions.  The sequences are inserted
directly into carriers, usually harmless viruses, that target them where they
are needed.

   But the effort recently suffered a series of setbacks after the sudden death
of a teen-age cancer patient at the University of Pennsylvania who experienced
an adverse reaction to the viral vector.

   Tuszynski, associate professor of neurosciences, hopes to get around that
problem by injecting the viral vectors containing the growth factor into skin
cells after they have been removed from the patient and inserted in a test tube.

   He emphasized that although viral vector lacks any disease producing genes,
"we can test it to make sure that what actually goes into the patient is free of
any disease-causing virus," he said.

   The nerve growth factor is then re-inserted into a specific area of the
patient's brain by a stereotactic needle guided by magnetic resonance imaging.

   That is not to say there aren't still risks, such as having a needle pass
into the brain, hemorrhage, or the nerve growth factor passing beyond its
intended target in the brain.

   But he thinks that's unlikely.  Tuszynski said that his team's proposal was
favorably reviewed by the National Institutes of Health Recombinant Advisory
Committee and received approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
And, he said, no other gene therapy effort "has been backed by as much
preliminary data in primates as we have, so we're approaching this study with a
very strong and cautious foundation."

   James Conner, UCSD assistant professor, and Jeffrey Roberts of the University
of California at Davis Primate Center co-wrote the monkey report, which was
funded by the National Institute on Aging, the academy foundation and the
Veteran's Administration.  The human trial is funded by a private philanthropy
and the New York Institute for the Study of Aging in New York.

   The neurology meeting focuses on the latest findings on a wide range of brain
disorders, including stroke, epilepsy, head injuries, headache and multiple
sclerosis.


LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2000


                             605 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                       MAY 1, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D10

LENGTH: 7655 words

HEADLINE: THE CHRONICLE 500;

A - C

BODY:
@Comm Corp.

    Integrated communications systems

   577 Airport Blvd., Suite 700

   Burlingame CA 94010-2024

   650-375-8188 Ticker: ATCM

   www.atcomm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5.57 / 5.98

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($8.50) / NA

   CEO: William H. Welling

   EMPLOYEES...... 125, Bay Area, 25

   -------------------------------------------

   3Com Corp.

   Computer networking systems

   5400 Bayfront Plaza

   Santa Clara CA 95054-3601

   408-326-5000 Ticker: COMS

   www.3com.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5693.23 / -0.67

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $908.66 / 139.17

   CEO: Eric Benhamou

   EMPLOYEES...... 13,027, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   3dfx Interactive, Inc.

   Media/entertainment software

   4435 Fortran Drive

   San Jose CA 95134-2300

   408-935-4400 Ticker: TDFX

   www.3dfx.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $360.52 / 77.94

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($63.28) / NA

   CEO: Dr. Alex Leupp

   EMPLOYEES...... 540, Bay Area, 225

   -------------------------------------------

   Abaxis, Inc.

   Medical instruments

   1320 Chesapeake Terrace

   Sunnyvale CA 94089-1100

   408-734-0200 Ticker: ABAX

   www.abaxis.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $19.46 / 45.82

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($1.83) / NA

   CEO: Clint Severson

   EMPLOYEES...... 110, Bay Area, 96

   -------------------------------------------

   Abgenix Inc.

   Biotechnology

   7601 Dumbarton Circle

   Fremont CA 94555-3616

   510-608-6500 Ticker: ABGX

   www.abgenix.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $12.28 / 219.75

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($20.49) / NA

   CEO: R. Scott Greer

   EMPLOYEES...... 60, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   ABM Industries Inc.

   Building maintenance

   160 Pacific Ave., Suite 222

   San Francisco CA 94111

   415-733-4000 Ticker: ABM

   www.abm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1666.46 / 8.57

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $40.22 / 14.42

   CEO: William W. Steele

   EMPLOYEES...... 57,000, Bay Area, 4,900

   -------------------------------------------

   Accrue Software, Inc.

   48634 Milmont Drive

   Fremont CA 94538-7353

   510-580-4500 Ticker: ACRU

   www.accrue.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $12.79 /

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($11.26) /

   CEO:

   EMPLOYEES...... 62, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Actel Corp.

   Semiconductors

   955 E. Arques Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-4533

   408-739-1010 Ticker: ACTL

   www.actel.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $171.66 / 11.15

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $17.63 / 17.68

   CEO: John East

   EMPLOYEES...... 449, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Active Software, Inc.

   3333 Octavius Drive

   Santa Clara CA 95054-3004

   408-988-0414 Ticker: ASWX

   www.activesw.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $27.44 / 261.13

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($9.36) / NA

   CEO: James Green

   EMPLOYEES...... 200, Bay Area, 170

   -------------------------------------------

   Actuate Corp.

   Software

   999 Baker Way, Suite 270

   San Mateo CA 94404-1566

   650-425-2300 Ticker: ACTU

   www.actuate.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $46.78 / 113.88

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $3.88 / NA

   CEO: Nicolas Nierenberg

   EMPLOYEES...... 149, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Acuson Corp.

   Medical ultrasound equipment

   1220 Charleston Road

   Mountain View CA 94043-1361

   650-969-9112 Ticker: ACN

   www.acuson.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $475.90 / 4.57

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $6.66 / -68.01

   CEO: Samuel H. Maslak

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,894, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   ADAC Laboratories, Inc.

   Medical imaging equipment

   540 Alder Drive

   Milpitas CA 95035-7443

   408-321-9100 Ticker: ADAC

   www.adaclabs.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $338.17 / 3.30

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($41.95) / NA

   CEO: Andrew Eckert

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,070, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Adaptec, Inc.

   Networking products

   691 S. Milpitas Blvd.

   Milpitas CA 95035-5484

   408-945-8600 Ticker: ADPT

   www.adaptec.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $782.12 / 9.84

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $180.74 / NA

   CEO: Bob Stephens

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,123, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Adaptive Broadband Corp.

   1143 Borregas Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94089-1306

   408-732-4000 Ticker: ADAP

   www.adaptivebroadband.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $82.39 / -8.54

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $18.14 / NA

   CEO: Frederick Lawrence

   EMPLOYEES...... 846, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Adept Technology, Inc.

   Robotics/vision systems

   150 Rose Orchard Way

   San Jose CA 95134-1398

   408-432-0888 Ticker: ADTK

   www.adept.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $87.33 / -0.13

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($0.85) / NA

   CEO: Brian Carlisle

   EMPLOYEES...... 393, Bay Area, 230

   -------------------------------------------

   Adobe Systems, Inc.

   Computer software

   345 Park Ave.

   San Jose CA 95110-2704

   408-536-6000 Ticker: ADBE

   www.adobe.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1070.76 / 15.89

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $264.04 / 126.30

   CEO: John Warnock

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,760, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Advanced Fibre Comm., Inc.

   Telecommunications

   1 Willowbrook Court

   Petaluma CA 94954-6507

   707-794-7700 Ticker: AFCI

   www.fibre.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $291.56 / -6.77

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $250.29 / 819.97

   CEO: John Schofield

   EMPLOYEES...... 815, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

   Semiconductors

   1 Amd Place

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-3905

   408-732-2400 Ticker: AMD

   www.amd.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2857.60 / 12.40

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($88.93) / NA

   CEO: W. J. Sanders III

   EMPLOYEES...... 13,800, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Advanced Polymer Systems

   Polymer-based delivery systems

   123 Saginaw Drive

   Redwood City CA 94063-4717

   650-366-2626 Ticker: APOS

   www.advancedpolymer.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $20.40 / -1.04

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $2.37 / -6.05

   CEO: John Meakem Jr.

   EMPLOYEES...... 89, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Advent Software, Inc.

   Investment management software

   301 Brannan St.

   San Francisco CA 94107-1849

   415-543-7696 Ticker: ADVS

   www.advent.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $101.56 / 43.04

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $17.44 / 296.52

   CEO: Peter Caswell

   EMPLOYEES...... 481, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Affymetrix, Inc.

   Biotechnology

   3380 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara CA 95051-0704

   408-731-5000 Ticker: AFFX

   www.affymetrix.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $96.85 / 86.17

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($23.08) / NA

   CEO: Stephen Fodor

   EMPLOYEES...... 321, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Agile Software Corp.

   1 Almaden Blvd.

   San Jose CA 95113-2211

   408-975-3900 Ticker: AGIL

   www.agilesoft.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $26.55 / 80.95

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($24.56) / NA

   CEO: Bryan Stolle

   EMPLOYEES...... 156, Bay Area, 250

   -------------------------------------------

   Agilent Technologies, Inc.

   3000 Hanover St.

   Palo Alto CA 94304-1112

   650-857-1501 Ticker: A

   www.agilent.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $8791.00 / 13.78

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $569.00 / 234.70

   CEO: Edward Barnholt

   EMPLOYEES...... 36,400, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Alliance Semiconductor Corp.

   Imbedded memory products

   2575 Augustine Drive

   Santa Clara CA 95054-2914

   408-855-4900 Ticker: ALSC

   www.alsc.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $74.19 / 19.29

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $67.57 / NA

   CEO: N. Damodar Reddy

   EMPLOYEES...... 149, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Alteon WebSystems, Inc.

   50 Great Oaks Blvd.

   San Jose CA 95119-1310

   408-360-5500 Ticker: ATON

   www.alteonwebsystems.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $44.43 / 129.05

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($22.70) / NA

   CEO: Dominic Orr

   EMPLOYEES...... 158, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Altera Corp.

   Programmable integrated circuits

   101 Innovation Drive

   San Jose CA 95134-1941

   408-544-7000 Ticker: ALTR

   www.altera.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $836.62 / 27.85

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $223.99 / 45.08

   CEO: Rodney Smith

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,400, Bay Area, 966

   -------------------------------------------

   AltiGen Communications, Inc.

   47427 Fremont Blvd.

   Fremont CA 94538-6504

   510-252-9712 Ticker: ATGN

   www.altigen.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $8.16 / 93.30

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($7.03) / NA

   CEO: Gilbert Hu

   EMPLOYEES...... 85, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Alysis Technologies, Inc.

   1900 Powell St., Suite 500

   Emeryville CA 94608-1811

   510-450-7000 Ticker: ALYS

   www.alysis.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $19.81 / 50.42

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($0.31) / NA

   CEO:

   EMPLOYEES...... 150, Bay Area, 95

   -------------------------------------------

   ALZA Corp.

   Drug delivery

   950 Page Mill Road

   Palo Alto CA 94304-1080

   650-494-5000 Ticker: AZA

   www.alza.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $805.90 / 24.57

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $91.00 / -15.97

   CEO: Ernest Mario

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,845, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   AMB Property Corp.

   Real estate investment trust

   505 Montgomery St., 5th Floor

   San Francisco CA 94111-2552

   415-394-9000 Ticker: AMB

   www.amb.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $448.18 / 24.88

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $179.10 / 56.40

   CEO: Hamid Moghadam

   EMPLOYEES...... 146, Bay Area, 110

   -------------------------------------------

   American Xtal Technology, Inc.

   Semiconductor materials

   4311 Solar Way

   Fremont CA 94538

   510-683-5900 Ticker: AXTI

   www.axt.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $72.81 / 51.08

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $0.20 / -94.63

   CEO: Morris Young

   EMPLOYEES...... 314, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Ampex Corp.

   Digital recording/imaging

   500 Broadway St.

   Redwood City CA 94063-3115

   650-367-2011 Ticker: AXC

   www.ampex.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $32.55 / 102.14

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($15.37) / NA

   CEO: Edward J. Bramson

   EMPLOYEES...... 461, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Apple Computer, Inc.

   Computer hardware

   1 Infinite Loop

   Cupertino CA 95014-2084

   408-996-1010 Ticker: AAPL

   www.apple.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $6134.00 / 3.24

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $601.00 / 52.65

   CEO: Steve Jobs

   EMPLOYEES...... 9,527, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Applied Materials, Inc.

   Semiconductor equipment

   3050 Bowers Ave.

   Santa Clara CA 95054-3298

   408-727-5555 Ticker: AMAT

   www.appliedmaterials.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5783.61 / 66.36

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $1022.23 / 1762.19

   CEO: James C. Morgan

   EMPLOYEES...... 12,755, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Applied Signal Technology

   Digital signal processing equipment

   400 W. California Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-5148

   408-749-1888 Ticker: APSG

   www.appsig.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $119.22 / 9.80

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $10.58 / 13.03

   CEO: Gary L. Yancey

   EMPLOYEES...... 642, Bay Area, 592

   -------------------------------------------

   Aradigm Corp.

   Drug delivery

   3929 Point Eden Way

   Hayward CA 94545-3720

   510-265-9000 Ticker: ARDM

   www.aradigm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $16.81 / -4.01

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($23.60) / NA

   CEO: Richard P. Thompson

   EMPLOYEES...... 208, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Ariba, Inc.

   Internet infrastructure

   1565 Charleston Road

   Mountain View CA 94043

   650-930-6200 Ticker: ARBA

   www.ariba.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $61.99 / 320.98

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($37.27) / NA

   CEO: Keith Krach

   EMPLOYEES...... 386, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   ArthroCare Corp.

   Medical devices

   595 N. Pastoria Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-2916

   408-736-0224 Ticker: ARTC

   www.arthrocare.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $48.72 / 74.53

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $5.54 / NA

   CEO: Michael A. Baker

   EMPLOYEES...... 239, Bay Area, 224

   -------------------------------------------

   Artisan Components, Inc.

   Semiconductors

   1195 Bordeaux Drive

   Sunnyvale CA 94089-1210

   408-734-5600 Ticker: ARTI

   www.artisan.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5.54 / -23.79

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $0.42 / -70.90

   CEO: Mark Templeton

   EMPLOYEES...... 103, Bay Area, 98

   -------------------------------------------

   Ask Jeeves, Inc.

   Internet online service

   5858 Horton St., Suite 350

   Emeryville CA 94608

   510-985-9400 Ticker: ASKJ

   www.askjeeves.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $22.02 / 3614.50

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($52.92) / NA

   CEO: Robert Wrubel

   EMPLOYEES...... 636, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Aspec Technology Inc.

   Semiconductor services

   830 E. Arques Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-4519

   408-774-2199 Ticker: ASPC

   www.aspec.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $7.46 / -67.67

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($26.29) / NA

   CEO: Douglas E. Klint (Acting)

   EMPLOYEES...... 90, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Aspect Communications Corp.

   Customer relation services

   1730 Fox Drive

   San Jose CA 95131-2311

   408-325-2200 Ticker: ASPT

   www.aspect.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $489.11 / -4.52

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($28.85) / NA

   CEO: James Carreker

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,820, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Aspect Development, Inc.

   Computer software

   1300 Charleston Road

   Mountain View CA 94043-1331

   650-428-2700 Ticker: ASDV

   www.aspectdv.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $95.14 / 10.16

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $7.79 / -51.33

   CEO: Romesh Wadhwani

   EMPLOYEES...... 659, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Asyst Technologies, Inc.

   Semiconductor equipment

   48761 Kato Road

   Fremont CA 94538-7313

   510-661-5000 Ticker: ASYT

   www.asyst.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $148.84 / 24.65

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($5.21) / NA

   CEO: Mihir Parikh

   EMPLOYEES...... 542, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   At Home Corp.

   Internet service provider

   425 Broadway St.

   Redwood City CA 94063-3126

   650-569-5000 Ticker: ATHM

   www.home.net

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $336.95 / 601.33

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($1457.63) / NA

   CEO: Thomas Jermoluk

   EMPLOYEES...... 570, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Atmel Corp.

   Semiconductor equipment

   2325 Orchard Parkway

   San Jose CA 95131-1034

   408-441-0311 Ticker: ATML

   www.atmel.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1330.16 / 19.71

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $53.37 / NA

   CEO: George Perlegos

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Aureal Inc.

   Semiconductor equipment

   4245 Technology Drive

   Fremont CA 94538-6339

   510-252-4245 Ticker: AURL

   NA

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $42.56 / 188.93

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($20.88) / NA

   CEO: Kenneth Kokinakis

   EMPLOYEES...... 111, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Aurora Foods Inc.

   Foods

   456 Montgomery St., Suite 2200

   San Francisco CA 94104-1255

   415-982-3019 Ticker: AOR

   www.aurorafoods.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1000.66 / 78.50

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $42.52 / NA

   CEO: Ian Wilson

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,311, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Auspex Systems, Inc.

   Computer hardware/software

   2300 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara CA 95050-2516

   408-566-2000 Ticker: ASPX

   www.auspex.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $101.63 / -26.08

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($52.98) / NA

   CEO: Bruce Moore

   EMPLOYEES...... 615, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Autodesk, Inc.

   Computer software

   111 McInnis Parkway

   San Rafael CA 94903-2700

   415-507-5000 Ticker: ADSK

   www.autodesk.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $820.18 / -2.76

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $9.80 / -90.09

   CEO: Carol Bartz

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,712, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Autoweb.com, Inc.

   3270 Jay St., Building 6

   Santa Clara CA 95054-3309

   408-970-9100 Ticker: AWEB

   www.autoweb.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $32.79 / 151.45

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($18.15) / NA

   CEO: Dean Bebiase

   EMPLOYEES...... 244, Bay Area, 174

   -------------------------------------------

   Avanex Corp.

   40919 Encyclopedia Circle

   Fremont CA 94538-2436

   510-897-4188 Ticker: AVNX

   www.avanex.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $11.42 /

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($26.40) /

   CEO: Walter Alessandrini

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Avant Corp.

   Computer software

   46871 Bayside Parkway

   Fremont CA 94538-6572

   510-413-8000 Ticker: AVNT

   www.avanticorp.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $303.62 / 22.26

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $56.62 / 150.77

   CEO: Gerald Hsu

   EMPLOYEES...... 989, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Avigen, Inc.

   Gene therapy

   1201 Harbor Bay Parkway 1000

   Alameda CA 94502-6553

   510-748-7150 Ticker: AVGN

   www.avigen.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $0.05 / -71.26

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($9.61) / NA

   CEO: John Monahan

   EMPLOYEES...... 73, Bay Area, 73

   -------------------------------------------

   Aviron

   Genetically engineered vaccines

   297 Bernardo Ave.

   Mountain View CA 94043-5205

   650-919-6500 Ticker: AVIR

   www.aviron.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $22.23 / 2884.16

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($61.87) / NA

   CEO: J. Leighton Read

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Axys Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

   Pharmaceuticals

   180 Kimball Way

   South San Francisco CA 94080-6218

   650-829-1000 Ticker: AXPH

   www.axyspharm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $38.25 / -19.32

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($48.76) / NA

   CEO: John Walker

   EMPLOYEES...... 298, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   BARRA, Inc.

   Risk management software

   2100 Milvia St.

   Berkeley CA 94704-1113

   510-548-5442 Ticker: BARZ

   www.barra.com.

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $182.58 / 18.73

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $15.93 / -14.25

   CEO: Kamal Duggirala

   EMPLOYEES...... 790, Bay Area, 300

   -------------------------------------------

   Bay View Capital Corp.

   Commercial banking

   1840 Gateway Blvd.

   San Mateo CA 94404

   650-573-7300 Ticker: BVC

   www.bvcc.com

   ASSETS ($mil) ....... $6498.70

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $28.96 / 27.48

   CEO: Edward Sondker

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,299, Bay Area, 799

   -------------------------------------------

   Be, Inc.

   800 El Camino Real, Suite 400

   Menlo Park CA 94025-4875

   650-462-4100 Ticker: BEOS

   www.be.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2.65 / 121.51

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($24.50) / NA

   CEO: Jean-Louis Gassee

   EMPLOYEES...... 105, Bay Area, 93

   -------------------------------------------

   BEA Systems, Inc.

   Computer software

   2315 N. First St.

   San Jose CA 95131-1010

   408-570-8000 Ticker: BEAS

   www.bea.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $464.41 / 60.67

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($19.57) / NA

   CEO: William T. Coleman

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,938, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Bebe Stores, Inc.

   Women's apparel/accessories

   380 Valley Drive

   Brisbane CA 94005-1208

   415-715-3900 Ticker: BEBE

   www.bebe.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $235.07 / 35.86

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $33.02 / 43.05

   CEO: Manny Mashouf

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,900, Bay Area, 550

   -------------------------------------------

   Bedford Property Investors, Inc.

   Real estate investment trust

   270 Lafayette Circle

   Lafayette CA 94549-4379

   925-283-8910 Ticker: BED

   www.bedfordproperty.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $93.56 / 3.14

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $54.28 / 36.18

   CEO: Peter Bedford

   EMPLOYEES...... 49, Bay Area, 34

   -------------------------------------------

   BEI Technologies, Inc.

   Industrial products

   1 Post St., Suite 2500

   San Francisco CA 94104-5229

   415-956-4477 Ticker: BEIQ

   www.bei-tech.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $166.38 / 25.33

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $5.54 / 128.40

   CEO: Charles Crocker

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,113, Bay Area, 423

   -------------------------------------------

   Bell Microproducts, Inc.

   Semiconductor distribution

   1941 Ringwood Ave.

   San Jose CA 95131-1721

   408-451-9400 Ticker: BELM

   www.bellmicro.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1058.27 / 83.94

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $9.00 / 15.85

   CEO: W. Donald Bell

   EMPLOYEES...... 880, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Beringer Wine Estates

   Wine

   610 Airpark Road

   Napa CA 94558-7516

   707-259-4500 Ticker: BERW

   www.beringer.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $410.25 / 18.61

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $37.81 / 58.37

   CEO: Walter Klenz

   EMPLOYEES...... 800, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Beyond.com Corp.

   Software

   3200 Patrick Henry Drive

   Santa Clara CA 95054

   408-855-3000 Ticker: BYND

   www.beyond.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $117.28 / 220.00

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($124.76) / NA

   CEO: Rick Neely (Interim)

   EMPLOYEES...... 241, Bay Area, 218

   -------------------------------------------

   Bio-Rad Laboratories

   Diagnostic products/instruments, Analytical Instrumentation

   1000 Alfred Nobel Drive

   Hercules CA 94547-1898

   510-724-7000 Ticker: BIO.A

   www.bio-rad.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $549.48 / 24.33

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $11.72 / -51.76

   CEO: David Schwartz

   EMPLOYEES...... 400, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   BioTime, Inc.

   Pharmaceutical products

   935 Pardee St.

   Berkeley CA 94710-2623

   510-845-9535 Ticker: BTX

   www.biotimeinc.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1.41 / 68.61

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($4.79) / NA

   CEO: Paul Segall

   EMPLOYEES...... 18, Bay Area, 17

   -------------------------------------------

   BRE Properties, Inc.

   Real estate investment trust

   44 Montgomery St., 36th Floor

   San Francisco CA 94104-4601

   415-445-6530 Ticker: BRE

   www.breproperties.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $234.25 / 15.25

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $73.21 / 20.73

   CEO: Frank McDowell

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,000, Bay Area, 150

   -------------------------------------------

   BrightStar Info Tech Grp, Inc.

   4900 Hopyard Road, Suite 200

   Pleasanton CA 94588-3346

   925-251-0000 Ticker: BTSR

   www.brightstar.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $132.17 / 144.32

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($10.00) / NA

   CEO: Mike Ober

   EMPLOYEES...... 825, Bay Area, 75

   -------------------------------------------

   Brio Technology, Inc.

   Software

   3460 W. Bayshore Road

   Palo Alto CA 94303-4227

   650-856-8000 Ticker: BRIO

   www.brio.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $106.63 / 57.13

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($15.03) / NA

   CEO: Yorgen Edholm

   EMPLOYEES...... 257, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Broadbase Software

   172 Constitution Drive

   Menlo Park CA 94025-1117

   650-614-8300 Ticker: BBSW

   www.broadbase.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $10.44 / 203.63

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($23.57) / NA

   CEO:

   EMPLOYEES...... 225, Bay Area, 200

   -------------------------------------------

   BroadVision, Inc.

   Internet software commerce

   585 Broadway St.

   Redwood City CA 94063-3122

   650-261-5100 Ticker: BVSN

   www.broadvision.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $115.51 / 126.89

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $18.80 / 365.68

   CEO: Pehong Chen

   EMPLOYEES...... 800, Bay Area, 408

   -------------------------------------------

   Brocade Communications Systems

   1901 Guadalupe Parkway

   San Jose CA 95131-1019

   408-542-1500 Ticker: BRCD

   www.brocade.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $103.42 / 323.82

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $11.63 / NA

   CEO: Gregory Reyes

   EMPLOYEES...... 182, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Building Materials Holding Corp.

   Building materials

   One Market Plaza, Steuart Tower, Suite 2650

   San Francisco CA 94105

   415-227-1650 Ticker: BMHC

   www.bmhc.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1007.10 / 14.79

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $21.60 / 29.92

   CEO: Robert Mellor

   EMPLOYEES...... 4,200, Bay Area, 311

   -------------------------------------------

   C-Cube Microsystems, Inc.

   Digital video circuits

   1778 McCarthy Blvd.

   Milpitas CA 95035-7421

   408-490-8000 Ticker: CUBE

   www.c-cube.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $407.64 / 15.87

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $57.27 / 23.73

   CEO: Alexandre Balkanski

   EMPLOYEES...... 929, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   CacheFlow, Inc.

   Internet caching appliances

   650 Almanor Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-3513

   408-220-2200 Ticker: CFLO

   www.cacheflow.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $19.42 / 373.82

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($47.55) / NA

   CEO: Brian NeSmith

   EMPLOYEES...... 270, Bay Area, 130

   -------------------------------------------

   Cadence Design Systems

   Software and services

   2655 Seely Ave., Building 5

   San Jose CA 95134-1931

   408-943-1234 Ticker: CDN

   www.cadence.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1093.30 / -17.18

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($14.07) / NA

   CEO: Ray Bingham

   EMPLOYEES...... 5,000, Bay Area, 1,853

   -------------------------------------------

   Calico Commerce, Inc.

   E-commerce software

   333 W. San Carlos St., Suite 300

   San Jose CA 95110-2730

   408-975-7400 Ticker: CLIC

   www.calico.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $30.08 / 54.62

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($21.79) / NA

   CEO: Alan Naumann

   EMPLOYEES...... 300, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   California Micro Devices Corp.

   Electronic components

   215 Topaz St.

   Milpitas CA 95035-5430

   408-263-3214 Ticker: CAMD

   www.camd.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $38.14 / 12.73

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($1.12) / NA

   CEO: Jeffery Kalb

   EMPLOYEES...... 283, Bay Area, 151

   -------------------------------------------

   California Water Service Group

   Water utilities

   1720 N. 1st St.

   San Jose CA 95112-4598

   408-367-8200 Ticker: CWT

   www.calwater.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $206.44 / 8.84

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $19.91 / 8.28

   CEO: Peter Nelson

   EMPLOYEES...... 658, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Caliper Technologies Corp.

   605 Fairchild Drive

   Mountain View CA 94043-2234

   650-623-0700 Ticker: CALP

   www.calipertech.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $12.10 / 48.37

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($14.37) / NA

   CEO: Daniel Kisner

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Calpine Corp.

   Power producers

   50 W. San Fernando St.

   San Jose CA 95113-2424

   408-995-5115 Ticker: CPN

   www.calpine.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $847.73 / 52.48

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $95.09 / 108.18

   CEO: Peter Cartwright

   EMPLOYEES...... 962, Bay Area, 550

   -------------------------------------------

   Calypte Biomedical Corp.

   Diagnostic kits

   1265 Harbor Bay Parkway

   Alameda CA 94502

   510-749-5100 Ticker: CALY

   www.calypte.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $3.72 / 292.00

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($10.02) / NA

   CEO: Dave Collins

   EMPLOYEES...... 60, Bay Area, 35

   -------------------------------------------

   Catalyst Semiconductor, Inc.

   Semiconductor manufacturer

   1250 Borregas Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94089-1309

   408-542-1000 Ticker: CATS

   www.catsemi.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $40.54 / 41.30

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $6.04 / NA

   CEO: Radu Vanco

   EMPLOYEES...... 43, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Catalytica, Inc.

   Specialty chemicals

   430 Ferguson Drive

   Mountain View CA 94043-5272

   650-960-3000 Ticker: CTAL

   www.catalytica-inc.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $423.69 / 4.23

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $27.13 / 22.23

   CEO: Ricardo Levy (President)

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,675, Bay Area, 158

   -------------------------------------------

   Catapult Communications Corp.

   Telecommunications test equipment

   160 S. Whisman Road

   Mountain View CA 94041-1512

   650-960-1025 Ticker: CATT

   www.catapult.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $28.71 / 43.62

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $8.53 / 75.67

   CEO: Richard A. Karp

   EMPLOYEES...... 93, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Catellus Development Corp.

   Real estate development

   201 Mission St.

   San Francisco CA 94105-1831

   415-974-4500 Ticker: CDX

   www.catellus.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $534.30 / 43.39

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $96.87 / 178.86

   CEO: Nelson Rising

   EMPLOYEES...... 430, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Celeritek, Inc.

   Wireless communications

   3236 Scott Blvd.

   Santa Clara CA 95054-3011

   408-986-5060 Ticker: CLTK

   www.celeritek.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $42.84 / -8.48

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($8.87) / NA

   CEO: Tamer Husseini

   EMPLOYEES...... 329, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Cell Genesys, Inc.

   Gene therapy

   342 Lakeside Drive

   Foster City CA 94404-1146

   650-425-4400 Ticker: CEGE

   www.cellgenesys.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $33.60 / 39.18

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($11.99) / NA

   CEO: Stephen A. Sherwin

   EMPLOYEES...... 117, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Cellegy Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   349 Oyster Point Blvd., Suite 200

   South San Francisco CA 94080-1913

   650-616-2200 Ticker: CLGY

   NA

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1.04 / 25.60

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($9.30) / NA

   CEO: K. Michael Forrest

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Centigram Communications Corp.

   Telecommunications equipment

   91 E. Tasman Drive

   San Jose CA 95134-1618

   408-944-0250 Ticker: CGRM

   www.centigram.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $82.10 / 3.06

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $2.26 / NA

   CEO: Robert Puette

   EMPLOYEES...... 326, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Central Garden & Pet Co.

   Consumer products

   3697 Mt. Diablo Blvd.

   Lafayette CA 94549-3745

   925-283-4573 Ticker: CENT

   www.centralgardenandpet.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $1526.22 / 10.27

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $18.45 / -45.37

   CEO: William E. Brown

   EMPLOYEES...... 5,000, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Centura Software Corp.

   Network software

   975 Island Drive

   Redwood Shores CA 94065-5147

   650-596-3400 Ticker: CNTR

   www.centurasoft.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $51.03 / -4.61

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($3.22) / -252.48

   CEO: Scott Broomfield

   EMPLOYEES...... 300, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Cerus Corp.

   Biotechnology/medical products

   2525 Stanwell Drive, Suite 300

   Concord CA 94520-4824

   925-603-9071 Ticker: CERS

   www.cerus.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2.40 / -17.05

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($22.62) / NA

   CEO: Stephen Isaacs

   EMPLOYEES...... 116, Bay Area, 116

   -------------------------------------------

   Chalone Wine Group, Ltd.

   Wine

   621 Airpark Road

   Napa CA 94558-6272

   707-254-4200 Ticker: CHLN

   www.chalonewinegroup.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $50.27 / 22.91

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $7.19 / 100.78

   CEO: Thomas B. Selfridge

   EMPLOYEES...... 130, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Charles Schwab & Co.

   Brokerage services

   120 Kearny St.

   San Francisco CA 94104-4122

   415-627-7000 Ticker: SCH

   www.schwab.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $4713.17 / 39.10

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $588.93 / 69.01

   CEO: Charles R. Schwab/David S. Pottruck

   EMPLOYEES...... 13,300, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Chevron Corp.

   Energy - oil and gas

   575 Market St.

   San Francisco CA 94105-2823

   415-894-7700 Ticker: CHV

   www.chevron.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $32527.00 / 24.21

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $2070.00 / 54.59

   CEO: David J. O'Reilly

   EMPLOYEES...... 39,191, Bay Area, 8,209

   -------------------------------------------

   Chiron Corp.

   Biotechnology

   4560 Horton St.

   Emeryville CA 94608-2916

   510-655-8730 Ticker: CHIR

   www.chiron.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $683.32 / 3.11

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $160.57 / -69.36

   CEO: Sean Lance

   EMPLOYEES...... 3,110, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Cholestech Corp.

   Medical devices

   3347 Investment Blvd.

   Hayward CA 94545-3808

   510-732-7200 Ticker: CTEC

   www.cholestech.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $24.70 / 9.39

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $1.71 / 124.67

   CEO: Warren E. Pinckert

   EMPLOYEES...... 187, Bay Area, 132

   -------------------------------------------

   Chordiant Software, Inc.

   E-business infrastructure

   20400 Stevens Creek Blvd., Suite 400

   Cupertino CA 95014-2298

   408-517-6100 Ticker: CHRD

   www.chordiant.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $17.58 / 41.09

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($23.13) / NA

   CEO: Sam Spadafora

   EMPLOYEES...... 180, Bay Area, 94

   -------------------------------------------

   CIDCO, Inc.

   Telecommunications equipment

   220 Cochrane Circle

   Morgan Hill CA 95037-9986

   408-779-1162 Ticker: CDCO

   www.cidco.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $158.59 / -9.22

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($0.03) / NA

   CEO: Paul Locklin

   EMPLOYEES...... 250, Bay Area, 245

   -------------------------------------------

   Circle International Group, Inc.

   Transportation/logistics

   260 Townsend St.

   San Francisco CA 94107-1719

   415-978-0600 Ticker: CRCL

   www.circleintl.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $814.07 / 10.35

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $23.21 / 25.36

   CEO: David I. Beatson

   EMPLOYEES...... 4,900, Bay Area, 302

   -------------------------------------------

   Cirrus Logic, Inc.

   Integrated circuits

   3100 W. Warren Ave.

   Fremont CA 94538-6419

   510-623-8300 Ticker: CRUS

   www.cirrus.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $531.57 / -32.58

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($323.53) / NA

   CEO: David D. French

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,260, Bay Area, 240

   -------------------------------------------

   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Networking products

   170 W. Tasman Drive

   San Jose CA 95134-1700

   408-526-4000 Ticker: CSCO

   www.cisco.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $12154.00 / 43.19

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $2096.00 / 88.16

   CEO: John Chambers

   EMPLOYEES...... 29,000, Bay Area, 12,500

   -------------------------------------------

   Clarent Corp.

   Internet protocol (IP) telephony

   700 Chesapeake Drive

   Redwood City CA 94063-4731

   650-306-7511 Ticker: CLRN

   www.clarent.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $47.82 / 226.50

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($30.78) / NA

   CEO: Jerry Chang

   EMPLOYEES...... 285, Bay Area, 180

   -------------------------------------------

   ClickAction, Inc.

   E-mail relationship management

   2197 E. Bayshore Road

   Palo Alto CA 94303-3219

   650-473-3600 Ticker: CLAC

   www.clickaction.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $21.26 / 41.40

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($2.22) / NA

   CEO: Gregory Slayton

   EMPLOYEES...... 110, Bay Area, 100

   -------------------------------------------

   CNET Networks, Inc.

   Internet content provider

   150 Chestnut St.

   San Francisco CA 94111-1004

   415-364-8000 Ticker: CNET

   www.cnet.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $112.34 / 95.45

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $416.90 / 13686.64

   CEO: Shelby Bonnie

   EMPLOYEES...... 671, Bay Area, 565

   -------------------------------------------

   CNF Transportation, Inc.

   Supply chain management

   3240 Hillview Ave.

   Palo Alto CA 94304-1201

   650-494-2900 Ticker: CNF

   www.cnf.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5592.81 / 13.18

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $158.47 / 14.02

   CEO: Gregory Quesnel

   EMPLOYEES...... 31,239, Bay Area, 1,500

   -------------------------------------------

   Cobalt Networks, Inc.

   Internet infrastructure

   555 Ellis St.

   Mountain View CA 94043-2214

   650-623-2500 Ticker: COBT

   www.cobalt.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $22.81 / 545.00

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($22.30) / NA

   CEO: Stephen Dewitt

   EMPLOYEES...... 160, Bay Area, 130

   -------------------------------------------

   Coherent, Inc.

   Laser instruments

   5100 Patrick Henry Drive

   Santa Clara CA 95054-1112

   408-764-4000 Ticker: COHR

   www.cohr.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $490.43 / 18.25

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $14.24 / -8.47

   CEO: Bernard Couillaud

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,417, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Cohesion Technologies, Inc.

   Medical products

   2500 Faber Place

   Palo Alto CA 94303-3329

   650-320-5500 Ticker: CSON

   www.cohesiontech.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2.31 / 14.07

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $13.64 / NA

   CEO: David J. Foster

   EMPLOYEES...... 80, Bay Area, 68

   -------------------------------------------

   Com21, Inc.

   Telecommunications equipment

   750 Tasman Drive

   Milpitas CA 95035-7456

   408-953-9100 Ticker: CMTO

   www.com21.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $95.74 / 98.99

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($10.30) / NA

   CEO: Peter Fenner

   EMPLOYEES...... 263, Bay Area, 215

   -------------------------------------------

   Commerce One, Inc.

   1600 Riviera Ave.

   Walnut Creek CA 94596-3569

   925-941-6000 Ticker: CMRC

   www.commerceone.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $33.55 / 1209.28

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($63.32) / NA

   CEO: Mark Hoffman

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Communication Intelligence Corp.

   Pen-based software

   275 Shoreline Drive, Suite 500

   Redwood City CA 94065-1413

   650-802-7888 Ticker: CICI

   www.cic.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $6.51 / 42.10

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($1.74) / NA

   CEO: Guido DiGregorio (President)

   EMPLOYEES...... 74, Bay Area, 29

   -------------------------------------------

   Concentric Network Corp.

   Network service provider

   1400 Parkmoor Ave.

   San Jose CA 95126

   408-817-2800 Ticker: CNCX

   www.concentric.net

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $147.06 / 77.59

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($111.78) / NA

   CEO: Henry Nothhaft

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,100, Bay Area, 377

   -------------------------------------------

   Conductus, Inc.

   969 W. Maude Ave.

   Sunnyvale CA 94086-2802

   408-523-9950 Ticker: CDTS

   www.conductus.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $7.79 / 66.30

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($3.12) / NA

   CEO:

   EMPLOYEES...... NA, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Connetics Corp.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   3400 W. Bayshore Road

   Palo Alto CA 94303-4227

   650-843-2800 Ticker: CNCT

   www.connetics.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $26.90 / 194.98

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($27.28) / NA

   CEO: Thomas Wiggans

   EMPLOYEES...... 112, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Consolidated Freightways Corp.

   Freight transport

   175 Linfield Drive

   Menlo Park CA 94025-3799

   650-326-1700 Ticker: CFWY

   www.cf.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2379.00 / 6.28

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $2.71 / -89.70

   CEO: G. Robert Evans (Vice-Chairman & President)

   EMPLOYEES...... 22,100, Bay Area, 875

   -------------------------------------------

   Copart, Inc.

   Salvage

   5500 E. 2nd St.

   Benicia CA 94510-1020

   707-748-5000 Ticker: CPRT

   www.copart.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $164.41 / 33.90

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $25.88 / 46.79

   CEO: Willis Johnson

   EMPLOYEES...... 1,749, Bay Area, 187

   -------------------------------------------

   Copper Mountain Networks, Inc.

   Telecommunication equipment

   2470 Embarcadero Way

   Palo Alto CA 94303-3313

   650-687-3300 Ticker: CMTN

   www.coppermountain.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $112.72 / 416.58

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $12.21 / NA

   CEO: Richard Gilbert

   EMPLOYEES...... 286, Bay Area, 58

   -------------------------------------------

   COR Therapeutics, Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   256 E. Grand Ave.

   South San Francisco CA 94080-4810

   650-244-6800 Ticker: COR

   www.corr.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $56.65 / 35.01

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($26.07) / NA

   CEO: Vaughn M. Kailian

   EMPLOYEES...... 321, Bay Area, 220

   -------------------------------------------

   Corsair Communications, Inc.

   Telecommunications equipment

   3408 Hillview Ave.

   Palo Alto CA 94304-1321

   650-842-3300 Ticker: CAIR

   www.corsair.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $66.20 / 1.51

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $8.84 / NA

   CEO: Thomas C. Meyer

   EMPLOYEES...... 165, Bay Area, 124

   -------------------------------------------

   Cost Plus, Inc.

   Home furnishings/gifts retailer

   200 4th St.

   Oakland CA 94607-4312

   510-893-7300 Ticker: CPWM

   www.costplus.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $402.29 / 27.65

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $19.68 / 48.72

   CEO: Murray Dashe

   EMPLOYEES...... 2,967, Bay Area, 551

   -------------------------------------------

   Cotelligent ,Inc.

   Information technology consulting Services

   101 California St., Suite 2050

   San Francisco CA 94111

   415-439-6400 Ticker: CGZ

   www.cotelligent.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $346.18 / 13.38

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($13.59) / NA

   CEO: James Lavelle

   EMPLOYEES...... 3,000, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Coulter Pharmaceutical, Inc.

   Pharmaceuticals

   600 Gateway Blvd.

   South San Francisco CA 94080

   650-553-2000 Ticker: CLTR

   www.coulterpharm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $0.00 / -100.00

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($50.60) / NA

   CEO: Michael Bigham

   EMPLOYEES...... 210, Bay Area, 210

   -------------------------------------------

   Covad Communications

   Digital internet services

   2330 Central Expressway

   Santa Clara CA 95050-2516

   408-844-7500 Ticker: COVD

   www.covad.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $66.49 / 1148.42

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($195.39) / NA

   CEO: Robert E. Knowling Jr.

   EMPLOYEES...... 850, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Credence Systems Corp.

   Automated testing equipment

   215 Fourier Ave.

   Fremont CA 94539-7828

   510-657-7400 Ticker: CMOS

   www.credence.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $272.46 / 69.31

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $22.60 / NA

   CEO: Graham Siddall

   EMPLOYEES...... 991, Bay Area, 300

   -------------------------------------------

   Crescendo Pharm Corp.

   Pharmaceuticals

   2000 Charleston Road

   Mountain View CA 94043

   650-564-8600 Ticker: CNDO

   www.crescendo-pharm.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2.38 /

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($88.44) / NA

   CEO: Gary L. Neil

   EMPLOYEES...... 1, Bay Area, NA

   -------------------------------------------

   Critical Path Inc.

   320 1st St.

   San Francisco CA 94105-2602

   415-808-8800 Ticker: CPTH

   www.cp.net

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $16.15 / 1701.22

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($116.94) / NA

   CEO: Doug Hickey

   EMPLOYEES...... 926, Bay Area, 348

   -------------------------------------------

   CV Therapeutics, Inc.

   Biopharmaceuticals

   3172 Porter Drive

   Palo Alto CA 94304-1212

   650-812-0585 Ticker: CVTX

   www.cvt.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $0.00 / -100.00

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($23.12) / NA

   CEO: Louis Lange

   EMPLOYEES...... 83, Bay Area, 83

   -------------------------------------------

   Cybergold, Inc.

   E-marketing solutions

   1330 Broadway, 12th Floor

   Oakland CA 94612-2503

   510-302-3000 Ticker: CGLD

   www.cybergold.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $5.30 / 427.66

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($10.06) / NA

   CEO: A. Nathaniel Goldhaber

   EMPLOYEES...... 260, Bay Area, 220

   -------------------------------------------

   CyberSource Corp.

   Internet services

   1295 Charleston Road

   Mountain View CA 94043

   650-965-6000 Ticker: CYBS

   www.cybersource.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $12.89 / 281.14

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($24.09) / NA

   CEO: William McKiernan

   EMPLOYEES...... 350, Bay Area, 300

   -------------------------------------------

   Cygnus, Inc.

   Medical diagnostic devices

   400 Penobscot Drive

   Redwood City CA 94063-4719

   650-369-4300 Ticker: CYGN

   www.cygn.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $2.06 / 348.04

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($2.83) / NA

   CEO: John Hodgman

   EMPLOYEES...... 90, Bay Area, 90

   -------------------------------------------

   Cylink Corp.

   Communications security

   3131 Jay St.

   Santa Clara CA 95054

   408-855-6000 Ticker: CYLK

   www.cylink.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $59.65 / 39.51

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... ($14.57) / NA

   CEO: William Crowell

   EMPLOYEES...... 377, Bay Area, 233

   -------------------------------------------

   Cypress Semiconductor Corp.

   Integrated circuits

   3901 N. 1st St.

   San Jose CA 95134-1599

   408-943-2600 Ticker: CY

   www.cypress.com

   SALES ($mil)/%CHG ....... $705.48 / 27.13

   INCOME($mil)/%CHG....... $91.05 / NA

   CEO: T.J. Rodgers

   EMPLOYEES...... 3,906, Bay Area, 927



GRAPHIC: CHART: SEE TEXT

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2000


                             606 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                               May 1, 2000 Monday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 781 words

HEADLINE: Hope for reversing memory loss grows;
Success reported in UCSD scientists' study with monkeys

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   UCSD scientists have reversed the process of deterioration in brain cells of
older monkeys, a discovery that is building high hopes for a similar approach
now approved for testing in humans with early signs of Alzheimer's disease. Dr.
Mark Tuszynski, director of UCSD's Center for Neural Repair, reported the gene
therapy's success in monkeys yesterday at the weeklong annual meeting of the
American Academy of Neurology.

   The meeting has drawn more than 10,000 neuroscientists and clinicians from
around the world to the San Diego Convention Center.

   The academy highlighted his team's report. The trial in Alzheimer's patients
is the first gene therapy effort involving a disease of the brain other than
cancer, Tuszynski said.

   UCSD is looking for eight patients from the San Diego area to test the
technique for safety and toxicity. If the approach passes, Tuszynski hopes to
enroll more patients in a larger study starting next year to see if the
technique can actually reverse the loss of memory that is characteristic of
Alzheimer's disease, now diagnosed in 4 million Americans. In the monkey study,
the research team focused on the cholinergic system, a network of
neurotransmitters that are believed critical for memory and cognitive function,
and which is known to wither and weaken in people with Alzheimer's disease. As
normal monkeys age, the density of the cells involved in this system drops by 43
percent from when the monkeys were young, roughly equivalent to the aging that
occurs when a human turns 70. The researchers found, however, that they could
restore the density of these connections by transplanting a gene that releases a
protein called nerve growth factor, which is known to maintain connectivity for
complex brain communication. Tuszynski said his team compared the brains of
three groups of monkeys whose average age was 22 years, equivalent to a
70-year-old human.

   One group of monkeys received grafts of cells with nerve growth factor, the
second received grafts of a control substance, and the third received no
treatment. The researchers discovered that the monkeys treated with nerve growth
factor showed much greater restoration of their cholinergic system density than
either of the other two groups. "We were surprised by the magnitude of the
ability of these genetically modified cells to reverse the effects of aging,"
Tuszynski said, adding that "it's not a far stretch to suggest this may be
useful in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease." Gene therapy is an experimental
approach that involves inserting genetic sequences that express specific
proteins found lacking or malfunctioning in patients with certain diseases or
conditions.

   The sequences are inserted directly into carriers, usually harmless viruses,
that target them where they are needed. But the effort recently suffered a
series of setbacks after the sudden death of a teen-age cancer patient at the
University of Pennsylvania who experienced an adverse reaction to the viral
vector. Tuszynski, associate professor of neurosciences, hopes to get around
that problem by injecting the viral vectors containing the growth factor into
skin cells after they have been removed from the patient and inserted in a test
tube. He emphasized that although viral vector lacks any disease producing
genes, "we can test it to make sure that what actually goes into the patient is
free of any disease-causing virus," he said. The nerve growth factor is then
re-inserted into a specific area of the patient's brain by a stereotactic needle
guided by magnetic resonance imaging. That is not to say there aren't still
risks, such as having a needle pass into the brain, hemorrhage, or the nerve
growth factor passing beyond its intended target in the brain. But he thinks
that's unlikely.

   Tuszynski said that his team's proposal was favorably reviewed by the
National Institutes of Health Recombinant Advisory Committee and received
approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

   And, he said, no other gene therapy effort "has been backed by as much
preliminary data in primates as we have, so we're approaching this study with a
very strong and cautious foundation." James Conner, UCSD assistant professor,
and Jeffrey Roberts of the University of California at Davis Primate Center
co-wrote the monkey report, which was funded by the National Institute on Aging,
the academy foundation and the Veteran's Administration.

   The human trial is funded by a private philanthropy and the New York
Institute for the Study of Aging in New York. The neurology meeting focuses on
the latest findings on a wide range of brain disorders, including stroke,
epilepsy, head injuries, headache and multiple sclerosis.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             607 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               April 30, 2000, SUNDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 1586 words

HEADLINE: Terry Savage talks money with . . . 'FLIP' FILIPOWSKI

SOURCE: JEAN LACHAT

BYLINE: Terry Savage

BODY:


   'The shorter the useful life of the information, the more valuable it is. So
a tip on a stock is worth more than the history of the world."

   Right away you can see that the graying, pony-tailed guy with the leather
jacket is willing to turn conventional wisdom upside down.

   And it immediately starts to make sense, in a new-economy sort of way.

   "After all," he continues. "The history of the world is available online on
the Internet, and you can get access to it at any time. What's really valuable
is information only a few people have."

   Flip Filipowski is a surprisingly open and accessible tycoon. He speaks
frequently at Chicago high-tech gatherings, both inspiring and proselytizing for
the role of high tech.

   This commitment to the future comes at a time when many are saying the "new
economy" is just a lot of hot air . . . and hot money.  Is the Internet changing
our lives that much?

   On the Internet

   "The Internet is not a technology. The real change is a cultural change. Do
you think this city would exist without automobiles?  But it wasn't the car that
was the big change. It was the highway system, because that allowed people to
commute to work, that's what built cities. Telephones made things different --
but not the telephone itself. The network that created communications changed
the way we did business, and the pace of business.

   "Today, we're connected by the Internet, and it's like we're all part of the
same brain no matter whether we live in America or Morocco or Australia. You or
I know everything that everybody else knows, because we can get it from the
Internet."

   I suggest that not everyone's ready for this interconnectedness of the
Internet. Must everyone participate?

   On change "At first, any change is scary -- whether technology or the way
you're expected to live your life. What we in this generation have had to do is
change more often than most generations before us.

   "Technology has created a cycle of inflection points that come at a more
frequent rate. Now, we can expect one or two of these major inflection points to
occur in our lifetime.

   "For example, a generation or two ago, our parents or grandparents would
expect to join a work force and retire with the same job. It was job security,
the normal way to raise a family. Today that's a foreign concept for most grads.

   "Gene therapy and the human genome research together make an inflection
point. The result is that we may live to be 150 years old, or at least live long
enough to see several major cycles in a lifetime."

   The value of information "Information is only valuable in its forecasting
context.  No one (cares) what a company performed like today or yesterday. All
they want is the information that will predict what the company will perform
like tomorrow.

   "The only way to stay ahead of the curve is to get information on which
company will be the dominant player in three years. And because of the velocity
of change, that three-year period, or five or 10 years, is enough to be an
entire life cycle for a corporation."

   I think about the blue-chip companies that have built shareholder value over
decades, and I wonder about Flip's short-term time horizon. Is this just a
characteristic of the tech-savvy society?

   On life cycles

   "Look, the fact is companies die. They die like human beings do. And they're
supposed to die to make room for the next generation.

   "When you talk to a person who's 100 years old, you don't say, 'How come
you're stupid?' You admire them. But when (old-economy investors) look at Sears
they say, 'What's wrong with you? You're still supposed to be 12 or 21.' In
fact, Sears is a mature, dying company -- and it should die -- and there's no
way to rejuvenate it unless you want to make it look stupid, like a 12-year-old.

   "It's like children when they're growing up and think they're invincible.
They drive at 160 miles an hour, something a 50-year-old wouldn't do. And when a
50-year-old does what a 16-year-old does, it looks pretty stupid. That's what
happens to old companies. Their procedures are risk-avoidance processes, and
that's what kills them. It means they have no ability to innovate, because all
their processes and procedures are designed to avoid risk.

   "I'm not complaining. I accept that. The very things that made a company
great are the things that kill it. Listening to customers, for example, is one
of the dumbest things a company can do if it wants to live forever, because
customers only want you to do what the company is currently doing, but they want
you to do it better at a reduced price. They don't want you to expand with new
stuff and do new things. That's for brand-new companies."

   Corporate value

   "Today you have to act quickly. You can't sit with an investment in a dot-com
business or a communications or biotech company. If it's gonna happen, it will
happen in the next four to five years, because in 20 years, it's gonna be gone
anyway.

   "So the idea of saying a company has generated profits for how many quarters
in a row is immaterial. That just means a company is mature, and only worth
about one times revenue, because it's a known, boring thing. And earnings per
share are no longer a relevant measure of a company's success. I've been saying
that for a decade."

   The tech-stock bubble

   I ask whether today's tech stock valuations have any rational basis, or are
they a bubble, waiting to burst? Flip acknowledges the bubble description, and
moves on, unwilling to be provoked.

   "The bubble moves from one cycle to the next. In past bubbles, there was big
change, and jobs were lost.  The gaslighters and the buggy-whip guys lost their
jobs, but new ones were created. Yes, the old stocks collapsed. But new
companies started. Anyone who thinks the dot-coms will be popular for 1,000
years has got to be crazy."

   But I point out that he's buying equity stakes in those companies, and I ask
him whether he will be someplace else when the bubble bursts?

   On the bursting bubble "The bubble moves, and you gotta move with it. That's
why the valuable information becomes how accurate you are in predicting that
movement.

   "It's not just the Internet. The real difference today is that the
opportunities of business have changed so investment philosophies have changed.
And they'll never go back. There are a lot of folks that will never accept that,
and they'll go to their deaths assuming that it's temporary."

   I asked if the recent volatility in tech stocks -- much of it to the downside

 -- changed his market viewpoint. The response was surprising:

   Flip's philosophy "I've never been particularly good at outguessing the
market. I don't think anyone is. And a historical perspective doesn't do much
good when predicting the future.

   "I usually invest in a few names, and I protect my investments with collars
(puts and calls that limit risk on both the upside and the downside), a very
conservative game."

   Wait a minute! These options collars are only available on the largest
companies, not the tiny dot-coms. Flip acknowledges he sticks with the
best-known tech names in his stock market investment portfolio, even while he is
risking so much in his venture capital investments with his own money.

   So, on to the subject of risk . . . we'd like some advice.

   Advice to grandma

   "If you're going to invest in tech, you have to be willing to play venture
capitalist, because the change and velocity of the market are incredible and
more like venture capital than anything else. That means you have to be ready to
see five or six investments fail, in exchange for making money on one or two.

   "I'm not a typical conservative 50, but if I were half my age, I'd be a lot
more risk-oriented than I am now."

   Career advice

   Perhaps keeping in mind that Flip didn't graduate from college, he hesitates
to offer advice. When pressed, he notes: "I always encourage students to develop
communications and leadership skills. If you have those things, then regardless
of where the economy goes or the inflection points, those are the things that
will always be at the center of career opportunities."

   Where should they look for jobs?

   "Nobody graduating from b-school today is stupid enough to take a job in a
partnership where the deal is for seven years, and you become an indentured
servant, and then you get to abuse the next generation of indentured servants.
Today's grads know they can become a billionaire in two or three years."

   A new world

   Filipowski's older children, ages 23 and 28, are actively involved in
Internet businesses. But he says the younger generation will really live their
lives differently because of the Internet. He also has a 7-year-old daughter,
and notes that: "Her mind is wired differently. The older kids learned from
television, a passive experience. But she already is proficient on the computer
and on the Internet, and she expects an immediate reaction and response."

   Final thought

   "Let's not forget that all new things are hybrids. There's nothing totally
new. All things look new for a while, but end up being a hybrid -- like a new
rose. The old doesn't disappear; it's just transformed. The new economy will
prevail."

   Terry Savage is a registered investment adviser for stocks and commodities
and is on the board of directors of McDonald's Corp. and Pennzoil-Quaker State
Co. Send questions via e-mail at savage@suntimes.com. Her third book, The Savage
Truth on Money, recently was published by John Wiley & Sons Inc.

GRAPHIC: The pony-tailed Filipowski discusses the new economy with columnist
Terry Savage. "Earnings per share are no longer a relevant measure of a
company's success," he says. "I've been saying that for a decade." At the site
of his development project, the Goose Island Industrial Campus, billionaire
financier Andrew J. "Flip" Filipowski says the ability to access new information
that few people know about is one of the necessary components of achieving
success in the world of high-tech. "I'm not a typical conservative 50," says
Filipowski, "but if I were half my age, I'd be a lot more risk-oriented than I
am now." See also related story page 44.

LOAD-DATE: May 02, 2000


                             608 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

HEADLINE: Success in Gene Therapy, at Last

BODY:

   The report from France that several infants with severe immune disorders have
apparently been cured by gene therapy is a dramatic breakthrough in a field that
is desperate for one. Three children whose immune systems were not functioning
because of a defective gene and who had been forced to live in airtight bubbles
to avoid the risk of infection have been restored to normal, healthy lives. This
is the kind of medical miracle that gene therapy has been promising for a decade
but has never before been able to deliver.

   The treatment involved removing bone marrow from the infants, isolating the
so-called stem cells, inserting normal genes to replace the defective ones, and
then reinfusing the stem cells into the blood stream, where they were finally
able to generate the cells for a functioning immune system. Two of the infants
have been healthy for almost a year. Without this treatment, they would have
been living in sterile bubbles until they could receive an alternative treatment
-- a transplant of bone marrow from a healthy donor -- that has a limited
success rate.

    Caveats are in order. Only a small number of children have been helped so
far, and even they have been monitored for less than a year. At this point the
researchers do not know whether their new immune systems will continue
functioning well or will start to deteriorate. Nor is it clear that gene therapy
will work as well on a wider array of diseases where experiments are under way.
The immune deficiency tackled by the French -- known as severe combined
immunodeficiency, type X1, or SCID-X1 -- was deemed a particularly ripe target
for gene therapy. Other diseases may be more difficult.

   The French success comes after a decade of hope, hype and recklessness in
which gene therapists repeatedly implied that they were on the verge of
delivering medical miracles only to have their attempts end in failure or death.
But these latest attempts in France seem to have been a model of care and
caution. The researchers experimented for six years in mice and the laboratory
before attempting to treat humans, and they took advantage of incremental
technical advances made over the years by other scientists to achieve their
success. Their accomplishment could serve as a model for the fast-moving
revolution in human genetics. The field shows great promise but will require
dedicated, painstaking work and careful monitoring to reach its goals.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2000


                             609 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

HEADLINE: April 23-29;
At Long Last, Gene Therapy

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   After 10 years of hype and dashed hopes, after more than 4,000 patients with
more than a dozen diseases were treated unsuccessfully in hundreds of studies,
gene therapy has finally worked.

    Doctors in France reported that they inserted new genes into cells of three
babies with a rare genetic disease that prevents them from growing immune
systems. Without treatment, the babies would be killed by microorganisms that
ordinarily pose no threat. With gene therapy, the babies developed normal immune
systems and went home from the hospital to live openly in the microbe-laden
world.   GINA KOLATA

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2000


                             610 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 30, 2000, Sunday, TWO STAR EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL, Pg. E-4

LENGTH: 874 words

HEADLINE: TIME DOESN'T WAIT FOR 'CULTURAL LITERACY'

BYLINE: PETER SCHRAG

BODY:


   The name of E.D. Hirsch Jr. may never become a household word, but in a
decade of fights about national school standards -- and in the larger culture
wars -- Hirsch's name looms as large as anyone's.

   A professor of English at the University of Virginia, he is a fact hunter.
He's been deep into school reform for more than a decade, but his reputation
rests primarily on a small book, "Cultural Literacy," that's based on the simple
notion that those who don't know a certain set of common facts -people, places,
phrases, dates, ideas -- will forever be shut out of our public discourse. More
particularly, he contends, kids can't just learn in the abstract: They have to
learn something.

   It's tough to argue with that. But for anyone looking at Hirsch's book now,
it's evident that maintaining that common body of cultural knowledge becomes
harder every day. The book, first published in 1987 and subtitled, "What Every
American Needs to Know," included a list of some 5,000 items beginning with the
year 1066 and ending with Zurich. A half-generation later, at the beginning of
the new century, most of the list has stood up remarkably well. But in a short
dozen years it's also grown large gaps and includes items that have long lost
their currency.

   You can't blame Hirsch for most of the gaps. Even in 1988, when the revised
paperback was published (and when he added a net 343 items to the first list),
he couldn't have known about the Internet, e-mail and Bill Gates; or the Gulf
war or Michael Jordan and Mark McGwire; or global warming or the genome; or
Chechnya, Kosovo and Saddam Hussein; or about Harry Potter or rap. Nor could he
know that today's Mayor Richard Daley would not be the one he put on the list.
Between editions he managed to dump Lee Iacocca, Spiro Agnew and George
McGovern, to add Zimbabwe and to split the merged Oliver Wendell Holmes in two,
junior and senior. And he remembered, belatedly, to change Peking to Beijing.

   But there's still something a bit fusty about the list that, in this period
of extraordinary change, raises worrisome questions both about the principle and
the execution. Savings bonds are here, and hippies and teenyboppers and the
organization man and the New Left; so are walkie-talkie and the Maginot line
(there is no Siegfried line) and V. Quisling and Chungking and the Don River and
black power.

   But there is no IRA (as in savings accounts), no Nasdaq; there's no HIV or
gene therapy; no cell phones or SUVs; no Final Four. There is stagflation, but
no initial public offering. The Atomic Energy Commission is there, although it
had long before morphed into the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which is not
there. "I'm the very model of a modern major general" is here, and so is "Mad
Dogs and Englishmen," and while Woodstock, Elvis and Lennon are named(along with
Crosby and Sinatra), you ain't gonna find no hound dog or yellow submarine.

   What you will find are some French and German words and phrases -- a way to
say good-bye in three or four languages, plus de rigueur, comme il faut and je
ne sais quoi (which do not please the spell-checker), but almost nothing
Hispanic -- no Cesar Chavez, no Gabriel Garcia Marquez, no Cinco de Mayo -except
for Zapata and la cucaracha. And while you'll find the New Yorker, presumably
meaning the magazine, you will not find Time or Newsweek, or even The New York
Times. The Super Bowl is missing, but so is the World Series. Sinclair Lewis,
Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald are in; Saul Bellow and Toni Morrison
are not.

   None of this necessarily destroys Hirsch's premise. There's no way that one
can understand our literature, or what's in newspapers or even on television
without knowing the references that our common discourse takes -- or should take
-- as a given. More troubling, there may be no way to hold the culture together
without that cultural common ground.

   But the gaps, the items that no longer belong and the diversification of the
culture indicate how tough it's getting to stay current. At first glance,
Hirsch's list would seem a tad snooty -- the inclusion of Ludwig Wittgenstein
and Charles Sanders Peirce, all those French phrases, the shortage of references
to anything having to do with television or pop culture. For those coming of age
now, a lot of the items are likely to be as foreign as je ne sais quoi and as
dated as last year's newspaper. (Gamal Abdel Nasser? Fiorello LaGuardia? Alfred
Kinsey?)

   But the real problem may be that, as cultural historian Jacques Barzun says,
you can't do it with lists. "It must enter your mind as part of a story. It must
be part of the books you've read, the things your friends refer to casually in
conversation."

   Somehow, it has to be part of the woodwork.

   For a growing number of people, even the principle is in doubt, people who
contend -- dubiously to many born before, say, 1970 -- that in the future
cultural literacy will have more to do with the processing of information than
with any common core of knowledge: If you want to know about 1066, you just get
on the Web and click. And eventually there'll be no one around from those good
old days.

   Peter Schrag is a columnist for The Sacramento Bee (pschrag@sacbee.com).

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2000


                             611 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             April 30, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: CITRUS TIMES; SUNDAY Q[A] Pg. 11

DISTRIBUTION: CITRUS TIMES

LENGTH: 595 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy excites cancer 'stakeholder'

BYLINE: TOM HAESEKER; JIM ROSS

BODY:


   Imagine you have millions of dollars at your fingertips. Then imagine a host
of the nation's brightest people are trying to convince you that, if they could
get just a bit of that money, they might help save, or at least improve,
countless lives.

   Welcome to Tom Haeseker's world.

   Haeseker helps decide how the American Cancer Society doles out $ 100-million
or so in research grants and scholarships each year. He does so in his capacity
as a "stakeholder," which is a fancy name for a layman who serves on a peer
review committee whose other members are academics and researchers.

   The cancer society has 17 such committees; the one on which Haeseker serves
reviews scholarship and funding requests from students and professors who
specialize in nursing oncology.

   Haeseker, 32, became a Citrus County resident when he was 5 1/2. He is
married to the former Cameron Vick, a 1989 graduate of Crystal River High
School. They live in Citrus Springs.

   Haeseker was a member of Lecanto High School's first graduating class in
1985, then went on to earn his undergraduate degree at the University of Florida
and a master's degree in business administration from Saint Leo University.

   Haeseker formerly worked at Seven Rivers Community Hospital as managed care
director, and in the business office, before becoming a consultant. In 1998, he
became president and chief executive officer of the Florida Wellcare Alliance,
an organization of Citrus doctors who are dedicated to ensuring high-quality
medical care.

   He recently sat down with Citrus Times staff writer Jim Ross to discuss his
work with the American Cancer Society.

   Question: How did you get involved with the American Cancer Society program?

   Answer: I found it on a news clipping service on the Internet. It was a news
release from the American Cancer Society looking for stakeholders. I thought
that being involved in an organization that does research would parallel the
mission of the Florida Wellcare Alliance. So I asked our local chairperson of
the American Cancer Society, Dr. (Timothy) Brant, for support and then filled
out an application.

   Q: What is your role on this committee?

   A: Local stakeholders were added to ensure that every research proposal and
training grant would be reviewed not only by scientists but also by a volunteer
who has serious interest in cancer research.

   Q: How much work does this committee assignment involve?

   A: I think I probably put 45 minutes into each (of the 37) applications.
There  were three days of training. Short of 100 hours a year of actual work.
But then, as volunteers representing the national home office, we're expected to
get involved in local American Cancer Society activities. (Also, the committee
meets twice each year in Atlanta.)

   Q: How do the academic members of the committee treat you?

   A: My experience was very positive. They felt that I brought valuable input
to the committee and did my homework.

   Q: What exciting things are happening in the world of cancer research?

   A: The most exciting things are gene mechanisms, designing (ways) to attack
cancer at its genetic roots. The therapeutic vaccines . . . the focus on the
poor and underserved areas in cancer research.

   Q: What have you learned about cancer research, or medical research in
general, since beginning your work on the committee?

   How many opportunities have gone unexplored. . . . You hear (only) about all
the great ones. Second is what is available that is maybe unknown in our
(geographic) area. Some of the assessment forms and the screening tools.


GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; Tom Haeseker

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2000


                             612 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     April 30, 2000, Sunday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; FOOD AT A CROSSROADS; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 4067 words

HEADLINE: FOUR-DAY SPECIAL REPORT: FOOD AT A CROSSROADS;
Stakes high as Japan restricts altered crops;
Minnesota farmers are fighting to hold on to one of their best customers, Japan,
which imports at least $3 billion worth of Midwestern soybeans and corn a year
but is leery of genetically altered foods.

BYLINE: Sharon Schmickle; Staff Writer

DATELINE: Tokyo, Japan

BODY:

   The deep-fry vats are always busy at the McDonald's and Kentucky Fried
Chicken counters in Tokyo, but Japanese consumers are spurning a different kind
of American food: genetically modified (GM) corn and soybeans from the Midwest.

        "God created the Earth and food and humans in a very superior way, and
we shouldn't mess around with that," said Hiroko Konno, who has a local farmer
deliver fresh food to her home near Tokyo four times a week.

        Such passions have prompted Japanese shoppers to pay as much as 10 times
the normal price for soybeans grown on their own soil, where farmers don't plant
GM seeds. And next April, a new law will require dozens of foods with GM
ingredients to carry labels, giving consumers a clear choice to reject the crops
that Midwestern farmers are planting this spring.

        For these farmers, the stakes are huge. Japan imports more Midwestern
corn and soybeans than any other nation, at least $3 billion worth a year. A
pressing question is how many other Asian nations will take their cues from
Japan.

        "Japan is the bellwether," said Minnesota Agriculture Commissioner Gene
Hugoson, who visited Japan on a trade mission last year. "The Japanese are seen
as fastidious in terms of food-safety issues, so they sort of define the high
end. And they influence attitudes pretty much down the line."

        Over the years, Japan typically has bought more than twice as much U.S.
corn as all of the European countries combined.

        Now, after losing $300 million a year in corn sales to Europe since 1996
because of anti-GM furor, U.S. farmers are fighting to save Japanese markets
they've cultivated for 50 years.

        Minnesota farmer Kim Larson, who grows GM corn and soybeans near
Willmar, is one of dozens of U.S. farmers who have visited Japan in an effort to
ease the fear of the new crops. The reception in Japan has been polite, but back
in Minnesota, Larson is worried.

        "The last decade was great for the image of soybeans," he said. "But
this is changing. In the European Union, soy is basically becoming a four-letter
word. If that attitude continues into Japan and other markets, or into the
United States, that could be extremely damaging to our industry."

        The paradox the farmers face is that Japan is caught between a love of
technology and devotion to tradition, especially in the kitchen. Japan is like
an astronaut "who wants to go around the world but keep one foot on the ground,"
said Walter Mondale, former U.S. ambassador to Japan who now practices law in
Minneapolis.

        In fact, the Japanese government is spending $2.3 billion a year to
study the genes in rice and to experiment with modifying them. At the same time
it is tightening restrictions on GM corn and soybeans.

        The paradox frustrates Japanese scientists.

        Consumers who think farmers should feed Japan's 127 million mouths
without biotechnology or pesticides are fooling themselves, said Kaoru
Zembayashi, a plant pathologist who works on the government's rice gene
research. "Some farmers are making organic produce, but they couldn't provide
enough food for the country."

        Japanese consumers, Zembayashi added, don't see the issue as a tradeoff
between pesticides and genetics. "They don't want genetic modification, but they
also don't want chemicals," she said.

        Growing the food at home is not Japan's answer. Confined by mountains,
the sea and urban sprawl, Japanese farmers can till only 15 percent of the land.
Thus, Japan grows only 3 percent of its own soybeans, and virtually none of its
corn. So it recognizes that it needs imports for at least half of its food, and
buys from the United States _ primarily the Midwest _ where Minnesota is the
third leading state in soybean production and fourth in corn.

        But now, nearly half of Japanese consumers tell pollsters that they want
nothing to do with GM crops. Plenty of others are wavering, even though
scientific panels and government health authorities in , the United States and
several other countries have said that GM foods are as safe as conventional
fare.

        Twice since Larson and other Midwestern farmers first planted GM crops
in 1996, he has flown to Japan and met with soybean buyers at a luxurious hotel
overlooking Tokyo Bay. His strategy is to explain why he plants GM soybeans.

        In his long-running battle with weeds, it had been routine to spray
repeated doses of potent weedkillers on the fields at planting time, whether or
not any weeds were in sight. Now, soybeans have been given a gene that allows
farmers to spray a field only when weeds show up. As a result, Larson has gained
more control over weeds while spreading fewer chemicals that could harm the
environment.

   .

   The line in the kitchen

        Larson's logical talking points are often confounded by listeners'
emotions. Consumers who line up for bags of fries panic about soybeans that
they've been eating for five years with no apparent health problems.

        And the fear is fanned by opposition groups who know how to use the news
media. A video spot, broadcast recently by 10 Japanese TV stations, depicts a
beetle rolling over dead after biting into a leaf of a GM potato plant. A
scientist might applaud the scene because the plant is doing what it was
designed to do: It kills the insect with a natural toxin that doesn't bother
people or animals who eat potatoes.

        But the tape's creator, Japan Offspring Fund, is hoping that consumers
will identify with the bug and join a boycott against food made from the crops.

        The bad-for-bugs-bad-for-people message isn't lost on Yasuko Muroi. GM
foods have no place, she said, on her apartment's handsome wooden table in one
of Tokyo's southwestern neighborhoods.

        Grassroots protest in Japan, where individuals often aren't eager to
stand out, isn't as feisty as it can be in the United States or Europe.

        Even so, to follow Muroi is to gain insight into the forces against GM
crops that are now moving many of her fellow Japanese.

        Food safety and the environment were priorities for Muroi even before
the GM issue flared. Every day, she reviews a chart on her dining-room wall that
lists principles to prevent global warming. She faithfully follows them,
shopping in a way that doesn't create garbage, pulling the plugs on appliances
when they aren't in use, buying goods that were produced with a minimum of
energy.

        "Natural" is the guide word. Her family drinks "natural mineral water"
for example, dispensed from a cart in the dining room. So the boycott against GM
foods was literally a natural for them.

        Japan Offspring Fund has outlined an elaborate regimen for boycotters:
Buy domestic soybeans and tofu, replace cornstarch with starch from domestic
potatoes, stick to cooking oil made from safflower, sesame or sunflower seeds,
grapes, olives and rice. The fund has circulated lists of restaurants that have
pledged to use GM-free ingredients and farmers who use no GM feed for their
animals.

        Muroi takes a shortcut. She buys food from a cooperative that honors the
boycott. It claims 153,000 members throughout Japan. She also works as a
volunteer for the cooperative and its political arm, which is trying to elect
members to the Japanese Diet (the legislative body).

        She also has lobbied the nutritionist who oversees the school lunch
program where Risa, 7, her eldest daughter, eats her midday meal. At least one
other Japanese school is serving GM-free meals, she said, and she wants the
same.

        Why go to all of this effort? First, she cites Risa and her other
daughter, Ikumi, 4. "When my daughters become older and give birth to their own
children, we might learn of some problem _ some food allergy, for example _ that
we didn't know about today," Muroi said.

        She isn't swayed by arguments that GM foods will reduce the need for
pesticides, setting up a difficult food-safety choice: pesticide residues vs.
the unknown effects of novel genes.

         Instead, she emphasizes a Japanese reverence for, and harmony with,
nature. In springtime, for example, a featured dish at Japanese tables is the
steamed greens of the canola plant. A slightly more bitter version of broccoli,
they are the color of newly sprouted grass. Another spring delicacy is a dollop
of sweetened rice and red-bean paste wrapped in a leaf from a cherry tree.

        "Our human bodies need to eat these foods in the spring," Muroi said.
"They are medicines. And they are so very important for the children."

        Tinkering with the genes in plants clashes with her sense of natural
order.

        "Living things, whether they are animals or plants, should be in the
environment in a natural state," she said. "This GM thing is going against the
work of nature."

   .

   From Midwest to temple

        The "GM thing" has already had considerable economic influence, however.
At the Yukawa family's pastry shop, it is easy to see the many ways in which
Midwestern farmers' produce has penetrated the Japanese market. The shop is in
Rokugo, a town of 7,000 people in a fertile plain where melting snow from the
surrounding mountains floods the paddies that produce a good share of Japan's
rice.

        Shinichi Yukawa, the family patriarch, is rolling sweetened rice in
powdered soybeans, imported from the United States. His wife, Setsu, shapes tofu
and other ingredients into bite-sized balls coated with sesame paste. His
granddaughter, Kayoko, spreads jam sweetened with corn syrup on some of the
European cakes that are her specialty. And his son, Yasuhiro, stirs corn oil
into a custard for cream puffs.

        On the first day of spring, Yukawa and his granddaughters carried
tofu-filled sweets to the temple. They prayed and then placed the delicacies on
a shrine commemorating a long line of departed Yukawas.

        "They're eating now," Kayoko, 25, whispered as she turned away from the
ceremonial offering.

        Sit down to any meal in the Yukawa home, and soybeans appear _ as
steaming miso broth (fermented soybean paste) for breakfast, as chunks of tofu
swimming with noodles in a lunchtime soup, as salty after-work snacks and as
buff-colored dumplings for dinner.

        Like Midwestern farmers, the Yukawas are engulfed in the global uproar
over GM crops. They face high-economic-risk decisions on whether to switch to
more expensive non-GM ingredients for their pastries. Will their customers be
willing to absorb the cost? Or could they ride out the storm in hopes that
consumers will come to accept GM foods just as they have accepted other fruits
of science such as vaccines and organ transplants?

        No one can say for sure.

        "Most people don't have true information about these crops," said
granddaughter Yukiko Yukawa, 22. "They haven't paid attention, and now they are
afraid of the food."

   .

   Molecular demystification

        The fear begins with something that is truly commonplace: genes, the
microscopic chemical codes for all living things. It is genes that make a
daffodil yellow, a dog four-legged and a cherry sweet. And genes are present in
every cell of the daffodil, the dog and the cherry.

        The mystery until recently has been the workings of these molecular
codes. Only in the last century have scientists begun to understand how they are
shuffled in nature to define a plant, a bird or a person.

        Now, scientists can do the shuffling. They have given corn, for example,
the gene from a bacterium that is deadly to corn borers but not to people or
other animals. Since 1995, such crops have been widely adopted by farmers in
Canada, South America, China, Australia _ and, above all, the United States,
where the first varieties were created.

        The debate concerns whether the scientists know the full extent of what
they are doing. After five years of raising the crops on four continents, there
have been no reports of health problems in people who eat the food or
environmental problems in fields where the plants are grown. But skeptics say
scientists may not know how to look for a dangerous side effect that may be
taking hold.

        Genetic research in medicine has been even more aggressive than in
agriculture. Millions of people routinely take drugs made from genetically
engineered ingredients. And recently some patients have died in gene-therapy
experiments, which are continuing with tightened government restrictions but
little public protest.

        Instead, fear of biotechnology has focused on food, something that is
far more familiar to consumers than medicine.

   .

   Which Japan?

        To the outside world, Japan appears to absorb technology with stunning
speed, putting forth leading brands of televisions and electronic gadgets in
profusion. In biology, too, Japan can be a trailblazer: Scientists made
headlines in January by announcing that they had cloned a calf from a cloned
bull.

        Less visible is Japan's conservative bent.

        "It is an ancient culture, with very deeply embedded values, where
tradition is as powerful as you will find in any society," Mondale said.

        Which Japan will dominate in the GM food decisions is anybody's guess
right now.

        There isn't as clear a consensus on GM foods in Japan as there is in
Europe. And although Japan started importing GM crops in 1996, the issue has
come into focus only recently, said Edward Lincoln, an economist at the
Brookings Institution in Washington, D.C., and author of the book "Troubled
Times: U.S.-Japan Trade Relations in the 1990s."

        "It wasn't until the Europeans raised a big hue and cry that the
Japanese picked up on it," Lincoln said. "When they did, consumers seemed to
jump on the bandwagon very, very quickly."

        As elsewhere in Japan, the debate goes back and forth in the Yukawas'
pastry shop.

        After a hectic workday, the family slides open the panels that lead to
their living quarters at the back of the store. They trade shoes for slippers,
sit back on tatami mats, turn on the television and and watch the news. Often,
they can view the GM debate in Tokyo, a four-hour ride to the south by bullet
train.

        "We wonder if someone who is against this must be smarter than we are,"
Kayoko Yukawa said with characteristic Japanese modesty.

        But her father, Yasuhiro Yukawa, argues that the merits of the crops,
such as gains in yield, need to be balanced against the fears.

        "The population on Earth is growing and growing, so if this technology
is not bad, we should use it because we won't have enough food," he said.

        About one in six people worldwide aren't getting enough to eat,
according to the U.N.'s Food and Agricultural Organization. And population
growth is outpacing gains in crop yields.

        Scientists also are discovering genes that could enhance nutrition in
crops commonly eaten by masses of poor people. For example, Swiss researchers
have inserted genes into rice plants that could curb the vitamin A deficiency
that afflicts about 100 million poor children, causing blindness in many cases.

        But the research on GM crops has cost billions of dollars. And the
companies behind it are increasingly nervous about investing more money, given
the growing hostility in consumer markets.

        Yukiko Yukawa, the second of Yasuhiro's three daughters, works in a
supermarket where some food processors already are touting GM-free wares, months
before the labeling requirement takes effect. Meanwhile, major breweries have
announced that they are using non-GM cornstarch in their beers. And many
consumers are paying a premium for non-GM tofu, cornmeal and other staples.

        Yukiko Yukawa isn't convinced, though, that shoppers are getting their
yen's worth.

        "I haven't seen any proof that this kind of food is bad for anyone," she
said.

   .

   A skull and crossbones?

        When the labeling law takes effect next April, it will affect 24 types
of food _ including tofu, miso, cornstarch, corn snacks, popcorn and frozen or
canned corn.

        Makers of those products are almost certain to switch to non-GM
ingredients, said James Echle, who directs the Tokyo office of the American
Soybean Association.

        "I don't think anybody will label containers genetically modified," he
said. "It's like putting a skull and crossbones on your product."

        Labels wouldn't be required on animal feed, by far the largest use for
corn and soybeans. And a good share of the labeled foods could come from U.S.
farms that specialize in crops for non-GM markets, Echle said.

        For example, when the New Herald _ a ship delivering corn to a Japanese
customer of Minnetonka-based Cargill Inc. _ pulled into the port of Kashima
recently, one of its huge holds contained GM corn. Another hold was filled with
a non-GM "specialty" variety.

        But for the bulk of the harvest, Midwestern agriculture isn't set up to
segregate GM grain from conventional varieties at the farm, the local elevator
and the shipping terminal. It could be a mistake for many of the farmers to take
on the costs associated with segregating the grain unless they know they have a
market for it, said Frank Sims, president of farm services for Cargill.

        "It's hard enough for producers to get an adequate return," he said,
even under ordinary conditions.

        And at the moment, the market is hard to read. Japan is showing a steady
demand for non-GM shipments, but not a "huge rush" toward them, Sims said. And
no one knows whether there ever will be a rush, especially if the costs of
segregating non-GM grain are added to grocery prices.

        The price that Japanese consumers are willing to pay for non-GM foods is
untested on a large scale, said Hayato Iwamoto, spokesman for the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which set up the labeling requirement.

        "No one knows the demand side at this point," he said.

        Thus, some food companies are sitting tight. Meidi-Ya Co. Ltd., a major
food and beverage importer that also makes jam and other foods and runs 18
supermarkets in Japan, is staying neutral, said Kiyotaka Gonda, vice director of
retailing. The company will obey the labeling law but go no further, he said.

        "Some food companies have gone too far," he said. "They are using it as
a selling point."

        The key question is how far the pendulum will swing against the GM
crops. Japan's Ministry of Health and Welfare took a step beyond the labeling
law last week. Starting in April 2001, it said, agricultural producers must
screen GM foods for allergy-causing potential and other health problems or their
products will be recalled and destroyed. U.S. authorities said companies already
are voluntarily screening biotech products, but Japan's rule imposes another
formal requirement on the crops.

        Meanwhile, the European Union is drafting labeling regulations for
animal feed. GM foes in Europe and Japan also are pushing for labels on GM-based
milk and meat as well.

   .

    _ Sharon Schmickle can be reached at sschmickle@startribune.com or
612-673-4432.

   .

   .

   More U.S. farmers going biotech

   Percent of total crop in the United States planted with genetically modified
seed.

   .

   Soybeans

   Genetically modified seed: 57%

   Normal seed: 43%

   .

   Corn

   Genetically modified seed: 33%

   Normal seed: 67%

   .

        .

   Most genetically modified crops are in the United States

   More than 70 percent of the land in the world that is planted in genetically
modified crops is in the United States.

   .

   United States: 71.9%

   Argentina: 16.8%

   Canada: 10.0%

   China: 0.8%

   All other: 0.5%

   .

   Source: Clive James

   .

   .

   Soybean customers

   Largest customers of U.S. soybean exports 1999

   Japan: 14.5%

   Netherlands: 12.4%

   Mexico: 10.9%

   Spain: 8.8%

   China: 7.8%

   Taiwan: 6.7%

   Germany: 5.8%

   S. Korea: 3.8%

   Indonesia: 2.6%

   United Kingdom: 2.4%

   Other: 24.3%

   .

   Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture

   .

   Corn customers

   Largest customers of U.S. corn exports 1999

   Japan: 30.0%

   S. Korea: 12.7%

   Mexico: 10.9%

   Taiwan: 8.8%

   Egypt: 5.5%

   Colombia: 2.9%

   Venezuela: 2.8%

   Saudi Arabia: 2.4%

   Algeria: 1.9%

   Canada: 1.6%

   Other: 20.5%

   .

   Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture

   .

   .

   Minnesota exports

   In 1998, the state ranked 17th in agricultural exports. The total value of
the exports was $2.28 billion. By far, the largest exports were soybeans and
corn.

   .

   Soybeans: $857.0 million

   Feed grains (mostly corn): $556.9 million

   Animals and meat: $231.1 million

   Vegetables: $169.5 million

   Other: $465.5 million

   .

   Source: Minnesota Agriculture Statistics Service

   .

   .

   How cromps are genetically modified

   To create most of the varieties that farmers grow today, traditional plant
breeders had to laboriously cross-breed closely related plants in order to
eventually get the desired genes and the traits they conveyed. But this practice
was limited by what was available from near relatives. Now the breeders can
genetically modify crops by taking a gene from a plant, animal or other organism
and splicing it into the DNA of a crop plant in order to add a trait such as
resistance to viruses or insects. Here are two of the techniques that scientists
use to do that.

   .

   1. Inside the nucleus of every plant cell are chromosomes made up of tightly
coiled strands of genes (DNA). The genes are specific sequences of four
chemicals that spell out the recipe for the plant.

   2. Scientists can add a trait to a plant by finding the gene with the recipe
for the trait in a plant, animal or other organism. Then, they must isolate the
gene in its host by breaking the chemical bonds that connect it to other genes.

   3. Once the gene is isolated, two methods can be used to implant the gene
into a different plant. One uses a gene gun; the other uses bacteria.

   .

   Method 1:

   Gene gun

   4. Microscopic pellets of gold or tungsten are coated with copies of the
isolated genes.

   5. Thousands of the metal pellets are placed on a disc inside a gene gun. The
gene gun propels the pellets into a disc of plant cells.

   6. The gene-coated metal pellets are propelled with enough force to burst
into the cell and carry the DNA to the nucleus of the cell.

   7. The DNA molecules make their way into the nucleus, where they join with
the chromosomes inside the cell.

   .

   Method 2:

   Bacteria

   .

   4. A plasmid is a circular piece of DNA in some bacteria. Scientists remove
unwanted DNA in the plasmid and insert the desired gene's DNA.

   5. The plasmid is inserted into an Agrobacterium. In nature, an Agrobacterium
causes diseases in plants by injecting its DNA into plant cells, changing the
plants genetic makeup. Scientists are harnessing this mechanism to insert
desired genes.

   6. The Agrobacterium enters the cells through a cut in the cell's wall.

   7. The plasmid is injected into the cell's nucleus, where the desired gene
combines with the cell's DNA in the chromosome.

   .

   8. The plantlets are grown into mature plants. Seeds from the new plants are
harvested and used for crops. The new crop will have the desired traits the new
gene caused in the donor organism.

   9. After the cell has been modified, it is cloned and grown in a nutrient
dish until a plantlet is formed. Each new cell contains the new gene.

   .

   Sources: Monsanto Co., Pioneer Hi-Bred International Inc., Iowa State
University

   .

   .

   INTERNET RESOURCES

   .

   The National Academy of Sciences has issued two major reports by scientific
panels. One is at http://national-academies.org/subjectindex/agr.html (click on
"Beyond Discovery: Designer Seeds"). The other is at
http://www.nap.edu/books/0309069300/html.

   .

   Three federal agencies with responsibility for regulating the crops have
posted extensive material including transcripts from public hearings.

        Food and Drug Administration _ http://www.fda.gov (click on
"Bioengineered Foods")

        Environmental Protection Agency _
http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/citizens.htm

        Department of Agriculture _ http://www.aphis.usda.gov/biotechnology/

   .

   Biotech critics:

        Greenpeace _ http://www.greenpeaceusa.org

        Union of Concerned Scientists _ http://www.ucsusa.org

        Environmental Defense _ http://www.edf.org

   .

   Biotech industry:

        Biotechnology Industry Organization _ http://www.bio.org

        Council for Biotechnology Information _ http://www.whybiotech.com


GRAPHIC: CHART; PHOTO; ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2000


                             613 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     April 29, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words

HEADLINE: MARKET SAVVY;
 SAVVY CONFIDENTIAL / A BRIEFING FOR INVESTORS;
 INVESTORS RETURN TO THE BIOTECH FOLD

BYLINE: Bloomberg News

BODY:


   Department of Deja Vu: Biotechnology stocks soared Friday amid new hopes that
genetic discoveries will lead to breakthrough new products.

   Though the biotech sector soared at the end of last year and the first part
of this year, it has been free-falling since last month amid concerns that the
speculative stocks rose too far, too fast. Investors have also been worried that
it's too soon to say which companies working in the field will profit from
scientific advances.

   Friday's rally was led by genomics stocks, which helped lift the 17-member
Amex biotechnology index by 14%, its biggest one-day percentage increase in nine
years. Three of the four biggest gainers in that index were genomics stocks such
as PE Corp.-Celera Genomics Group (ticker symbol: CRA), which rocketed $ 16.25
to $ 82.75 on the New York Stock Exchange, and Genome Therapeutics Corp. (GENE),
which climbed $ 3.75 to $ 17.13 on Nasdaq.

   Diversa Corp. (DVSA) gained $ 4.38 to $ 27.56. The company issued a news
release saying it has won a patent that expands protection of its technology to
collect and store genetic samples.

   Genomics refers to the discovery, analysis and manipulation of genetic
information to help develop new drugs, agricultural products and industrial
processes.

   "People are beginning once again to appreciate the promise that genomics
companies are offering for changing the practice of medicine," said Dennis Harp,
a Deutsche Banc Alex. Brown biotechnology analyst.

   The excitement over the prospects of genomics was shared by retail investors,
whose hyperbole helped push many genomics stocks to record highs earlier this
year.

   "Next week genomics will be red hot!" screamed an item on Celera's Yahoo
message board posted by somebody with the nickname "Internet--Gambler." "Load up
before other people have had a chance."

   The group began picking up Friday as researchers reported success in a
gene-therapy treatment on two babies with "bubble-boy" syndrome, which destroys
the immune system.

   That news, coupled with recent medical reports on advances, such as new work
on cloning animals, rekindled confidence about the financial prospects for
genomics companies, analysts said.

   Now investors are starting to think that biotech stocks have fallen too far,
too fast, said Meirav Chovav, an analyst with Salomon Smith Barney. Nasdaq's
biotech index plunged more than 40% over two months.

   Tim Bepler, who manages the $ 170-million Orbitex Health and Biotechnology
Fund, said he's interested in stocks in companies whose shares fell after the
market soured last month that are also likely to become profitable over the next
couple of years.

   "We've been buying some of these stocks with both hands for the last week or
two," he said. "There's a new generation of biotech companies coming to the
forefront that will be hugely profitable over the next few years."

   His top picks include Enzon Inc. (ENZN), which rose $ 6.19 to $ 37.25 on
Friday. He said he also recently bought shares in Protein Design Labs Inc.
(PDLI), Icos Corp. (ICOS) and Titan Pharmaceuticals Inc. (TTP). In Friday's
trading, Protein Design rose $ 15.81 to $ 101.50, Icos rose $ 2.13 to $ 40.25
and Titan rose $ 4.63 to $ 32.25.

   But Bepler said it's too soon to say whether biotechnology stocks have pulled
out of their seven-week slump."I'm not exactly sure where the market is going in
the short term," he said. "I think the overall market will be whipsawed by
economic data. We're not sure when the bottom is going to hit, though we hope it
has already."

   Among the big biotechnology shares that gained Friday were Genentech Inc.
(DNA), up $ 10.13 to $ 120; Immunex Corp. (IMNX), up $ 4.06 to $ 39.38; and
Amgen Inc. (AMGN), $ 1.88 higher at $ 56.


   Wild Ride

   Like many biotech stocks, Celera Genomics has been on a roller coaster. After
surging Friday, the stock is back in the black year-to-date. Weekly closes:


   *

   Friday: $ 82.75, up $ 16.25


   *

   Source: Bloomberg News

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Wild Ride, Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2000


                             614 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                    April 29, 2000, Saturday, Metro Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Advances to extend human life have age limit, biologist says;
While some scientists say technological progress may push the limits to 500 or
even 1,000 years, aging expert Leonard Hayflick calls that wishful thinking.

BYLINE: Warren Wolfe; Staff Writer

BODY:

   Despite advances in medicine, nutrition, gene therapy and genetic
engineering, the outer limits of human life will remain about 125 years, a
leading biologist and expert on aging said Friday.

        "There is lifespan and there is life expectancy," Leonard Hayflick told
the Minnesota Gerontological Society at its meeting in St. Paul. "We have done
amazing things in advancing the average expectancy _ how long the average person
lives. But the limit to lifespan was probably set 100,000 years ago."

        Hayflick is best known for his discovery of the "Hayflick limit," which
says that human and other animal cells have a limited capacity to replicate. A
few scientists disagree, saying that technological advances might push the
limits of human life to 500 or even 1,000 years.

        "That's wishful thinking," said Hayflick, who teaches at the University
of California, San Francisco. He is former president of the Gerontological
Society of America.

        During the 20th century, Americans added about 29 years to life
expectancy, from about 47 at the beginning of the century to about 76 at the end
_ about equal to the years of life added during the previous 2,000 years.

        "But most of that increase occurred among younger people," who used to
die in great numbers from childhood diseases, poor nutrition, infection and
childbirth, he said. "For someone age 75, life expectancy rose from about eight
years at the beginning of the century to nine or 10 years today."

        The reason is that cells replicate only about 50 times, then stop _ a
fact he and fellow researchers discovered by accident in their labs in the
1960s.

        "Even if we eliminate diseases and accidents, we'll greatly expand how
long people live _ but we'll still bump up against that limit of about 125
years," he said. "Only cancer cells seem to be 'immortal' because they continue
to replicate."

        Minnesota will face a series of problems as increasing life expectancy
swells the ranks of the aged, state demographer Tom Gillaspy said at the
conference Friday.

        "One of the major reasons we have a state surplus now is that 42 percent
of our people are in their peak earning years of 30 to 59, and that's a record,"
he said. "But a decade from now, that will be down to 38 percent."

        This decade, the state will see a continued tight labor market and a big
increase in retirement planning as the baby boom prepares to stop working.

        In the next decade, the baby boomers will start retiring, the overall
labor force will be at its maximum size, and there is likely to be economic
shrinking instead of growth.

        In the late 2020s, one in five Minnesotans will be 65 and older, up from
about one in eight now. Paying for health care may be a far bigger problem than
it is today.

        "The nice thing about demographics is it helps us see the future more
clearly so we can plan for it," Gillaspy said. "But we're not always real good
at that."

   .

   Knatterud honored

        State planners issued a major report last year about what to expect by
the year 2030, when the baby-boom generation begins to turn 85.

        The author, LaRhae Knatterud of the Minnesota Department of Human
Services, was given the Dutch Kastenbaum Outstanding Gerontologist Award on
Friday by the gerontological society for her work.

        The award is named after a social worker and advocate for seniors who,
in his 70s, started a weekly TV program about seniors' issues that ran for 20
years until his death.


LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2000


                             615 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

               April 28, 2000, FRIDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 563 words

HEADLINE: Gene remedy works;
2 infants healthy nearly year later

BYLINE: BY RICK WEISS

BODY:


   Two infants born with a life-threatening immune system disorder that had
forced them to live inside protective sterile "bubbles" are healthy and living
normal lives almost a year after being treated with an experimental genetic
therapy, doctors reported Thursday.

   If the children retain their good health, they will go down in medical
history as the first to be definitively cured by gene therapy, a controversial
approach that seeks to treat diseases by giving people new genes.

   "They have complete restoration of immune system function," said Marina
Cavazzana-Calvo of Necker Hospital in Paris, who led the research with co-worker
Alain Fischer. "The word cure' is hard to use because we don't know how long
these results will last. But the follow-up of one year is very encouraging."

   Cavazzana-Calvo said the team has recently treated three additional infants,
including one from the United States, and at least two of them appear to be
completely healthy. The children's identities are not being released, to protect
their privacy.

   In the 10 years since a 4-year-old Ohio girl with a related immune system
disorder became the first person to be treated with gene therapy, doctors have
tried to deliver curative genes to thousands of patients with many different
diseases, all to no avail. In 1995, a federally appointed panel criticized
scientists for experimenting on too many people before enough basic research had
been done.

   In September, the field came under renewed public scrutiny and criticism when
a teenager died in a University of Pennsylvania experiment that federal
regulators concluded was badly managed. Congressional inquiries later revealed
hundreds of lapses in similar studies being conducted around the country.

   The new work, described in the journal Science, could give the beleaguered
field a boost by proving for the first time that gene therapy can correct inborn
genetic errors.

   All the children treated by the French team were born with a rare and
catastrophic disease called SCID-X1, in which a single defective gene disables T
cells, which are crucial to the body's ability to fight infections. The disease
can be cured with a bone marrow transplant from a healthy donor, but only in a
minority of cases are donors available with a full genetic match for the
patient.

   Taking a different approach, the French team removed bone marrow from its
young patients, who ranged from 1 month to 11 months old. Bone marrow contains
blood "stem cells," which produce a constant supply of immune system cells that
migrate into the bloodstream and circulate for months or years before dying and
being replaced.

   The researchers removed millions of stem cells from each infant's marrow,
used genetically altered viruses to deliver to those cells healthy copies of the
gene the children lacked, and then reinfused the newly endowed stem cells into
the children.

   The hope was that those repaired cells would settle into the bone marrow and
produce genetically corrected immune system cells for the rest of the children's
lives.

   Within 15 days, tests indicated that some of the children's circulating blood
cells did contain the gene that had previously been missing. Over a period of
months, the number of circulating immune system cells increased, and tests
indicated that for the first time, large numbers of them were functioning
normally.

GRAPHIC: WASHINGTON POST

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             616 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 28, 2000, Friday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 946 words

HEADLINE: Milestone in gene therapy;
Doctors first to save lives using technique

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Service

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Two infants born with a life-threatening immune system disorder
that had forced them to live inside protective sterile "bubbles" are healthy and
living normal lives almost a year after being treated with an experimental gene
therapy, doctors reported Thursday.

   If the children retain their good health, they will go down in medical
history as the first to be definitively cured by gene therapy, a controversial
approach that seeks to treat diseases by giving people new genes.

   "They have complete restoration of immune system function," said Dr. Marina
Cavazzana-Calvo of Necker Hospital in Paris, who led the research with co-worker
Dr. Alain Fischer. "The word 'cure' is hard to use because we don't know how
long these results will last. But the follow-up of one year is very
encouraging."

   Cavazzana-Calvo said the team has recently treated three additional infants,
including one from the United States, and at least two of them appear to be
completely healthy. The children's identities are not being released, to protect
their privacy.

   Experts in this country said they could hardly contain their excitement.
"This is something you dream about," said Dr. William Shearer, chief of
immunology at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston.

   Shearer, also of the Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, was one of the
doctors who cared for David the "bubble boy," who suffered from the same disease
as the French children and died in 1984 at the age of 12.

   David Philip Vetter lived north of Houston in Shenandoah. A school in The
Woodlands is named for him, as is a center at Texas Children's Hospital.

   In the 10 years since a 4-year-old Ohio girl with a related immune system
disorder became the first person to be treated with gene therapy, doctors have
tried to deliver curative genes to thousands of patients with many different
diseases, all to no avail.

   In September, the field came under renewed criticism when a teen-ager died in
a University of Pennsylvania experiment that federal regulators concluded was
badly managed.

   The new work, described in today's issue of the journal Science, could give
the beleaguered field a boost by proving for the first time that gene therapy
can correct inborn genetic errors.

   "It looks like gene therapy is beginning to turn the corner," said Dr. W.
French Anderson, who led the first gene therapy experiment in the United States
in 1990.

   All the children treated by the French team were born with a rare and
catastrophic disease called SCID-X1, in which a single defective gene disables T
cells, which are crucial to the body's ability to fight infections. A bone
marrow transplant from a healthy donor can cure the disease, but only in a
minority of cases are matching donors available.

   Taking a different approach, the French team removed bone marrow from its
young patients, who ranged from 1 month to 11 months old. Bone marrow contains
blood "stem cells," which produce a constant supply of immune system cells that
migrate into the bloodstream and circulate for months or years before dying and
being replaced.

   The researchers removed millions of stem cells from each infant's marrow,
used genetically altered viruses to deliver to those cells healthy copies of the
gene the children lacked, and then reinfused the newly endowed stem cells into
the children.

   The hope was those repaired cells would settle into the bone marrow and
produce genetically corrected immune system cells for the rest of the children's
lives.

   Within 15 days, tests indicated that some of the children's circulating blood
cells did contain the previously missing gene.

   Most encouraging, the children became healthy. Chronic diarrhea and
long-lasting skin sores disappeared. When the children were inoculated with
tetanus, diphtheria and polio vaccines, their immune systems responded normally
and produced antibodies against those childhood infections, which otherwise
could easily kill them. Four of the five treated children have left their
protective isolation tents and are living in their homes, where they are
developing normally.

   Key to the therapy's apparent success were recent improvements in
gene-transfer techniques that ensure that a greater number of stem cells get
copies of the healthy gene.

   Anderson, now at the University of Southern California, said he hoped to try
the new technique this summer in Ashanthi DeSilva, the Ohio girl he first
treated as a 4-year-old in 1990, and who has a form of SCID called SCID-ADA.
About 25 percent of DeSilva's immune system cells were repaired as a result of
that initial treatment - until now, the most successful use of gene therapy -
but she still relies on doses of an expensive drug that enhances the immune
system.





   Activating the immune system


   Babies with a rare disease called SCID are at severe risk of dying from minor
germs. Their immune system fails because their bone marrow does not produce T
cells and other lymphocytes, both crucial to ward off infections.  Now French
scientists have used gene therapy to restore normal immune systems. Here is an
illustration of the process.


   Failed immune system


   A defective gene blocks stem cell receptors needed to trigger T cells and
other lymphocytes.


   Gene therapy


   In a lab dish, blocked stem cells are infected with a virus containing the
normal gene.

   When the stem cells absorb the normal gene, their cell receptors become
unblocked.


   Working immune system


   The corrected stem cells produce signals to create T cells and lymphocytes,
activating the immune system.

   After three days of repeated interaction, the cells are placed back into the
patient.



GRAPHIC: Drawings: 1. Blocked receptor and Stem Cell; 2. Normal gene and virus;
3. T cells and Lymphocytes; 4. Added gene and Unblocked receptor; 5. Syringe
needle; Graph: 6. Activating the immune system (p. 16, TEXT); All by Associated
Press, Source: Science

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2000


                             617 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 28, 2000, Friday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 917 words

HEADLINE: Milestone in gene therapy;
Experiment reverses 'bubble boy disease'

SOURCE: Houston Chronicle News Service

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - For the first time, scientists have used gene therapy, the
replacement of defective genes with working copies, to save the lives of several
infants who might otherwise have died of a severe immune disorder sometimes
called the "bubble boy disease."

   It's too soon to know if the babies are cured, experts cautioned. But the
experiment, reported in today's edition of the journal Science, finally provides
evidence that gene therapy can succeed - at a time when skeptics are harshly
criticizing the field.

   "The clinical benefits we observe had never been achieved before," Dr. Alain
Fischer, the Paris physician who performed the gene therapy, said at a news
conference Thursday, describing his sickly patients' rebound into healthy
toddlers.

   "It looks like this really worked," agreed Dr. Jennifer Puck, a geneticist at
the U.S. National Institutes of Health who plans to start a similar gene therapy
study this fall with doctors at North Carolina's Duke University. "This is a
very important milestone."

   The babies have SCID, or "severe combined immunodeficiency disease," a
devastating, rare disease. Their bodies cannot make lymphocytes, the immune
cells crucial for warding off infection - meaning they can die from the most
minor of germs.

   The best-known victim of SCID was the child known for years to the public
only as David, the "bubble boy" who lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure
until his death at age 12 in 1984. David Philip Vetter lived north of Houston in
Shenandoah. A school in The Woodlands is named for him, as is a center at Texas
Children's Hospital.

   Today, bone marrow transplants keep many SCID babies from having to live in
sterile bubbles. Transplants provide them with healthy stem cells, special cells
that reside in the bone marrow and produce lymphocytes. Transplants have cured
some babies and extended the lives of others. But they're not always successful,
so scientists hope gene therapy could offer an alternative.

   The Science article described an experiment on two French infants. Neither
underwent a transplant, and both lived the first months of their lives inside
sterile bubbles. They have the most common form of SCID, caused by a defective
gene that blocks a cell receptor needed to trigger lymphocyte formation. Lift
that roadblock, and the body should generate normal, working immune cells.

   Fischer, of the Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris, took bone marrow
from the babies when they were 8 months and 11 months old, respectively. He
culled some of their stem cells and bathed them in fibronectin, a protein
believed to make them more receptive to gene therapy.

   Then Fischer took a normal version of the immune system gene that the babies
were missing, and added it to a harmless virus. In a lab dish, he infected the
babies' stem cells with the gene-carrying virus for three days. Then he
transplanted the stem cells back into their bodies.

   Soon, the babies started making germ-killing immune cells. Three months
later, they went home from the hospital without antibiotics or any additional
treatment - and 11 months later, both have levels of immune system cells
comparable to healthy children their age, Fischer said.

   Neither suffered any side effects from the gene therapy. Their immune systems
reacted properly when they were vaccinated against polio and other diseases.

   In a footnote, the researchers said they had successfully treated a third
baby, 1 month old at the time. He has since treated two more, Fischer said, and
was waiting to learn whether the effort succeeded with them as well.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Fischer said. "It is a
success today. Then the next question is, 'How long will it be a success?' "

   It is "the first significant success" in gene therapy in 10 years of
experiments with more than 4,000 people, said Dr. W. French Anderson of the
University of Southern California, who performed the world's first gene therapy
attempt.

   What's especially important here: Scientists have long wanted to correct gene
defects at the stem cell level because healthy stem cells should continue
producing a working immune system for years. Plus, unlike the challenge with
genetic diseases that affect other types of cells, every stem cell doesn't have
to take up the new gene - only a few healthy stem cells are required to work.

   "You can't call it a cure" until the children are older and the disease
doesn't return, Anderson cautioned, but it is a possibility. "It does look like
gene therapy might finally be turning the corner."





   Activating the immune system


   Babies with a rare disease called SCID are at severe risk of dying from minor
germs. Their immune system fails because their bone marrow does not produce T
cells and other lymphocytes, both crucial to ward off infections.  Now French
scientists have used gene therapy to restore normal immune systems. Here is an
illustration of the process.


   Failed immune system


   A defective gene blocks stem cell receptors needed to trigger T cells and
other lymphocytes.


   Gene therapy


   In a lab dish, blocked stem cells are infected with a virus containing the
normal gene.

   When the stem cells absorb the normal gene, their cell receptors become
unblocked.


   Working immune system


   The corrected stem cells produce signals to create T cells and lymphocytes,
activating the immune system.

   After three days of repeated interaction, the cells are placed back into the
patient.



GRAPHIC: Drawings: 1. Blocked receptor and Stem Cell; 2. Normal gene and virus;
3. T cells and Lymphocytes; 4. Added gene and Unblocked receptor; 5. Syringe
needle; Graph: 6. Activating the immune system (p. 16, TEXT); All by Associated
Press, Source: Science

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2000


                             618 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                      April 28, 2000, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 1; Metro Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY MAY HAVE CURED 3 INFANTS

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, TIMES MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:


   After 10 years of research on more than 4,000 subjects, gene therapy
researchers may finally have reached their Holy Grail--curing a patient with a
genetic disease.

   French researchers have successfully treated three infants with severe
combined immunodeficiency disease, a devastating disorder that shuts down
children's immune systems and forces them to live in airtight bubbles to prevent
infections.

   Dr. Alain Fischer and his colleagues at Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades in
Paris removed bone marrow cells from the infants, treated the cells with a virus
that carried the gene for a missing protein and returned the cells to the
infants' bodies.

   Today, the children all have fully functioning immune systems, and two have
lived normal lives for nearly a year, Fischer said at a news conference Thursday
in Paris. The research is reported in today's Science.

   "This is the most dramatic improvement in a patient's condition that has been
achieved using gene therapy to date--a real milestone," said Dr. Jennifer Puck
of the National Human Genome Research Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "It's too early to say if they have been completely cured," she said, "but
for now, they seem to be doing just as well as if they had been cured."

   The achievement was good news for gene therapy researchers, who have been
laboring under the shadow of the treatment-related death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger in November at the University of Pennsylvania. That death and
subsequent investigations revealed a number of improprieties--albeit relatively
minor ones--in the conduct of several gene therapy studies. Some programs were
shut down, at least temporarily, while research protocols were revised to better
protect participants.

   But while those problems have generated headlines, researchers have made
several significant improvements in gene therapy efforts. At least two groups of
researchers have reported alleviating the symptoms of hemophilia with gene
therapy and others have claimed success in growing new blood vessels to bypass
blocked arteries in the leg and the heart.

   The news from Paris "is coming at a very good time for the field," said Dr.
Katherine High of Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who has conducted
hemophilia studies. "Most people believe that the underlying principles of gene
therapy are sound and that it is a question of working out the details. It has
proven to be a much more complex undertaking than was initially imagined . . .
but Fischer has illustrated that it can be done."

   Dr. W. French Anderson of USC, one of the pioneers in the field, said: "It
does look like gene therapy might finally be turning the corner."

   The three male infants treated by Fischer's group suffer from a rare
affliction called severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) X1. It is
caused by a defective gene on the X chromosome, one of the chromosomes that
determine gender. Because of the faulty gene, the body cannot produce an
important protein called the gamma-c cytokine receptor subunit. The lack of that
protein, in turn, means that white blood cells cannot be converted into the T, B
and natural killer cells necessary for fighting off infections. The infants are
left defenseless.

   Infants Serve as Their Own Donors

   Researchers estimate that the disorder occurs in one of every 50,000 to
100,000 births. The figure could actually be substantially higher, Puck said,
because many victims die of infections before the disorder can be diagnosed.

   Victims generally live in sterile plastic bubbles for the first year or so of
their lives, then receive bone marrow transplants to provide functioning immune
cells. If an infant has a closely matched sibling, which happens in about
one-fifth of all cases, the transplants are effective about 90% of the time. But
if a parent or nonrelative is used as the donor, transplants work only 60% to
70% of the time.

   "Gene therapy would allow the infants to serve as their own donor," leading
to a high success rate, said Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   An even rarer form of the immune disorder is caused by a defect in a
different gene, called adenosine deaminase, or ADA. Anderson, Kohn and others
have attempted to cure ADA deficiency with gene therapy, but those efforts have
been only partially successful and the children have continued to require
supplemental drug therapy to replace the missing enzyme. Supplemental therapy is
not possible with the form of the disease the French doctors treated.

   Fischer's group initially treated two boys, ages 8 months and 11 months.
Doctors removed bone marrow from the boys and isolated stem cells--the primitive
cells from which all other blood cells are derived--from each. They grew the
cells in a laboratory dish containing fibronectin, a protein thought to make
them more receptive to gene therapy.

   They then treated the cells with a virus containing the healthy version of
the gene that is defective in SCID X1 and infused the cells back into the boys'
bloodstreams. Those cells proliferated in the boys' bodies, out-reproducing the
cells with the defective gene.

   Within 15 days, the boys' bodies began producing T, B and natural killer
cells. Diarrhea and skin lesions that had afflicted one of the boys disappeared.
Within three months, the babies were able to go home, freed from their bubbles.
They have subsequently remained healthy for 11 months and have successfully been
vaccinated against tetanus, diphtheria and polio--vaccinations that would not
have worked before their treatment.

   A third boy was subsequently treated and has now been healthy for four
months.

   "The clinical benefits we observe have never been achieved before," Fischer
said at the news conference.

   Kohn said: "This is a real home run for gene therapy."

   Puck cautioned that the long-term success of the therapy will not be known
for at least a couple more years. A child's immune system does not normally
become fully developed until somewhere between the ages of 3 and 5, so Fischer's
success cannot be fully evaluated until the children are at least that old, she
said.

   "This is a major step toward being able to do the same thing for kids with
sickle cell disease, thalassemia and other problems," Kohn said. "SCID is the
easiest to treat, because a few cells can grow out to produce a whole immune
system," but this shows that the concept will work, he said.


   Gene Therapy Milestone

   French researchers have used gene therapy to apparently cure three infants
with severe combined immunodeficiency, which leaves the children defenseless
against infections.


   *

   Source: Science

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC: Gene Therapy Milestone, LESLIE CARLSON / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             619 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      April 28, 2000 Friday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 09A

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy appears to cure immune disease;
In France, infants who had genes put in bone marrow cells now seem normal

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD Associated Press

BODY:

   Washington -- In an exciting and long-awaited success, gene therapy has
restored apparently normal immune systems to two French babies born with a rare,
lethal immune disease sometimes called the "bubble boy disease."

   It's too soon to know if the babies are cured, experts cautioned. But the
experiment, reported in today's edition of the journal Science, finally provides
evidence that gene therapy can succeed -- at a time when skeptics are harshly
criticizing the field.

   "The clinical benefits we observe had never been achieved before," Alain
Fischer, the Paris physician who performed the gene therapy, said at a news
conference Thursday, describing his sickly patients' rebound into healthy
toddlers.

   The babies have SCID, or "severe combined immunodeficiency disease," a
devastating, rare disease. Their bodies cannot make lymphocytes, the immune
cells crucial for warding off infection, meaning they can die from the most
minor of germs.

   The best-known victim of SCID was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who
lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until his death at age 12.

   Today, bone marrow transplants keep many SCID babies from having to live in
sterile bubbles. Transplants provide them with healthy stem cells, special cells
that reside in the bone marrow and produce lymphocytes. Transplants have cured
some babies and extended the lives of others. But they're not always successful,
so scientists hope gene therapy could offer an alternative.

   The French babies never tried a transplant and lived the first months of
their lives inside sterile bubbles. They have the most common form of SCID,
caused by a defective gene that blocks a cell receptor needed to trigger
lymphocyte formation. Lift that roadblock, and the body should generate normal,
working immune cells.

   Fischer, of the Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris, took bone marrow
from the babies when they were ages 8 months and 11 months, respectively. He
culled some of their stem cells, and bathed them in fibronectin, a protein
believed to make them more receptive to gene therapy.

   Then he took a normal version of the immune system gene the babies were
missing and added it to a harmless virus. In a lab dish, he infected the babies'
stem cells with the gene-carrying virus for three days. Then he transplanted the
stem cells back into their bodies.

   Soon, the babies started making germ-killing immune cells. Three months
later, they went home from the hospital without antibiotics or any additional
treatment -- and 11 months later, both have levels of immune system cells
comparable to healthy children their age, Fischer said.

   Neither suffered any side effects from the gene therapy.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             620 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1443 words

HEADLINE: SCIENTISTS REPORT THE FIRST SUCCESS OF GENE THERAPY

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

BODY:

   For the first time, gene therapy has unequivocally succeeded, scientists say.
Doctors used the treatment, which involves adding working genes to cells, to
save the lives of several infants who might otherwise have died of a severe
immune disorder.

   The achievement, announced yesterday in France, comes after a decade of
widely heralded promise followed by dashed hopes for the revolutionary
treatment.

    The success proves that gene therapy can work, researchers said, but the
patients had a disease that is especially suited for the treatment. The
researchers cautioned that the method might not be immediately applicable to
other diseases.

   The patients were three babies who could not grow a complete immune system.
The only other treatment for the condition, a form of severe combined immune
deficiency, or SCID, is a bone marrow transplant, which works just 60 percent of
the time. Otherwise, patients with SCID, pronounced skid, must live in germ-free
bubbles or fall prey to the ever-present microorganisms that most people can
easily fend off.

   In a report of the work in today's issue of the journal Science, Dr. Alain
Fischer, a professor of pediatric immunology at the Necker children's hospital
in Paris, and his colleagues describe the course of two of the babies, 11 months
and 8 months of age at the time of their treatment.

   Three months after the therapy, the researchers recounted, the babies were
home, living like any other children. Ten months later, their immune systems
were normal. Untreated infants born with SCID who are not kept in a sterile
bubble become ill within months and die before their first birthday.

   In a footnote, the researchers say they have now successfully treated a third
baby, who was a month old at the time. In a telephone interview, Dr. Fischer
said yesterday that he had now treated two more babies and is waiting to learn
whether the effort succeeded with them as well.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Dr. Fischer said. "It is
a success today. Then the next question is, 'How long will it be a success?' It
may be that after some time there will be a decline in these cells and that
sooner or later we will have to treat them again. We hope that if this happens
it will not be for a very long time."

   Gene therapy experts were exuberant. "It's a very exciting study," said Dr.
R. Michael Blaese, who was a member of a medical team at the National Institutes
of Health that tried the first gene therapy on a human patient nearly 10 years
ago. Dr. Blaese, now the head of the human therapeutics division at ValiGen in
Newtown, Pa., added: "This would probably be the first example in any disease
where gene therapy could be a fully successful treatment. You can't distinguish
these patients from normal."

   The success comes on the heels of a tumultuous decade in which, according to
the National Institutes of Health, more than 390 gene therapy studies were
initiated, involving more than 4,000 patients and more than a dozen medical
conditions. While those doing the research always expressed confidence in its
promise, critics said many of the companies formed to capitalize on the
technology exaggerated preliminary data in the hope of raising capital.

   And, at times, some scientists promised more than the technology was ready to
deliver, leaving the field a target for accusations that patients were being
endangered by reckless experiments that were doomed to failure.

   "We've all been so burned by saying, 'Ah, this looks like it worked, that
looks like it worked,' " said Dr. W. French Anderson of the Keck School of
Medicine at the University of Southern California and a member of the team that
attempted the first gene therapy in 1990. "Now when it finally looks like
something is working, I don't want to be in the position of saying the same
words. We've all been criticized for hyping too much."

   The babies treated by Dr. Fischer had a rare disorder known as severe
combined immunodeficiency-X1, or SCID-X1, which almost exclusively affects boys,
occurring once in every 75,000 live male births. It is caused by mutations that
destroy the function of a gene that is needed to make T cells, a class of white
blood cells.

   In a sense, the condition is a perfect target for gene therapy. With SCID-X1,
the cells that need a new gene are readily accessible in the bone marrow, whose
cells are relatively easy to remove from the body.

   Even better, if functioning genes actually get into the marrow cells of
patients with SCID-X1, those genetically corrected cells will proliferate and
displace cells with the defective gene. That is because, as the body tries to
grow a complete immune system, it sends waves of chemical signals to the bone
marrow to stimulate it into providing T cells.

   T cells with the defective gene start to grow and then die. Any cells with a
functioning gene will be fueled by the body's hormones and will grow rapidly to
populate the bone marrow.

   Dr. Fischer said he began working on gene therapy for SCID-X1 in 1993, as
soon as the missing gene was identified. He studied the treatment for six years
in mice and in the laboratory before trying to treat patients. Last year, he
said, he decided "there was a serious chance that the treatment could work in
this particular disease," and the success with the first babies is the result.

   Scientists, of course, were well aware that SCID-X1 and other rare genetic
diseases of immune system cells would be perfect for gene therapy. In fact, the
very first human gene therapy patient had a similar disease. The experiment took
place at the National Institutes of Health on Sept. 14, 1990.

   The problem with that experiment, Dr. Anderson said, was that researchers
needed to get the new genes into stem cells, which are progenitor cells of the
immune system.  But scientists at that time faced a conundrum. If they tried to
put genes into stem cells that were not dividing, the cells would not accept the
genes. If they allowed the cells to divide, they would accept the genes. But,
Dr. Anderson said, the cells would mature and would not be stem cells anymore.
In the past few years, this obstacle has been overcome.

   Dr. Fischer said it was that advance, along with numerous technical
achievements in molecular biology, that enabled him to successfully treat babies
with SCID-X1.

   "There is nothing new intellectually here," said Dr. Stuart Orkin, a
professor of pediatrics at Harvard Medical School. "They've put together all the
incremental advances that occurred over the past several years."

   But many gene therapy researchers had not waited for such advances, experts
said. Starting a decade ago, scientists attempted gene therapy after gene
therapy in patients, trying to cure at least a dozen diseases, including cystic
fibrosis, cardiovascular disease, Alzheimer's disease, hemophilia,
hypercholesterolemia and -- in more than two-thirds of the studies -- cancer.

   Five years ago, Dr. Orkin, as director of a federal panel reporting on gene
therapy, said that there were very large numbers of clinical trials "many of
which have been approved without extraordinary oversight in terms of scientific
or clinical benefit."

   In an interview yesterday, Dr. Orkin said: "There were a lot of people going
around grandstanding and saying they could cure cystic fibrosis and many other
things, which is a vast oversimplification. The awful history is not just the
companies. Some of it, unfortunately, is the investigators and the academic
institutions."

   Last year the festering discomfort many felt with the proliferating gene
therapy trials came to a head when a teenager, Jesse Gelsinger, died in a
clinical trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The death brought
investigations of all gene therapy studies and widespread cries that the field
was moving ahead recklessly, with no success in sight.

   In an interview on Wednesday, Dr. Orkin said that the panel he headed never
questioned whether gene therapy would work, eventually. "What we argued for was
to do the research and to look for actual clinical benefit, which hadn't been
demonstrated even in a mouse at that point."

   The success, at last, of gene therapy shows the wisdom of such an approach,
experts said. "They did all the science beforehand and then translated it to the
patient, which is what I think the field should be doing," Dr. Orkin said.

   Dr. Anderson said that while other forms of SCID should be amenable to gene
therapy now, nonetheless, "because you correct SCID doesn't mean you can correct
any other disease." But he added, "If you can't correct SCID, you can't correct
anything else."


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The first successful gene therapy has been reported by Dr. Alain
Fischer and Dr. Marina Cavazzana-Calvo and colleagues in Paris. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. A16)

Chart: "A CLOSER LOOK -- A Gene Therapy Breakthrough"

French researchers have developed a method of gene therapy to treat a genetic
disorder known as severe combined immune deficiency-X1, a condition that forces
patients to live within a sterile bubble to avoid threats to their
nonfunctioning immune system.

The Process

Bone marrow is extracted from the patient. A set of blood stem cells is sorted
from the marrow.

The cells are mixed with a virus contain 2/3ing a replace 2/3ment gene. The
virus helps carry the gene into the cells.

The cells containing the healthy gene are then trans 2/3planted back into the
patient.

The genetically corrected cells proliferate and displace cells with the
defective gene.
(Source: American Association for the Advancement of Science)(pg. A16)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             621 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  April 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

U.S. Offers Russia Revision of Arms Treaty
The Clinton administration has presented Russia with a draft proposal to revise
the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972. It would allow the United States to
deploy a limited missile defense system and would hold open the possibility of
building a larger system in the future. At a news conference capping three days
of talks, the Russian foreign minister said "considerable differences" remained,
and he repeated that Russia believed the ABM treaty should "remain a cornerstone
of strategic stability."   A1

British Rebuff to Zimbabwe
Foreign Secretary Robin Cook said he had told three Zimbabwean ministers that
Britain would not provide extra money for land resettlement until squatters
backed by Zimbabwe's government ended an occupation of hundreds of white-owned
farms.   A5

Iran Closes More Papers
Islamic hard-liners intensified their attack on reformers, summarily closing a
daily newspaper run by the brother of President Mohammad Khatami and one run by
a Khatami adviser who was recently the target of an assassination attempt.   A3

300 Stranded in Bahamas
More than 300 people believed to be Haitian migrants were found stranded on an
uninhabited island. Among them were 14 dead and dozens suffering from severe
dehydration and hypothermia. The United States Coast Guard sent boats and
helicopters to aid the survivors. Dozens have been taken to hospitals in the
Bahamas and Miami.   A6

Effort to Fill Ambassadorships
Two major Foreign Service organizations are asking the Senate to lift a
politically instigated hold on ambassadorial appointments to the Philippines and
Slovakia, which have been blocked for nearly nine months.   A13

Republicans Rethink Taiwan Bill
Some Senate Republicans were pushing to postpone consideration of a bill that
would upgrade military ties with Taiwan, asserting that it made no sense to pass
the bill at a time when Taiwan's government was in transition and China had
acted with relative restraint toward its neighbor.   A11

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-21

Officer Explains Reasoning For Use of Armed Agents
Federal agents who staged the Elian Gonzalez raid in Miami carried automatic
weapons into the house because intelligence reports had indicated that among
those guarding the house were people with concealed-weapons permits, a history
of violent crime or a record of anti-Castro violence, one of the officers said.
   A20

A federal appeals court put off a request by Elian's father to serve as his sole
legal representative, but granted him the right to intervene in the battle over
whether his son goes back to Cuba or stays here. But in a blow to Elian's Miami
relatives, the court denied their request for regular visits with him and
dismissed their request for the appointment of a neutral guardian. Instead, a
psychiatrist and a social worker appointed by the government will monitor the
boy and send the court reports on his condition and care.   A20

Plan to Move on Protesters
Attorney General Janet Reno is preparing a sea-and-land law enforcement
operation next week to clear encampments of demonstrators from a Navy bombing
range on the Puerto Rican island of Vieques, government officials said.   A21

McCain-Bush Session at Risk
Aides to Senator John McCain, who is revisiting Vietnam, threatened to cancel a
planned reconciliation session with Gov. George W. Bush in a dispute over the
how substantive the agenda of their talk would be.   A18

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Gene Therapy Breakthrough
Scientists said they had used gene therapy to save the lives of several infants
who might otherwise have died of a severe immune disorder.   A1

Cloned Cells Not Short-Lived
Researchers said cloned cows have youthful cells and should live at least as
long as ordinary animals, a finding that strengthens hope of finding ways to
create replacement tissues by cloning a patient's own cells.   A18

Heartburn Drug Cited in Death
A hospital study to test a heartburn remedy, Propulsid, on children was partly
the cause of the death of a 9-month-old boy, the coroner of Allegheny County,
Pa., ruled. The maker said last month that it would stop marketing the drug,
though it would be available to some patients.   A21

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-12

Mayor Has Prostate Cancer But Hopes to Stay in Race
Mayor Giuliani said he had prostate cancer in an early, treatable form. He said
he hoped to continue his Senate campaign, but would not make any decisions about
the race until he had settled on a course of treatment, which includes
radiation, hormone therapy, surgery or a combination of those options. Hillary
Rodham Clinton had a brief telephone conversation with the mayor in which she
wished him a speedy recovery.   A1

Cancer experts said none of the therapies should interrupt his campaigning more
than temporarily nor stop him from running for the Senate.   B6

Unrecorded Police Searches
Investigators for the city's Civilian Complaint Review Board determined that
police officers routinely fail to file required paperwork after frisking or
searching people on the street. The preliminary finding suggests that far more
stop-and-frisk encounters may have taken place than were recorded in recent
years.   B1

U.S. Panel's Report Assailed
Mayor Giuliani and Police Commissioner Howard Safir questioned the credibility
of the United States Commission on Civil Rights and attacked critical findings
of its draft report on the Police Department.   B4

Port Agency Budget Dispute
New Jersey representatives to the Port Authority said their New York
counterparts had reneged on an agreement to pass a budget, while New York
officials disputed that there ever was an agreement.   B1

WEEKEND   E1-32; E33-48

'Miss Saigon' to Close
The epic Vietnam War musical will end its nearly 10-year Broadway run on New
Year's Eve.   E3

SPORTS   D1-8

Toronto Takes Series Lead
The Maple Leafs beat the Devils, 2-1, in Game 1 of their playoff series.   D1

OBITUARIES   C20-21

Herbert Wechsler
The Columbia law professor who helped shape the legal system over half a century
was 90.   C21

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20, 22

Inflation Rises to 3.2%
The economy continued its robust growth in the first quarter, fueled by consumer
spending, but inflation jumped mainly because of higher prices for fuel. Wall
Street expressed concern that even as oil prices receded, labor costs would
accelerate and keep the inflation rate rising. That raised the possibility that
the Fed would increase short-term interest rates by as much as half a percentage
point next month, though most analysts expected it to stick to a quarter-point
rate increase.   A1

The Dow fell 57.40 points, or half a percent, to 10,888.10; the S.& P. 500 rose
3.93 points, to 1,464.92; but the Nasdaq climbed 143.94 points, or nearly 4
percent, to 3,774.03.   C8

Rates Rise in Europe
The European Central Bank raised interest rates for the fourth time in six
months, to 3.75 percent from 3.5 percent, but the common currency, the euro,
nonetheless plunged to 91 cents against the dollar, a low.   C1

Pressing a Microsoft Remedy
State attorneys general in the Microsoft antitrust case who support the federal
proposal to break the company into two parts pressed the handful of their
colleagues who had still not signed on to that remedy. The deadline for filing
the remedy is today.   C1

Mirabella to Close
Hachette Filipacchi Magazines said the June/July issue would be the last for the
11-year-old women's magazine.   C1

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: The remedy for Microsoft; Mayor Giuliani's prostate cancer; death of
a showman.

Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E47

TV Listings   E32

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D8

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             622 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                   APRIL 28, 2000 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 399 words

HEADLINE: A SUCCESS FOR GENE THERAPY?

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In what some experts are calling the first true gene therapy success, French
researchers said yesterday they had treated two infant boys for a rare,
inherited immune system disorder.

   The boys have human severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) X1, which leaves
them without any working immune system. Patients usually live out their short
lives in sterile "bubbles" because any infection would overwhelm them.

   Dr. Alain Fischer of the Necker Hospital in Paris and colleagues said they
had managed to restore the boys' immune systems using gene therapy.

   "Both enjoy normal growth and psychomotor development. No side effects have
been noted," they wrote in their report, published in the journal Science.

   Although they do not know how long the new genes will last and continue to
provide an immune system for the boys, the researchers said their results "pave
the way" for the same approach to be used in other genetic diseases.

   "I think this is the first evidence ever that gene therapy does anything,"
said Dr. David Nelson, an expert in inherited immune diseases at the National
Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "This is really good stuff."

   SCID X1 patients are missing a master control for the immune system, a cell
receptor that turns on the different immune system cells, including T-cells that
flag and destroy invaders and natural killer cells.

   Attempts to introduce an improved version of the gene into patients' bodies
have not worked, so Fischer's team tried a new approach, using stem cells.

   Stem cells are nursery cells, found in this case in the bone marrow. They
give rise to all the different kinds of blood cells, including the immune system
cells.

   Fischer's team took bone marrow cells from the two boys, aged 8 and 11 months
at the time, and purified out the stem cells. They nursed these cells along in a
special cocktail of compounds meant to help the stem cells thrive and multiply,
and also to make them more amenable to genetic engineering.

   Added into the mix was a virus carrying a healthy version of the gene the
boys needed. After three days, the mixture was purified and the infected cells
put back into the boys.

   Within 15 days the researchers saw results. The boys started producing immune
cells and chemicals. One boy who had suffered from diarrhea and skin lesions had
his symptoms clear up and both went home after three months.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             623 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 28, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 861 words

HEADLINE: BOOST FOR GENE THERAPY;
MUCH-CRITICIZED TREATMENT RESTORES IMMUNE SYSTEMS TO THREE FRENCH BABIES BORN;
WITH RARE, DEADLY DISEASE. BIG

BYLINE: THOMAS H. MAUGH II, LOS ANGELES TIMES

BODY:


   French researchers have successfully used gene therapy to treat three infants
with severe combined immunodeficiency disease, a devastating disorder that shuts
down children's immune systems and forces them to live in an airtight bubble to
prevent infections.

   Dr. Alain Fischer and his colleagues at Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades in
Paris removed bone marrow cells from the infants, treated the cells with a virus
that carried the gene for a missing protein and returned the cells to the
infants' bodies.

   Today, the children all have fully functioning immune systems and are living
normal lives, Fischer said at a press conference yesterday in Paris. The
research is reported in today's issue of the journal Science.

   "This is the most dramatic improvement in a patient's condition that has been
achieved using gene therapy to date, a real milestone," said Dr. Jennifer Puck
of the National Human Genome Research Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   "It's too early to say if they have been completely cured," she said, "but
for now, they seem to be doing just as well as if they had been cured."

   The achievement was good news for gene-therapy researchers, who have been
laboring under the shadow of the treatment-related death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger last November at the University of Pennsylvania. That death and
subsequent investigations revealed a number of minor improprieties in the
conduct of several gene-therapy studies. Some programs were shut down, at least
temporarily, while research protocols were revised to better protect
participants.

   But while those problems have made headlines, researchers have made several
significant improvements in gene-therapy efforts. At least two groups of
researchers have reported alleviating the symptoms of hemophilia with gene
therapy, and others have claimed success in growing new blood vessels to bypass
blocked arteries in the leg and the heart.

   "This is coming at a very good time for the field," said Dr. Katherine High
of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, who has conducted hemophilia studies
. "Most people believe that the underlying principles [of gene therapy] are
sound and that it is a question of working out the details."

   The three male infants treated by Fischer's group were born with a rare
disease called severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) X1.

   It is caused by a defective gene on the X chromosome that leaves its victims
incapable of producing an important protein called the gamma-c cytokine receptor
subunit.

   Without that protein, white blood cells cannot be converted into the T, B and
natural killer cells necessary for fighting off infections.

   Researchers estimate that the disorder occurs in one in every 50,000 to one
in every 100,000 births. The figure could actually be substantially higher, Puck
said, because many victims die of infections before the disorder can be
diagnosed.

   Victims generally live in a sterile plastic bubble for the first year of life
or longer and then receive a bone-marrow transplant to provide functioning
immune cells. If the infant has a closely matched sibling, which happens in
about one-fifth of cases, the transplants are effective about 90 percent of the
time.

   But if a parent or non-relative is used as the donor, transplants work only
60 percent to 70 percent of the time.

   "Gene therapy would allow the infants to serve as their own donor," leading
to a high success rate, said Dr. Donald Kohn of Childrens Hospital Los Angeles.

   Fischer's group initially treated an 8-month-old boy and an 11-month-old boy.

   The researchers removed bone marrow from the boys and isolated stem cells.
They grew the cells in a laboratory dish containing fibronectin, a protein
thought to make cells more receptive to gene therapy.

   They then treated the cells with a virus containing the healthy version of
the gene that is defective in SCID X1 and infused the cells back into the boys'
bloodstreams. Those cells then proliferated.

   Within 15 days, the boys' bodies began producing T, B and natural killer
cells. Diarrhea and skin lesions that had afflicted one boy disappeared.

   Within three months, the babies were able to go home, freed from their
bubbles.

   They have remained healthy for 11 months and have successfully been
vaccinated against tetanus, diphtheria and polio -- vaccinations that would not
have worked before their treatment.

   A third boy was later treated and has been healthy for four months.

   "The clinical benefits we observe have never been achieved before," Fischer
said at the Paris news conference.

   But Puck cautioned that it will take years to determine the long-term success
of the therapy.

   A child's immune system does not fully develop until sometime between ages 3
and 5, so Fischer's success cannot be fully evaluated until the children are at
least that old, she said.

   "This is a major step toward being able to do the same thing for kids with
sickle cell disease, thalassemia and other problems," Kohn said.

   "SCID is the easiest to treat because a few cells can grow out to produce a
whole immune system," but this shows that gene therapy can work, he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2000


                             624 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       April 28, 2000 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 649 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY BREAKTHROUGH:;
TREATMENT SAVES THREE BABIES

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA; NEW YORK TIMES

BODY:

   For the first time, scientists have successfully used gene therapy, the
replacement of defective genes with working copies, to save the lives of several
infants who might otherwise have died of a severe immune disorder.

   Researchers said the achievement, announced yesterday, was the first
unequivocal success for gene therapy, a field whose widely heralded promise has
until now ended in disappointing results.

   The work involved three babies who could not grow complete immune systems.
The only other treatment for the condition, a form of severe combined immune
deficiency, is a bone marrow transplant, which works just 60 percent of the
time. Otherwise, patients must live in germ-free bubbles or fall prey to the
ever-present microorganisms that most people easily fend off.

   In a report of the work, in today's issue of the journal Science, Dr. Alain
Fischer, a professor of pediatric immunology at the Hospital Necker-Enfants
Malades in Paris, and his colleagues describe the course of two of the babies,
ages 11 months and 8 months at the time of treatment.

   Three months after their gene therapy, the researchers recounted, the babies
were home from the hospital, living like any other children. Ten months later,
their immune systems were normal. Ordinarily, infants born with SCID (pronounced
like skid), die before their first birthdays unless they remain in a germ-free
environments.

   In a footnote, the researchers said they had successfully treated a third
baby, who was 1 month old at the time. In a telephone interview, Fischer said he
had since treated two more babies and was waiting to learn whether the effort
succeeded with them as well.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Fischer said. "It is a
success today. Then the next question is, How long will it be a success?' It may
be that after some time there will be a decline in these cells and that sooner
or later we will have to treat them again. We hope that if this happens it will
not be for a very long time."

   Gene therapy experts were exuberant. "It's a very exciting study," said Dr.
R. Michael Blaese, who was a member of a medical team at the National Institutes
of Health that attempted the first gene therapy on a human patient nearly 10
years ago.

   Blaese, now the head of the human therapeutics division at ValiGen in
Newtown, Pa., added: "This would probably be the first example in any disease
where gene therapy could be a fully successful treatment. You can't distinguish
these patients from normal."

   The success comes after a tumultuous decade in which, according to the
National Institutes of Health, more than 390 gene therapy studies were
initiated, involving more than 4,000 patients and more than a dozen medical
conditions. While those doing the research always expressed confidence in its
promise, critics said many of the companies formed to capitalize on the
technology exaggerated preliminary data in hopes of raising capital.

   And, at times, some scientists promised more than the technology was ready to
deliver, leaving the field a target for accusations that patients were being
endangered by reckless experiments that were doomed to failure.

   The babies treated by Fischer had a rare disorder known as severe combined
immunodeficiency-X1, or SCID-X1, which almost exclusively affects boys,
occurring once in every 75,000 live male births. It is caused by mutations that
destroy the function of a gene that is needed to make T cells, a class of white
blood cells.

   In a sense, the condition is a perfect target for gene therapy. With SCIS-X1,
the cells that need a new gene are readily accessible in the bone marrow, which
is relatively easy to remove from the body.

   Even better, if functioning genes actually get into the marrow cells of
patients with SCID-X1, those genetically corrected cells will proliferate and
displace cells with the defective gene.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2000


                             625 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 28, 2000, Friday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 1080 words

HEADLINE: First successful gene therapy saves immune deficient infants

BYLINE: Gina Kolata; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE | Reuters contributed to this
report.

BODY:
 For the first time, scientists have successfully used gene therapy, the
replacement of defective genes with working copies, to save the lives of several
infants who might otherwise have died of a severe immune disorder.

   Researchers said the achievement, announced yesterday, was the first
unequivocal success for gene therapy, a field whose widely heralded promise has
until now ended in disappointing results.

   The work involved three babies who could not grow complete immune systems.
The only other treatment for the condition, a form of severe combined immune
deficiency, is a bone marrow transplant, which works just 60 percent of the
time.  Otherwise, patients must live in germ-free bubbles or fall prey to the
ever-present microorganisms that most people easily fend off.

   In a report of the work, in today's issue of the journal Science, Dr. Alain
Fischer, a professor of pediatric immunology at the Hospital Necker-Enfants
Malades in Paris, and his colleagues describe the course of two of the babies,
ages 11 months and 8 months at the time of treatment.

   Three months after their gene therapy, the researchers recounted, the babies
were home from the hospital, living like any other children.  Ten months later,
their immune systems were normal.  Ordinarily, infants born with SCID
(pronounced like skid) die before their first birthdays unless they remain in
germ-free environments.

   In a footnote, the researchers said they had successfully treated a third
baby, who was 1-month-old at the time.  In a telephone interview, Fischer said
he had since treated two more babies and was waiting to learn whether the effort
succeeded.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Fischer said.  "It is a
success today.  Then the next question is, 'How long will it be a success?' It
may be that after some time there will be a decline in these cells and that
sooner or later we will have to treat them again.  We hope that if this happens
it will not be for a very long time."

   Gene therapy experts were exuberant.

   "It's a very exciting study," said Dr. R. Michael Blaese, who was a member of
a medical team at the National Institutes of Health that attempted the first
gene therapy on a human patient nearly 10 years ago.

   Blaese, now the head of the human therapeutics division at ValiGen in
Newtown, Pa., added: "This would probably be the first example in any disease
where gene therapy could be a fully successful treatment.  You can't distinguish
these patients from normal."

   The success comes after a tumultuous decade in which, according to the
National Institutes of Health, more than 390 gene therapy studies were
initiated, involving more than 4,000 patients and more than a dozen medical
conditions.  While those doing the research always expressed confidence in its
promise, critics said many of the companies formed to capitalize on the
technology exaggerated preliminary data in hopes of raising capital.

   And, at times, some scientists promised more than the technology was ready to
deliver, leaving the field a target for accusations that patients were being
endangered by reckless experiments that were doomed to failure.

   "We've all been so burned by saying, 'Ah, this looks like it worked, that
looks like it worked,' " said Dr. W. French Anderson of the Keck School of
Medicine at the University of Southern California, a member of the team that
attempted the first gene therapy in 1990.  "Now when it finally looks like
something is working, I don't want to be in the position of saying the same
words.  We've all been criticized for hyping too much."

   The babies treated by Fischer had a rare disorder known as severe combined
immunodeficiency-X1, or SCID-X1, which almost exclusively affects boys,
occurring once in every 75,000 live male births.  It is caused by mutations that
destroy the function of a gene that is needed to make T cells, a class of white
blood cells.

   In a sense, the condition is a perfect target for gene therapy.  With
SCID-X1, the cells that need a new gene are readily accessible in the bone
marrow, which is relatively easy to remove from the body.

   Even better, if functioning genes actually get into the marrow cells of
patients with SCID-X1, those genetically corrected cells will proliferate and
displace cells with the defective gene.  That is because, as the body tries to
grow a complete immune system, it sends waves of chemical signals to the bone
marrow to stimulate it into providing T cells.  T cells with the defective gene
start to grow and then die.  Any cells with a functioning gene will be fueled by
the body's hormones and will grow rapidly to populate the bone marrow.

   Fischer said he began working on gene therapy for SCID-X1 in 1993, as soon as
the missing gene was identified.  He studied the treatment in mice and in the
laboratory, attempting to insert the gene into patients' cells for six years
before trying to treat patients.  Last year, he said, he decided "there was a
serious chance that the treatment could work in this particular disease," and
the success with the first babies was the result.

   Scientists, of course, were well aware that SCID-X1 and other rare genetic
diseases of immune system cells would be perfect for gene therapy.  In fact, the
very first human gene therapy patient had a similar disease.

   The experiment took place at the National Institutes of Health on Sept. 14,
1990, and involved a 4-year-old girl, Ashanti de Silva, whose gene defect
prevented her blood cells from making an enzyme that clears metabolic toxins
from the body.  Those toxins, left unchecked, kill T cells.

   Researchers removed some white blood cells from Ashanti, added the needed
gene to those cells, and infused about a billion of the cells back to her.  They
repeated the treatment 10 more times over the next few years.  Ashanti's
disorder had another treatment -- she could have received injections of the
enzyme she was missing, which would have enabled her to make T cells.

   But the scientists hoped that gene therapy would enable her to survive
without the enzyme treatment.  It did not.  "We never felt we could stop her
enzymes completely," Blaese said.  She is still alive and still taking enzymes.

   Anderson, of USC, said he intends to try the new approach on Ashanti.

   "We plan to go in and give her gene-corrected stem cells this summer.  Once
you have got stem cells in a patient, if it's a high enough level, then the
patient should be corrected for life."


GRAPHIC: 1 DIAGRAM; SOURCE: American Association for the Advancement of Science
| NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE; Breakthrough -- French researchers developed a
methond to treat a genetic disorder that forces patients to live within a
sterile bubble to protect their nonfunctioning immune systems.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2000


                             626 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                 April 28, 2000, Friday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. A12

LENGTH: 385 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY HELPS 2 "BUBBLE BOY" BABIES, DOCTOR REPORTS

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Gene therapy has restored apparently normal immune systems to two French
babies born with a rare, lethal immune disease sometimes called the "bubble boy"
disease.

   It is too soon to know whether the babies are cured, experts cautioned. But
the experiment, reported in today's issue of the journal Science, provides
evidence that gene therapy can succeed at a time when skeptics are harshly
criticizing the practice.

   "The clinical benefits we observe had never been achieved before," Dr. Alain
Fischer of Paris, who performed the gene therapy, said Thursday.

   He made his remarks in describing his sickly patients' rebound into healthy
toddlers.

   The babies have SCID, or severe combined immunodeficiency disease. Their
bodies cannot make lymphocytes, the immune cells crucial for warding off
infection, meaning that they can die from the most minor of germs.

   The best-known victim of SCID was David, the famous bubble boy who lived in a
germ-proof plastic enclosure in Houston until his death at age 12.

   Today, bone marrow transplants keep many SCID babies from having to live in
sterile bubbles. Transplants provide them with healthy stem cells, special cells
that reside in the bone marrow and produce lymphocytes. Transplants have cured
some babies and extended the lives of others. But they are not always
successful, so scientists hope that gene therapy can offer an alternative.

   Transplants were never tried for the French babies, who lived the first
months of their lives inside sterile bubbles.

   Fischer took bone marrow from the babies when they were ages 8 months and 11
months, respectively. He culled some of their stem cells and bathed them in
fibronectin, a protein believed to make them more receptive to gene therapy.

   Then he took a normal version of the immune system gene that was missing and
added it to a harmless virus. In a lab dish, he infected the babies' stem cells
with the gene-carrying virus for three days. Then he transplanted the stem cells
back into their bodies.

   Soon, the babies started making germ-killing immune cells. Three months
later, they went home from the hospital without antibiotics or any additional
treatment - and 11 months later, both have levels of immune system cells
comparable with healthy children their age, Fischer said.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             627 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             April 28, 2000 Friday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy aids 'bubble boy' babies

BYLINE: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   In an exciting and long-awaited success, gene therapy has restored apparently
normal immune systems to two French babies born with a rare, lethal immune
disease sometimes called the "bubble boy disease."

    It's too soon to know if the babies are cured, experts cautioned. But the
experiment, reported in today's edition of the journal Science, finally provides
evidence that gene therapy can succeed - at a time when skeptics are harshly
criticizing the field.

    "The clinical benefits we observe had never been achieved before," said
Alain Fischer, the Paris physician who performed the gene therapy. At a news
conference yesterday, Fischer described how his sickly patients rebounded into
healthy toddlers.

    "It looks like this really worked," agreed Jennifer Puck, a geneticist at
the U.S. National Institutes of Health who plans to start a similar gene therapy
study this fall with doctors at North Carolina's Duke University.

    The babies have SCID, or "severe combined immunodeficiency disease." Their
bodies cannot make lymphocytes, the immune cells crucial for warding off
infection - meaning they can die from the most minor of germs.

    The best-known victim of SCID was David, Houston's famous "bubble boy" who
lived in a germ-proof plastic enclosure until he died at age 12.

    Today, bone marrow transplants keep many SCID babies from having to live in
sterile bubbles. Transplants provide them with healthy stem cells, special cells
that reside in the bone marrow and produce lymphocytes. Transplants have cured
some babies and extended the lives of others. But they're not always successful,
so scientists hope gene therapy could offer an alternative.

    The French babies never tried a transplant, and lived the first months of
their lives inside sterile bubbles. They have the most common form of SCID,
caused by a defective gene that blocks a cell receptor needed to trigger
lymphocyte formation. Lift that roadblock, and the body should generate normal,
working immune cells.

    Fischer took bone marrow from the babies when they were 8 months and 11
months, respectively. He culled some of their stem cells, and bathed them in
fibronectin, a protein believed to make them more receptive to gene therapy.

    Then he took a normal version of the immune system gene the babies were
missing, and added it to a harmless virus. In a lab dish, he infected the
babies' stem cells with the gene-carrying virus for three days. Then he
transplanted the stem cells back into their bodies.

    Soon, the babies started making germ-killing immune cells. Three months
later, they went home from the hospital without antibiotics or any additional
treatment - and 11 months later, both have levels of immune system cells
comparable with healthy children their age, Fischer said.

    Neither suffered any side effects from the gene therapy. Their immune
systems reacted properly when they were vaccinated against polio and other
diseases. A third patient who had the treatment four months ago is also doing
well, he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             628 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 28, 2000 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 851 words

HEADLINE: FOR THE FIRST TIME, RESEARCHERS MAKE GENE THERAPY WORK

BYLINE: By Gina Kolata 2000, The New York Times

BODY:

   For the first time, scientists have used gene therapy, the replacement of
defective genes with working copies, to save several infants who might otherwise
have died of a severe immune disorder.

   Researchers said the achievement, announced Thursday, was the first
unequivocal success for gene therapy, a field whose widely heralded promise has
until now ended in disappointing results.

   The work involved three babies who could not develop complete immune systems.
The only other treatment for the condition, a form of severe combined immune
deficiency, is a bone marrow transplant, which works just 60 percent of the
time. Otherwise, patients must live in germ-free bubbles or fall prey to the
ever-present microorganisms that most people easily fend off.

   In a report of the work, in Friday's issue of the journal Science, Dr. Alain
Fischer, a professor of pediatric immunology at the Hospital Necker-Enfants
Malades in Paris and his colleagues describe the course of two of the babies,
ages 11 months and 8 months at the time of treatment.

   *** Living normally ***

   Three months after their gene therapy, the researchers recounted, the babies
were home from the hospital, living like any other children. Ten months later,
their immune systems were normal. Ordinarily, infants born with SCID die before
their first birthdays unless they remain in a germ-free environment.

   In a footnote, the researchers said they had successfully treated a third
baby, who was 1 month- old at the time. In a telephone interview, Fischer said
he had since treated two more babies and was waiting to learn whether the effort
succeeded with them as well.

   "We are very happy and the families are very happy," Fischer said. "It is a
success today. Then the next question is, 'How long will it be a success?' It
may be that after some time there will be a decline in these cells and that
sooner or later we will have to treat them again. We hope that if this happens
it will not be for a very long time."

   *** Experts delighted ***

   Gene therapy experts were exuberant. "It's a very exciting study," said Dr.
Michael Blaese, who was a member of a medical team at the National Institutes of
Health that attempted the first gene therapy on a human patient nearly 10 years
ago.

   Blaese, now the head of the human therapeutics division at ValiGen in
Newtown, Pa., said: "This would probably be the first example in any disease
where gene therapy could be a fully successful treatment. You can't distinguish
these patients from normal."

   The success comes after a tumultuous decade in which, according to the
National Institutes of Health, more than 390 gene therapy studies were
initiated, involving more than 4,000 patients and more than a dozen medical
conditions. While those doing the research always expressed confidence in its
promise, critics said many of the companies formed to capitalize on the
technology exaggerated preliminary data in hopes of raising capital.

   And, at times, some scientists promised more than the technology was ready to
deliver, leaving the field a target for accusations that patients were being
endangered by reckless experiments.

   "We've all been so burned by saying, 'Ah, this looks like it worked, that
looks like it worked,' " said Dr. French Anderson of the Keck School of Medicine
at the University of Southern California, and a member of the team that
attempted the first gene therapy in 1990. "Now when it finally looks like
something is working, I don't want to be in the position of saying the same
words. We've all been criticized for hyping too much."

   *** Mutated genes ***

   The babies treated by Fischer had a rare disorder known as severe combined
immunodeficiency-X1, or SCID-X1, which almost exclusively affects boys,
occurring once in every 75,000 live male births. It is caused by mutations that
destroy the function of a gene needed to make T cells, a class of white blood
cells.

   In a sense, the condition is a perfect target for gene therapy. With SCID-X1,
the cells that need a new gene are readily accessible in the bone marrow, which
is relatively easy to remove from the body.

   Even better, if functioning genes actually get into the marrow cells of
patients with SCID-X1, those genetically corrected cells will proliferate and
displace cells with the defective gene. That is because, as the body tries to
grow a complete immune system, it sends waves of chemical signals to the bone
marrow to stimulate it into providing T cells. T cells with the defective gene
start to grow and then die. Any cells with a functioning gene will be fueled by
the body's hormones and will grow rapidly to populate the bone marrow.

   Fischer said he began working on gene therapy for SCID-X1 in 1993, as soon as
the missing gene was identified. He studied the treatment in mice and in the
laboratory, attempting to insert the gene into patients' cells for six years
before trying to treat patients. Last year, he said, he decided "there was a
serious chance that the treatment could work in this particular disease," and
the success with the first babies was the result.

GRAPHIC: ACTIVATING THE IMMUNE SYSTEM Babies with a rare disease called SCID are
at severe risk of dying from minor germs. Their immune system fails because
their bone marrow does not produce T cells and other lymphocytes, both crucial
to ward off infections. Now French scientists have used gene therapy to restore
normal immune systems. Here is an illustration of the process.  FAILED IMMUNE
SYSTEM A defective gene blocks stem cell receptors needed to trigger T cells and
other lymphocyhtes.  GENE THERAPY In a lab dish, blocked stem cells are infected
with a virus containing the normal gene.  When the stem cells absorb the normal
gene, their cell receptors become unblocked.  After three days of repeated
interaction, the cells are placed back into the patient.  WORKING IMMUNE SYSTEM
The corrected stem cells produce signals to create T cells and lymphocytes,
activating the immune system.  Source:Science AP

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2000


                             629 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     April 28, 2000, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 4A

LENGTH: 324 words

HEADLINE: Genetic disease responds to gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Two infants born with so-called bubble boy disease, in which the
immune system doesn't function, appear to be the first humans
successfully treated with gene therapy, French researchers report
in today's Science.

   The scientists who treated the infants are avoiding the word "cure,"
but after 10 months of follow-up, Marina Cavazzana-Calvo and colleagues
at the Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades in Paris say the babies
continue to have a "full correction" of their non-working immune
systems.

   The results of the procedure are the most profound reported so
far for the fledging field of gene therapy, which began a decade
ago with an unsuccessful attempt by U.S. National Institutes of
Health (NIH) scientists to treat a similar immune system disease
in two young girls.


   "This is the first clear example of gene therapy successfully
treating a genetic disease. It is very exciting," says Inder
Verma, professor of genetics at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
Calif.

   The infants were born with a rare inherited disease called severe
combined immunodeficiency, which affects 1 in 100,000 to 1 in
a million children. It arises when a key immune system gene is
missing from an infant's genetic makeup. Victims are unable to
mount any disease-fighting response to infection, and many must
be sheltered in sterile plastic tents to protect them against
germs.

   Members of the French medical team removed bone marrow from the
infants and inserted a normal copy of the missing gene into the
infants' bone marrow cells. The gene-treated marrow cells were
returned to their bodies, the new genes began working and the
infants developed normal immune systems.

   Today the children are living at home and are no longer in protective
isolation, says Alain Fischer, who headed the French team.

   Gene therapy pioneer French Anderson, who led the original NIH
study, called the results "very encouraging."

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             630 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     April 28, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1044 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Therapy Apparently Cures 2; French Team's Feat Would Be a
First

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   Two infants born with a life-threatening immune system disorder that had
forced them to live inside protective sterile "bubbles" are healthy and living
normal lives almost a year after being treated with an experimental genetic
therapy, doctors reported yesterday.

   If the children retain their good health, they will go down in medical
history as the first to be definitively cured by gene therapy, a controversial
approach that seeks to treat diseases by giving people new genes.

   "They have complete restoration of immune system function," said Marina
Cavazzana-Calvo of Necker Hospital in Paris, who led the research with co-worker
Alain Fischer. "The word 'cure' is hard to use because we don't know how long
these results will last. But the follow-up of one year is very encouraging."

   Cavazzana-Calvo said the team has recently treated three additional infants,
including one from the United States, and at least two of them appear to be
completely healthy. The children's identities are not being released, to protect
their privacy.

   Experts in this country said they could hardly contain their excitement.
"This is something you dream about," said William Shearer, chief of immunology
at Texas Children's Hospital in Houston. Shearer, also of the Baylor College of
Medicine in Houston, was one of the doctors who in the 1970s and 1980s cared for
David the "Bubble Boy," who suffered from the same disease as the French
children and died in 1984 at the age of 12.

   The French results, Shearer said, "are fabulous."

   In the 10 years since a 4-year-old Ohio girl with a related immune system
disorder became the first person to be treated with gene therapy, doctors have
tried to deliver curative genes to thousands of patients with many different
diseases, all to no avail. In 1995, a federally appointed panel criticized
scientists for experimenting on too many people before enough basic research had
been done.

   In September, the field came under renewed public scrutiny and criticism when
a teenager died in a University of Pennsylvania experiment that federal
regulators concluded was badly managed. Congressional inquiries later revealed
hundreds of lapses in similar studies being conducted around the country.

   The new work, described in today's issue of the journal Science, could give
the beleaguered field a boost by proving for the first time that gene therapy
can correct inborn genetic errors.

   "It looks like gene therapy is beginning to turn the corner," said W. French
Anderson, who led the first gene therapy experiment in the United States while
he was at the National Institutes of Health in 1990.

   "We're not talking about treatments for lots of diseases in the next few
years," said Anderson, now at the University of Southern California. "But this
is certainly good news for patients, because until now we had essentially zero
success."

   All the children treated by the French team were born with a rare and
catastrophic disease called SCID-X1, in which a single defective gene disables T
cells, which are crucial to the body's ability to fight infections. The disease
can be cured with a bone marrow transplant from a healthy donor, but only in a
minority of cases are donors available with a full genetic match for the
patient.

   Taking a different approach, the French team removed bone marrow from its
young patients, who ranged from 1 month to 11 months old. Bone marrow contains
blood "stem cells," which produce a constant supply of immune system cells that
migrate into the bloodstream and circulate for months or years before dying and
being replaced.

   The researchers removed millions of stem cells from each infant's marrow,
used genetically altered viruses to deliver to those cells healthy copies of the
gene the children lacked, and then reinfused the newly endowed stem cells into
the children.

   The hope was that those repaired cells would settle into the bone marrow and
produce genetically corrected immune system cells for the rest of the children's
lives.

   Within 15 days, tests indicated that some of the children's circulating blood
cells did indeed contain the gene that had previously been missing. Over a
period of months, the number of circulating immune system cells increased, and
tests indicated that for the first time, large numbers of them were functioning
normally.

   Most encouraging, the children became healthy. Chronic diarrhea and
long-lasting skin sores disappeared. When the children were inoculated with
tetanus, diphtheria and polio vaccines, their immune systems responded normally
and produced antibodies against those childhood infections, which otherwise
could easily kill them. Four of the five treated children have left their
protective isolation tents and are living in their homes, where they are
developing normally.

   Key to the therapy's apparent success, scientists said, were recent
improvements in gene-transfer techniques that ensure that a greater number of
stem cells get copies of the healthy gene. Moreover, the repaired stem cells
seem to have a "selective advantage," or better survival, compared with
unrepaired cells, and so are gradually coming to dominate in the children's
marrow.

   Nonetheless, researchers cautioned, animal studies have shown that new genes
added to cells via viruses can gradually become inactive over a period of years.
If that happens, the children would have to be isolated in bubbles again, and
perhaps be treated again.

   Cavazzana-Calvo said the same technique, using viruses loaded with different
corrective genes, may prove curative for other diseases. But it would be
appropriate only for diseases in which overproduction of the missing gene would
not be harmful, because there is no way to regulate the activity of a newly
inserted gene once it is in the body.

   Anderson said he hoped to try the new technique this summer in Ashanthi
DeSilva, the Ohio girl he first treated as a 4-year-old in 1990, and who has a
form of SCID called SCID-ADA. About 25 percent of DeSilva's immune system cells
were repaired as a result of that initial treatment--until now, the most
successful use of gene therapy--but she still relies on regular doses of a
powerful and expensive drug that enhances the immune system.


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2000


                             631 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    April 27, 2000, Thursday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C1

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: RULING IN PATENT FIGHT TRIPS UP TKT SHARES PROCEDURAL DECISION SEEN
AIDING AMGEN

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., which is challenging Amgen Inc. in a major
patent dispute, saw its shares plunge nearly 13 percent after a procedural
ruling yesterday by US District Court Judge William Young in Boston

   Amgen's shares, however, rose $2.9375 to $57.25. TKT closed at $28 a share,
down $4.125 yesterday.   The heavy stock trading in both companies came after a
two-hour hearing yesterday when the judge ruled that Cambridge-based TKT
violated a claim on one Amgen patent for the production of Epogen, an anemia
drug that is the world's biggest-selling biotechnology therapeutic product. The
ruling was sought by Amgen in preparation for a May 15 nonjury patent trial
before Young. The trial is expected to last through late June.

   For Amgen, which is headquartered in Thousand Oaks, Calif., and is the
nation's largest biotech company, the stakes are significant.

   Last year its Epogen sales were $1.8 billion of its $3.3 billion in revenues.
Epogen is used by kidney dialysis patients to stimulate the production of red
blood cells.

   "We are pleased with the court's ruling," said Amgen chief executive Gordon
Binder.

   TKT has questioned the validity and enforceability of Amgen's Epogen patents
as it prepares, with its pharmaceutical partner Aventis Pharma (the
pharmaceutical company of Aventis SA), to market a version of Epogen using a
different technology and manufacturing process. Amgen insists the TKT/Aventis
plans to sell the equivalent of Epogen in the United States violates 18 claims
on five Amgen patents.

   "To draw any conclusions from Judge Young's decision is premature," said
Daniel E. Geffken, TKT vice president and chief financial officer.

   Yesterday's procedural ruling is expected to narrow the scope of the trial on
whether Amgen's patents are valid, said several Wall Street analysts who
traveled to Boston for Young's ruling. Some said his decision was a modest win
for Amgen while others believed it would benefit the biotech giant at the
upcoming patent trial.

   "This has to be a disappointment for TKT because Young's decision does weigh
heavily in Amgen's favor," said Elise T. Wang, biotechnology analyst at Paine
Webber. "He has narrowed the scope on the issues for the trial and that will
require TKT to prove that Amgen's patents are invalid and cannot be enforced."

   Her views are similar to other Wall Street analysts who follow both
companies. However, a few analysts maintain that TKT will ultimately prevail
because its technology and manufacturing process for making the equivalent of
Epogen is significantly different from Amgen's patents and procedures.

   "If I was Amgen I would be disappointed going into the trial," said Jonas V.
Alsenas, biotechnology analyst at ING.Barings Ltd. "For all their huffing and
puffing the judge only ruled that there is some product overlap, probably the
most vulnerable part of the patent. But he did not rule on whether TKT's way of
making their product violated Amgen's patents. He left that for the trial. The
key issue is how broadly Judge Young will interpret the Amgen patents."

   TKT maintains it has developed another way of making a version of Epogen. The
method is called gene-activation technology, which uses all human cells that
have a complete set of genes. That approach, say TKT officials, is different
from Amgen, which uses a gene-splicing technology. Amgen inserts the gene for
making Epogen into Chinese hamster ovary cells, which then make the protein.

   And while TKT insists the two processes are different, Amgen maintains that
its patents cover all versions of the drug made in cells of vertebrates,
including humans. TKT and Aventis say that definition is too broad and should
not include human cells.

   TKT is not the first company to challenge Amgen. Genetics Institute of
Cambridge battled Amgen in the federal courts in the mid-1990s when both were
developing the same drug that Amgen calls Epogen. Amgen won that patent battle.
Genetics Institute was later acquired by American Home Products Corp.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000


                             632 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 April 27, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

HEADLINE: Amgen Wins Initial Battle In Legal War Over Patent

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

BODY:

   Amgen won an early round yesterday in a high-stakes lawsuit in which it is
trying to protect its leading drug from competition.

   In a pretrial hearing, a federal judge in Boston ruled that Transkaryotic
Therapies and Aventis had infringed on one Amgen patent covering erythropoietin,
or EPO, an anemia drug used for patients undergoing kidney dialysis or
chemotherapy for cancer.

    Analysts differed on how significant a victory this was for Amgen because
the trial will proceed, with Aventis and Transkaryotic, known as TKT, having a
chance to prove that Amgen's patents are invalid. Still, shares of Amgen jumped
$2.9375, to $57.25, a gain of 5.4 percent, on more than twice the normal trading
volume. TKT plunged $4.125, or 17 percent, to $28.

   "This is a first but important step in the final determination of Amgen's
claims," Gordon M. Binder, Amgen's chairman and chief executive, said in a
statement. But TKT said in a statement that it was too early to predict the
outcome of the case and that it remained confident in its legal position.

   TKT, a biotechnology company based in Cambridge, Mass., has developed a way
of producing EPO that it contends does not infringe the patents held by Amgen.
If it wins the case, it and Aventis, the big European company that is its
partner, would be able to compete for part of the estimated $4 billion in annual
EPO sales, most of which is now split between Amgen and its licensee, Johnson &
Johnson. TKT might also be able to use its technique to make its own versions of
other lucrative drugs now produced by Amgen and other biotechnology companies.

   Amgen, the nation's largest biotechnology company, uses conventional
gene-splicing, in which it clones the human gene governing EPO production and
puts it in hamster cells, which are then grown in culture to produce the drug.
TKT's technique is to turn on the EPO gene that is present in all human cells
but is usually dormant. It then grows human cells in a culture to produce the
drug.

   Federal District Judge William G. Young of Boston said yesterday that TKT and
Aventis had infringed a patent claim covering pharmaceutical composition
containing human EPO grown in mammalian cells in culture. But he denied motions
for similar rulings on two other patent claims, deferring them until the trial.

   To some extent, the ruling is not surprising. One of TKT's major contentions
is that Amgen's patent claims are overly broad and should not extend to human
cells. Judge Young's ruling yesterday was more on the literal meaning of the
patent claims. He can address whether the claims are overly broad in the trial
itself, which is scheduled to start on May 15.

   "This was Amgen's best shot," said Jonas V. Alsenas, an analyst with ING
Barings, who believes TKT will win.

   But Elise Wang, an analyst at PaineWebber, said the ruling provided "a
significant advantage for Amgen now going into the trial." Instead of having to
prove TKT infringed, she said, Amgen will now only have to defend the validity
of its patents. The burden of proof, she said, has now shifted solely to TKT and
Aventis.


   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000


                             633 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 April 27, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 582 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS DIGEST

BODY:


   Amgen Wins Early Ruling In a Drug Patent Dispute
A federal judge in Boston ruled that two companies, Transkaryotic Therapies and
Aventis, had infringed on an Amgen patent covering its leading drug, an anemia
treatment for patients undergoing kidney dialysis or chemotherapy for cancer.

   The ruling, at a pretrial hearing, was an early victory for Amgen, but
analysts differed on how significant it was because the trial will proceed, with
Aventis and Transkaryotic having a chance to prove that Amgen's patents are
invalid. Shares of Amgen jumped $2.9375, to $57.25. Transkaryotic fell $4.125,
or 17 percent, to $28.  Page C6.


   New Chief Seeks to Revamp Aetna
William H. Donaldson, the new chief executive of Aetna, is driving hard to
transform the insurer into a consumer-friendly company that makes more profits
and fewer enemies. But he is under pressure from shareholders who want quicker
action to bolster the stock.  C6.

Most States Back Microsoft Split
A majority of the 19 states that have sued Microsoft in the antitrust case plan
to back the government's proposal to break the software giant into two
companies. But several states plan to file minority opinions -- something the
trial judge, Thomas Penfield Jackson, has said he does not want. Some of the
states may still be persuaded to join the majority.  A1.

Stocks Fall Ahead of New Data
Stocks retreated as investors awaited important economic data. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 179.32 points, or 1.6 percent, to 10,945.50. The Nasdaq
composite index dropped 81.14 points, or 2.2 percent, to 3,630.09. The Standard
& Poor's 500-stock index fell 16.45 points, or 1.1 percent, to 1,460.99.  C12.

Snag Appears in Nuclear Waste Plan
The Energy Department's plan to hire a British company to solidify liquid
radioactive waste that has been leaking from storage tanks in Washington State
stumbled when the energy secretary said an increase in the company's price
estimate was unacceptable.  C4.

Orders for Durable Goods Up 2.6%
Orders for big-ticket durable goods bounced back in March, rising 2.6 percent,
after two consecutive months of declines, the government said. The number was
helped by a substantial rebound in transportation orders after Boeing reached a
contract agreement with 17,000 striking engineers.  C27.

Building Business Slowly in Guyana
Working to discard decades of isolation after independence from Britain in 1966,
Guyana's economy has slowly become more capitalistic, and people like Gerald
Gouveia, the owner of Roraima Airways, are leading the way. Mr. Gouveia is one
of the more outspoken executives in Guyana, the only English-speaking nation in
South America.  C4.

Amazon Loss Widens as Sales Grow
Amazon.com said that it lost $308 million in the first quarter, five times its
loss a year earlier, but that its sales rose 95 percent, beating forecasts.
Excluding the cost of stock options, merger costs and some other items, Amazon
lost $122 million, or 35 cents a share, which was a penny less than expected.
C2.

Viacom Posts 69% Rise in Earnings
Viacom, owner of the MTV cable channel and the Blockbuster video chain, said
that its first-quarter profit increased 69 percent and that the Justice
Department had given approval to the proposed acquisition of CBS.  C11.

Three Seats Sold on the Big Board
Three New York Stock Exchange seats were sold, one for $1.65 million and the
other two for $1.7 million each.  C14.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

Chart: "YESTERDAY"
Dow industrials -- 10,945.50 down 179.32
Nasdaq composite -- 3,630.09 down 81.14
30-yr. Treasury yield -- 5.94% up 0.01
The euro -- $0.9233 up 0.0025
The dollar -- 106.27yen up 0.46

Graph: "TODAY" shows Gross Domestic Product
First-quarter figures due at 8:30 a.m. Eastern time.
Expected: +6.0%

Graph tracks Amgen share price since Wed.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000


                             634 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     April 25, 2000, Tuesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 507 words

HEADLINE: Business Press;
 Views differ on market sag restraining 'wealth effect'

BYLINE: Tom Walker, Staff

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
One of the big unknowns getting a lot of attention these days is what

   consequences the stock market's decline will have for consumer spending, via
the so-called wealth effect.

   Economist Jerry A. Hausman of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology tells
Forbes (May 1) the collapse of stocks trading at price/earnings ratios of 100 to
1,000 would be "bad news for Porsche dealers ... but it wouldn't be big enough
to bring the economy into a recession."

   The key, he contends, is what policy-makers do as a result of a market
decline. Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan could fix a burst stock market
bubble, as he did when the market crashed in 1987 --- or he could " break it
some more, as his predecessors did in 1929."

   The Economist (April 28) is not so bullish. The British publication notes
that market optimists believe the U.S. economy is "fundamentally so sound" a
market collapse would not cause a recession.

   But the magazine says America's overhang of private debt --- especially
margin debt used to buy stock --- and the large U.S. debt to foreigners would
make the consequences of a stock market crash "more severe than most people
expect."

   "If current levels of borrowing and spending are based on the rosy
assumptions of continuing high stock market returns, the negative impact of a
crash on consumption and investment could be bigger," the magazine says.

Grenade for McColl?

   Business Week (May 1) suggests that Bank of America Chief Executive Officer
Hugh L. McColl be prepared to catch a few verbal blasts at the bank's
shareholders meeting in Charlotte today. "McColl faces heavy criticism over his
$ 50 million pay package --- and allegations that he is stacking the board of
the nation's largest bank with cronies who lack the know-how to oversee $ 630
billion in assets," the magazine says.

   CalPERS, the huge California state teachers pension fund, already has pledged
to vote against reinstating four board members on the compensation committee and
another with business ties to the bank.

   But the big issue may be the "circumstances surrounding the departure of
board member Shirley Young," a former General Motors vice president. The bank
says she was dropped because she left her job at GM, in accordance with bank
policy. Bank critics say she was forced out because of her criticism of McColl's
management style.

Worth mentioning ...

   Fortune (May 1) profiles the plight of 8-year-old Amy Martin, who has a rare
toxic disease, sometimes fatal, in which the liver lacks a key enzyme. Hers is
the kind of illness that might be helped by gene therapy, and that, in turn, has
both medical and business implications, the magazine says.

   Smart Money (May), The Wall Street Journal's personal finance magazine,
focuses on a plan for "the perfect retirement."

   Individual Investor (May) helps investors decide how to choose between the
stocks of strong blue chip companies that compete with each other, such as
Wal-Mart and Amazon, AT&T and MCI WorldCom and Coca-Cola and Pepsico.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2000


                             635 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                     April 25, 2000 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: HEALTH[FITNESS] Pg. 7F

LENGTH: 361 words

HEADLINE: Treatments continue to improve

BYLINE: Tracy Boyd

BODY:

   The treatment of prostate cancer has come a long way. Since the late 1940s,
the rate of identification of prostate cancer cases has increased 67 percent, or
about 1.8 percent per year. This is due to better detection techniques and
higher awareness.

   And as detection has increased, so have treatment options.

   * Surgical techniques to remove diseased cells and tissue have become less
invasive and more specialized to help avoid side effects such as impotence
(which is experienced by 65-90 percent of patients) and urinary leakage
(experienced by up to 35 percent). For example, William Beaumont Hospital
urologist Dr. Howard Korman is often able to abandon the conventional large
incision in the abdomen in favor of a small incision behind the patient's
scrotum. By avoiding cutting through the abdominal muscles, pain and recovery
time are decreased.

   Beaumont surgeons are also using an electronic wand called CaverMap to locate
the bundle of blood vessels and nerves that control erections. By confirming the
exact location, the surgeon is better able to steer clear of these areas and
help reduce the risk of side effects.

   * Radiation therapy also has improved. At Henry Ford Health System, Svend
Freytag, a molecular biologist, and Dr. Jaeho Kim, chairman of the department of
radiation oncology, have developed a genetic therapy in which a virus works with
drugs to make cancer cells in the prostate more sensitive to radiation.

   At the Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, researchers have found that
combining a beam of neutron radiation with high-energy X-rays can efficiently
kill cancer cells while sparing healthy tissue. Studies indicate that this
combination, called photon/neutron treatment, can offer fewer side effects than
the more conventional neutron radiation treatment.

   Physicians also can use radioactive pellets to destroy cancer cells. Called
brachytherapy, this technique can lower the risk of impotence and incontinence.

   * Many pharmaceutical companies are hoping to create a drug to help with the
treatment of prostate cancer. In 1998, 22 medicines were under development
specifically for the treatment of this disease.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             636 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 25, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1:2,7; B-2:1

LENGTH: 739 words

HEADLINE: UCSD put at center of attack on cancer

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 A major new federal grant will make UCSD Cancer Center the hub of a novel kind
of cancer research consortium designed for more efficient approaches to
researching and treating cancer.

   The consortium, which will include scientists from nine institutions around
the country, will focus on chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the most common blood
cancer among adults.  The disease strikes about 10,000 Americans a year and has
no effective treatments.

   Dr. Thomas Kipps, a cancer immunologist at UCSD, received a $16.5 million
grant from the National Cancer Institute to run the research network for five
years.  It is among the largest grants ever awarded to UCSD.

   "This is an extraordinary collaboration amongst the leading investigators in
this disease in the country," said Dr. Bruce Cheson, head of the medicine
section of NCI's Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program.  "It's the first such
multicenter project the NCI has funded.  We hope it will be a model for other
grants."

   Cheson said he asked the researchers more than two years ago to consider
working together.  He said they have proven in planning for the grant that they
can cooperate effectively.

   "Dollars are scarce," Cheson said.  "If you can get together the best minds
in a disease and have them shed their egos and work together collaboratively, .
. . you not only eliminate duplication, but you complement what's going on in
the various labs."

   The idea of freely sharing and building on scientific findings may seem like
common sense, but researchers at different institutions generally are highly
competitive and guard their findings closely for the months or years it takes to
publish them in scientific journals.

   Multisite clinical trials of potential treatments are common -- in which
researchers enlist others to help them recruit more patients -- but the leukemia
project will be a unique combination of basic research on the cellular processes
of cancer with treatment trials.

   It also is unusual because the collaborators include scientists from many
disciplines: genetics, immunology, biochemistry, cell biology, pharmacology and
oncology.

   "We're planning to put all the pieces, like a jigsaw puzzle, on the table and
see if we can put it together," said Kipps, the consortium director and a
leading gene therapy researcher at UCSD.

   Besides seeking new treatments for chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the research
may provide insights into other types of cancer, Kipps said.  The mechanisms
that allow abnormal cells to proliferate and stay alive are believed to be
similar in many cancers.

   Leukemia is relatively easy to study because new tumor samples can be taken
at any time just by drawing blood.

   "We're trying to understand the basis of this leukemia," Kipps said.  "I
think it is curable."

   Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a disease of abnormal production of white
blood cells, called lymphocytes, which normally help fight infections by making
antibodies that attack viruses or other invaders.  In the disease, the body
makes too many lymphocytes and makes them badly.  The blood and lymph systems
become crowded with immature, useless lymphocytes, eventually squeezing out
other essential blood cells.

   The disease usually is diagnosed after age 60, but can appear in people as
young as 30. On average, patients survive six or seven years, but traditional
cancer treatments have not been shown to have much effect on survival time.

   Kipps estimated 60,000 people in the United States are living with the
disease.

   The consortium plans to set up a national tissue bank of leukemia cell
samples, so many types of analyses can be done on the same cells.

   Besides several UCSD doctors, Dr. John C. Reed of the Burnham Institute in La
Jolla is a participant in the consortium.  The other collaborators are from the
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute of Harvard Medical School in Boston; Johns Hopkins
University Oncology Center in Baltimore; Long Island Jewish Medical Center in
New York; M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston; Ohio State University Cancer
Center in Columbus; Kimmel Cancer Institute of Thomas Jefferson University in
Philadelphia; and Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C.

   A kickoff meeting is planned in early June in San Diego, but the group mostly
will meet by phone and computer over the years.  Eventually, the samples and
information will be available for other researchers around the world, Cheson
said.


LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000


                             637 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 25, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1:2,7; B-2:1

LENGTH: 729 words

HEADLINE: UCSD put at center of attack on cancer

BYLINE: Susan Duerksen, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A major new federal grant will make UCSD Cancer Center the hub of a novel
kind of cancer research consortium designed for more efficient approaches to
researching and treating cancer. The consortium, which will include scientists
from nine institutions around the country, will focus on chronic lymphocytic
leukemia, the most common blood cancer among adults.

   The disease strikes about 10,000 Americans a year and has no effective
treatments. Dr. Thomas Kipps, a cancer immunologist at UCSD, received a $16.5
million grant from the National Cancer Institute to run the research network for
five years.

   It is among the largest grants ever awarded to UCSD. "This is an
extraordinary collaboration amongst the leading investigators in this disease in
the country," said Dr. Bruce Cheson, head of the medicine section of NCI's
Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program.

   "It's the first such multicenter project the NCI has funded.

   We hope it will be a model for other grants." Cheson said he asked the
researchers more than two years ago to consider working together.

   He said they have proven in planning for the grant that they can cooperate
effectively. "Dollars are scarce," Cheson said.

   "If you can get together the best minds in a disease and have them shed their
egos and work together collaboratively, . . . you not only eliminate
duplication, but you complement what's going on in the various labs." The idea
of freely sharing and building on scientific findings may seem like common
sense, but researchers at different institutions generally are highly
competitive and guard their findings closely for the months or years it takes to
publish them in scientific journals. Multisite clinical trials of potential
treatments are common -- in which researchers enlist others to help them recruit
more patients -- but the leukemia project will be a unique combination of basic
research on the cellular processes of cancer with treatment trials. It also is
unusual because the collaborators include scientists from many disciplines:
genetics, immunology, biochemistry, cell biology, pharmacology and oncology.
"We're planning to put all the pieces, like a jigsaw puzzle, on the table and
see if we can put it together," said Kipps, the consortium director and a
leading gene therapy researcher at UCSD. Besides seeking new treatments for
chronic lymphocytic leukemia, the research may provide insights into other types
of cancer, Kipps said.

   The mechanisms that allow abnormal cells to proliferate and stay alive are
believed to be similar in many cancers. Leukemia is relatively easy to study
because new tumor samples can be taken at any time just by drawing blood. "We're
trying to understand the basis of this leukemia," Kipps said.

   "I think it is curable." Chronic lymphocytic leukemia is a disease of
abnormal production of white blood cells, called lymphocytes, which normally
help fight infections by making antibodies that attack viruses or other
invaders.

   In the disease, the body makes too many lymphocytes and makes them badly.

   The blood and lymph systems become crowded with immature, useless
lymphocytes, eventually squeezing out other essential blood cells. The disease
usually is diagnosed after age 60, but can appear in people as young as 30. On
average, patients survive six or seven years, but traditional cancer treatments
have not been shown to have much effect on survival time. Kipps estimated 60,000
people in the United States are living with the disease. The consortium plans to
set up a national tissue bank of leukemia cell samples, so many types of
analyses can be done on the same cells. Besides several UCSD doctors, Dr. John
C. Reed of the Burnham Institute in La Jolla is a participant in the consortium.

   The other collaborators are from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute of Harvard
Medical School in Boston; Johns Hopkins University Oncology Center in Baltimore;
Long Island Jewish Medical Center in New York; M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in
Houston; Ohio State University Cancer Center in Columbus; Kimmel Cancer
Institute of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia; and Walter Reed Army
Medical Center in Washington, D.C. A kickoff meeting is planned in early June in
San Diego, but the group mostly will meet by phone and computer over the years.

   Eventually, the samples and information will be available for other
researchers around the world, Cheson said.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             638 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 23, 2000, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. F6

LENGTH: 755 words

HEADLINE: A MAP TO WHERE?

BODY:

   President Clinton recently posed questions with long-term consequences: When
the full sequencing of the human genome is announced in a few months, he asked,
what will be the implications? How did it come to be? And where are we going
from here?

   These are valid questions, which scientists working on the genome have
themselves been posing and, to the extent they can, answering. There is general
agreement that actual announcement of the completed sequencing of the blueprint
of human life will be less a eureka moment than a PR one. Wisdom will be found
among those who can give the event its proper weight. The rival public and
private teams doing the sequencing of a small number of randomly chosen and
unnamed volunteers' 80,000 to 100,000 genes will undoubtedly squabble over who
has really achieved what, and with what degree of accuracy.   And the finish
line is really a starting line, as far as making actual use of the completed
body of knowledge is concerned. The effort to map and sequence all the human
genes began 10 years ago after scientists decided it made more sense than the
piecemeal identification of genes up to that time. Even before then, scientists
had isolated genes with mutations that caused devastating diseases like cystic
fibrosis and Huntington disease - but those discoveries still have not led to
better treatments. One industry official has compared the hoopla over which team
first completes the genome sequencing to runners elbowing to see which gets the
first two steps in a race of 90 miles.

   Still, the implications for completing what has been called biology's
equivalent of the periodic table are enormous. Ultimately, this knowledge holds
out the promise that medicine will be able to tackle the wide range of diseases
with a genetic basis by rectifying defective genes or replacing missing ones.

   Just how difficult that can be was demonstrated last year by the death of an
18-year-old boy with a rare genetic disease of the liver. In a University of
Pennsylvania experiment, researchers used a virus as a transporter of a normal
gene, but the virus overwhelmed the youth's system and caused his death. So far,
while there have been promising experiments with gene therapy, it has yet to
produce an approved medicine.

   Knowledge of an individual's genetic makeup could, however, improve the use
of conventional medicines. Each year, an estimated 100,000 Americans die from
adverse reactions to prescribed drugs - some of which could be predicted from
genetic tests. Such scanning would also let doctors know what form of
chemotherapy might work best for a cancer patient.

   Short of preventing or curing disease, knowing the genetic code can - and
already has - aided in the predicting of disease. This is especially beneficial
in the case of genetic markers for conditions, such as a metabolic disorder that
causes mental retardation, that can be identified early on and avoided by
specific diets or lifestyle changes.

   But there is also a downside to knowing from genes the diseases an individual
is likely to face: possible discrimination by employers or insurers. Craig
Venter, the CEO of the Celera company, which is racing the public team to finish
the genome sequencing, has deplored the sketchiness of state and federal laws
banning or strictly regulating such discrimination.

   Perhaps the most controversial of all the brave-new-world implications of the
genome sequencing is the potential it raises for parents - and by extension the
human race itself - to manipulate the genes of coming generations. Even if this
is done only to avoid diseases, there are pitfalls: The gene that causes
sickle-cell anemia also protects against malaria.

   But the temptation will be great to fiddle with genes to predetermine all
kinds of babies' characteristics, from height to nose length. There is a whiff
of this in those ads placed by infertile couples in Ivy League newspapers
seeking women egg donors with high SAT scores.  Even though 99.9 percent of all
genes are unvaried from one person to the next, that 0.1 percent offers
opportunities for a great deal of mischief, well-intentioned or not.

   Other implications of the genome sequencing are a question mark. As Venter
has noted, when electricity was first mastered, no one predicted it would lead
one day to the personal computer. President Clinton was right to call for a
discussion of the issues raised by genome sequencing; his successors - and the
nation as whole - will have to do more than just talk about them.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2000


                             639 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     April 23, 2000, Sunday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: SPECIAL SECTION; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1867 words

HEADLINE: FIFTY FIVE PLUS / ATTITUDE PLUS;
Jessica Brilliant Keener   is writing a book with William Rosenberg about his
life. "It's Worth the Trip" will be published by Lebhar-Friedman Books in the
spring of 2001.;
THE MAN BEHIND THE DONUTS 'I'M JUST AN AVERAGE GUY WITH ABOVE AVERAGE DESIRE'

BYLINE: BY Jessica Brilliant Keener, GLOBE CORRESPONDENT

BODY:

   When William Rosenberg founded Dunkin' Donuts 50 years ago, he had high hopes
for its success but he never imagined it would become what it is today: the
largest chain of coffee, bagel, and doughnut shops in the world, with 5,000
locations in the United States and 40 countries worldwide.

   "I'm just an average guy with above average desire," says the self-made
multimillionaire, founder of the International Franchise Association, three-time
cancer survivor, active philanthropist, and once New England's largest standard
horse breeder.   Born in 1916, the second oldest of four children, and the
oldest son, Rosenberg grew up in a series of two and three-family houses in
Dorchester and Roxbury "in neighborhoods of very modest means," he says, "And if
modest means poor," he adds with characteristic humor, "then we were extremely
modest."

   At 8, he began working odd jobs to help the family out. His father owned a
small grocery store in Dorchester, and Rosenberg delivered orders before and
after school - from 6 to 8 each morning and then again from 4 to 8 at night -
from "can't see to can't see," as his father used to say.

   The boy's efforts - delivering groceries, loading 50 pound sacks of potatoes
in warehouses, and shoveling snow in the winter didn't stave off the family's
overwhelming financial woes. With the stock market crash of 1929 and the Great
Depression that followed, his father lost the store and the family moved to what
Rosenberg describes as a "shack by the railroad tracks."

   At 14, Rosenberg dropped out of school and took a full-time job at Western
Union delivering telegrams.

   He got paid $22 a week, plus tips. "I learned early on that the customer is
the boss," Rosenberg says.  "If I treated the customer well, I got bigger tips."
Within a short time, he became the highest paid telegram boy with the most
successful route in his district. He remembers holding onto the backs of trucks
and streetcars to make his delivery bike go faster. "I was always looking out
for better opportunities, a better way of doing things," he says.

   Two years later, he landed a higher paying job delivering ice cream novelties
for Simco, an ice cream vending company in Mattapan.  He was assigned a failing
route in Jamaica Plain, which he soon turned into the second most successful
route in the city.

   That job, Rosenberg says, was a turning point for him.  "I learned how we all
have the same opportunities," he says, "but only 10 percent are overachievers,
the majority will do a decent job and the other 10 percent are complainers."

   At Simco, Rosenberg supervised a production department, a shipping
department, cold storage and manufacturing, and he oversaw mechanics. "I went
from a small business man to a major big-time manager overseeing 40 to 100
trucks."

   After 14 years, he left Simco. The country was in the throes of World War II,
but Rosenberg had a wife and two young children, so to support the war effort,
he took an electrician's position at Bethlehem Steel at the Hingham Shipyard.

   "I didn't know a thing about electricity," says Rosenberg.

   He was a licensed refrigeration engineer from his days at Simco, but at the
shipyard, he found himself fixing 13,000 amp transformers.  It took, literally,
the near-fatal shock of his life for him to realize he needed to look for
something more suited to his skills. He ran for union representative becoming
the first Jewish delegate ever elected, winning more votes than all 12
candidates combined.

   After the war, the shipyard wanted him to stay on, but Rosenberg had dreams
of starting his own company, something he and his youngest brother, Donald
Rosenberg, who had been fighting overseas, had discussed in letters to each
other.

   Tragically, Donald was killed just two weeks before the war ended. Saddened
but resolute, Rosenberg set out to begin again. Using $1,500 in savings from his
war bonds, $1,000 borrowed from his mother, who had received $10,000
compensation from the government for Donald's death, and another $2,500 from his
brother-in-law, he started a catering company, Industrial Luncheon Services,
with one truck and a small kitchen operation.

   Soon, he needed more trucks, a commodity nearly impossible to come by after
the war. Rosenberg, undaunted, bought a fleet of 10 cabs.

   His inventive mind envisioned a new kind of vehicle: He would use the chassis
from the cabs to create a truck similar to the ice cream trucks he used to
drive.  The sides would open up to reveal stainless steel shelves, and there
would be storage in the back to hold products to refill the shelves.he found a
mechanic who could engineer his vision: the prototype of today's canteen truck.

   With his newly configured vehicles, his organization grew into a multistate
fleet of 200 trucks that serviced large companies such as Raytheon.  By 1950, he
had 25 in-plant cafeterias and a vending division. It became the largest
catering business in the Northeast.

   But Rosenberg saw another opportunity. He realized that 40 percent of his
revenues came from coffee and pastries. Why not open a retail shop selling these
popular items, he thought?  That year, he launched The Open Kettle, a doughnut
and coffee shop, at a busy intersection in Quincy. The enterprise didn't take
off right away.  "I had some naysayers who were ready to close it down, but I
persisted," says Rosenberg. Ultimately, he adds, the quality and freshness of
the coffee and doughnuts, made daily on the premises, began to generate a
fantastic business.  He soon opened a second and third store.

   Rosenberg was dissatisfied with the name, however, so he rounded up his
executives, put them in a room with a tape recorder, and instructed them to
brainstorm. He credits his architect for coming up with the world-famous Dunkin'
Donuts.

   In a short time, Rosenberg had six Dunkin' Donut stores and an idea for
expanding his business nationwide. "I wanted to franchise.  I knew that was the
answer," he says, and in 1955, the first Dunkin' Donuts franchise store opened
in Worcester.

   Today the concept of franchising is so pervasive, it accounts for more than
42 percent of retail sales in America.

   "Not so in the '50s," says Rosenberg. Franchising had a tainted reputation
because of a few renegade individuals. Both The New York Times and The Wall
Street Journal refused to run ads with the word franchising in it, and laws had
been passed that made it difficult for franchisors to operate.

   "But I believed that franchising was the epitome of free enterprise,"
Rosenberg says. "It is one of the most dynamic economic factors in the world
today."

   So, in 1959, while attending a Start Your Own Business convention in Chicago,
Rosenberg gathered about 16 friends at a lunch and advised fellow franchise
business owners to form an organization to protect and promote their industry.
"We needed to prove to the government and the public that franchising was the
penultimate democratic enterprise," says Rosenberg, "giving American men and
women a chance to own a business."

   From that meeting, "we raised $1,700 to pay for stamps and such and got
started.  That's how the International Franchise Association began," he says.

   As founder and chairman emeritus, Rosenberg remains active in the IFA, which
is celebrating its 40th anniversa-

   ry, boasts more than 30,000 members, and whose mission is to help maintain
high standards in the industry.

   In 1963, Dunkin' Donuts opened its 100th shop, and Rosenberg put his oldest
son, Robert, in charge as president, while he stayed on as chairman and later as
chairman emeritus. (Robert Rosenberg recently retired from the company after 35
years.)

   In 1968, the company went public. Store 1,000 opened in 1979 and in 1990,
Allied Dome PLC, the British company that owns Baskin and Robbins and Togos,
purchased Dunkin' Donuts.  Shop 5,000 opened in Bali, Indonesia, this year.

   In the April supplement published by Nation Restaurant News, Rosenberg was
named one of 100 individuals who "changed retailing and food service in the 20th
century."

   From the beginning, and at every juncture of his long career, he took risks.
He also faced life-threatening challenges.  In 1971, four years after Dunkin'
Donuts went public, Rosenberg got the sobering news that he had lung cancer.

   It was during his recovery from lung surgery that he turned his attention to
Wilrose Farm, a horse farm he had bought in East Kingston, N.H., several years
before.  Once more, he went full speed ahead with a new passion: horse breeding.
He became the largest standard horse breeder in New England.

   Rosenberg insists he knew little about horses, except that he saw the
possibilities for making money.

   "I found out who the best people were in the business," he says, "and modeled
myself after their success." In 1979, Rosenberg was inducted into the New
England Hall of Fame of the Standardbred Industry.

   Adversity hit again in 1977 when he learned that he had lymphoma, a
potentially fatal blood cancer.  Thinking his life was closing, he gave Wilrose
Farm to the University of New Hampshire in 1980 and in 1994, the school
dedicated the William Rosenberg Chair in Franchising and Entrepreneurship.

   Rosenberg survived his lymphoma as well as an episode with skin cancer, and
has been free of the disease ever since. In gratitude for the care he received
at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, Rosenberg and his wife, Ann, recently
established The William Rosenberg Family Foundation Laboratory at Dana-Farber
and Harvard Medical School. The laboratory shared by the two institutions will
support new research in the promising area of gene therapy.

   Donating millions of dollars over the years to a variety of organizations,
Rosenberg continues to champion numerous causes, including finding a cure for
cancer and diabetes, encouraging future entrepreneurs and franchisers, and
promoting a positive mental attitude.

   As he views it, the same principles for success apply no matter what your
age. "Some of the tools change," he says, referring to his hearing loss and his
adult-onset diabetes, but this master builder of worldwide organizations pushes
forward despite two hip replacements. "I walk 3 or 4 miles a day and I stay
involved."

   "I was given many chances to fail," says Rosenberg. "My very humble
beginnings, my abbreviated educational training, but I learned invaluable
lessons early on that have guided me through the decades. Success can be won by
hard work and persistence.  I've always said that it doesn't take a genius to do
what I've done, but it takes passion, determination, and persistence, and above
all positive mental attitude.

   "No matter what the circumstance," he adds, "poverty or its opposite -
inherited wealth - a lousy family, an overly protective one, illness, divorce,
war, a physical handicap, I believe a person can find a way to succeed.  I'm not
just talking about monetary results.  That's not the only factor that determines
success. No matter what you choose to do, whether it's to be a teacher, a rabbi,
a singer, a cook, how well you do it depends on attitude. Attitude is
everything.  That's what will determine the quality of your life."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, William Rosenberg wears a sweatshirt promoting his favorite
franchise. / Globe staff photo/Bill Greene

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2000


                             640 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 21, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 726 words

HEADLINE: McDonald's profits up 12% for first quarter; Good sales help chain
surpass expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:
 McDonald's Corp.'s profit rose 12 percent in the first quarter as strong sales
in North America and Europe helped the fast-food chain beat Wall Street's
expectations.

   McDonald's earned $450.9 million, or 33 cents a share, in the January-March
period, up from $402.7 million, or 29 cents a share, a year ago.

   Revenues rose 10 percent to $3.34 billion from $3.04 billion a year ago.

   Analysts attributed the Oak Brook, Ill.-based company's robust performance to
improvements in its restaurant operations in the United States and Europe,
including the $180 million Made For You marketing strategy and computerized
cooking program.

   Brandy Shin, a restaurant analyst for Goldman Sachs & Co. in New York, said
McDonald's earnings "look pretty good" despite investor concerns about a nearly
10 percent decline in sales last month.  She called the company's move to
repurchase 16.6 million shares of its common stock at $574 million a surprise.

   In local earnings news:

   Collateral Therapeutics said it lost $3.2 million, or 25 cents a share,
during the first quarter.  The San Diego biotech, which is working on gene
therapy products, reported revenue of $600,000 and said it had $36.9 million in
cash as of March 31.

   Document Sciences Corp. said it earned $413,912, or 4 cents per share, on
revenues of $5.7 million for the first quarter ended March 31. During the first
quarter of 1999, the company earned $225,805, 2 cents per share, on revenues of
$5.5 million.

   Based in Carlsbad, Document Sciences provides document automation services
and products.

   Sunrise Medical said third-quarter net income fell to $269,000, or 1 cent per
share, from $1.8 million, or 8 cents per share, a year earlier.  Revenues fell
to $166 million from $170 million.

   The results include a pre-tax charge of $2.1 million for bad-debt related
expenses and $1.4 million for employee separation costs.  The bad-debt expense
includes $1.2 million resulting from Chapter 11 filing of a customer.

   During the quarter, in an effort to streamline operations and reduce its debt
load, the company combined several divisions and in a move that generated $14
million, it sold and leased back several manufacturing facilities.

   Sunrise shares, traded on Nasdaq under ticker symbol SMD, rose 25 cents
yesterday to $4.88.

   In other earnings news:

   Soaring Gatorade sales helped Quaker Oats Co. post a 45 percent increase in
first-quarter profit before one-time items.

   The results exceeded Wall Street's expectations.  Quaker shares rose $3.18
3/4, or 5 percent, to $66.25 in afternoon trading on the New York Stock
Exchange.

   A strong rise in sales of Gatorade and snacks such as Chewy Granola Bars
enabled the company to easily overcome a 3 percent decline in hot cereals,
including its namesake Quaker Oats.

   Excluding one-time items, profit from operations was $106 million, or 77
cents per share, up from $72.9 million, or 51 cents a share, a year earlier.
Analysts surveyed by First Call/Thomson Financial had forecast per-share
earnings of 60 cents.

   Including the special items, Quaker's earnings fell to $1.8 million, or 1
cent a share, from $86.7 million, or 61 cents a share, a year earlier.

   Sales rose 9 percent to $1.17 billion.

   Times Mirror Co., publisher of the Los Angeles Times, reported a 16 percent
increase in first-quarter earnings on the strength of higher ad revenues and
lower newsprint costs.

   Times Mirror, which is being purchased by Chicago-based Tribune Co., had
earnings from continuing operations of $57.9 million, or 90 cents per share, up
from $50 million, or 60 cents per share, in the first quarter of 1999. Revenues
rose 7 percent to $745.3 million.

   Including a pretax gain on the sale of The Sporting News and the sale of
other investments, net income was $113.3 million, or $1.74 per share.  That
figure does not include $4.3 million in merger costs.

   Despite overall growth in revenues, Gillette Co. reported a decline in
first-quarter earnings on weaker results in its Duracell battery line.

   Gillette had net income of $258 million, down 4 percent from $269 million a
year earlier.  Per-share earnings were 24 cents, 2 cents above Wall Street
expectations and unchanged from a year ago.


LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2000


                             641 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 21, 2000 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 692 words

HEADLINE: McDonald's profits up 12% for first quarter;
Good sales help chain surpass expectations

BYLINE: STAFF AND NEWS SERVICES

BODY:

   McDonald's Corp.'s profit rose 12 percent in the first quarter as strong
sales in North America and Europe helped the fast-food chain beat Wall Street's
expectations. McDonald's earned $450.9 million, or 33 cents a share, in the
January-March period, up from $402.7 million, or 29 cents a share, a year ago.
Revenues rose 10 percent to $3.34 billion from $3.04 billion a year ago.
Analysts attributed the Oak Brook, Ill.-based company's robust performance to
improvements in its restaurant operations in the United States and Europe,
including the $180 million Made For You marketing strategy and computerized
cooking program. Brandy Shin, a restaurant analyst for Goldman Sachs & Co. in
New York, said McDonald's earnings "look pretty good" despite investor concerns
about a nearly 10 percent decline in sales last month.

   She called the company's move to repurchase 16.6 million shares of its common
stock at $574 million a surprise. In local earnings news: Collateral
Therapeutics said it lost $3.2 million, or 25 cents a share, during the first
quarter.

   The San Diego biotech, which is working on gene therapy products, reported
revenue of $600,000 and said it had $36.9 million in cash as of March 31.
Document Sciences Corp. said it earned $413,912, or 4 cents per share, on
revenues of $5.7 million for the first quarter ended March 31. During the first
quarter of 1999, the company earned $225,805, 2 cents per share, on revenues of
$5.5 million. Based in Carlsbad, Document Sciences provides document automation
services and products. Sunrise Medical said third-quarter net income fell to
$269,000, or 1 cent per share, from $1.8 million, or 8 cents per share, a year
earlier. Revenues fell to $166 million from $170 million. The results include a
pre-tax charge of $2.1 million for bad-debt related expenses and $1.4 million
for employee separation costs.

   The bad-debt expense includes $1.2 million resulting from Chapter 11 filing
of a customer. During the quarter, in an effort to streamline operations and
reduce its debt load, the company combined several divisions and in a move that
generated $14 million, it sold and leased back several manufacturing facilities.
Sunrise shares, traded on Nasdaq under ticker symbol SMD, rose 25 cents
yesterday to $4.88. In other earnings news: Soaring Gatorade sales helped Quaker
Oats Co. post a 45 percent increase in first-quarter profit before one-time
items. The results exceeded Wall Street's expectations.

   Quaker shares rose $3.18 3/4, or 5 percent, to $66.25 in afternoon trading on
the New York Stock Exchange. A strong rise in sales of Gatorade and snacks such
as Chewy Granola Bars enabled the company to easily overcome a 3 percent decline
in hot cereals, including its namesake Quaker Oats. Excluding one-time items,
profit from operations was $106 million, or 77 cents per share, up from $72.9
million, or 51 cents a share, a year earlier.

   Analysts surveyed by First Call/Thomson Financial had forecast per-share
earnings of 60 cents. Including the special items, Quaker's earnings fell to
$1.8 million, or 1 cent a share, from $86.7 million, or 61 cents a share, a year
earlier. Sales rose 9 percent to $1.17 billion. Times Mirror Co., publisher of
the Los Angeles Times, reported a 16 percent increase in first-quarter earnings
on the strength of higher ad revenues and lower newsprint costs. Times Mirror,
which is being purchased by Chicago-based Tribune Co., had earnings from
continuing operations of $57.9 million, or 90 cents per share, up from $50
million, or 60 cents per share, in the first quarter of 1999. Revenues rose 7
percent to $745.3 million. Including a pretax gain on the sale of The Sporting
News and the sale of other investments, net income was $113.3 million, or $1.74
per share.

   That figure does not include $4.3 million in merger costs. Despite overall
growth in revenues, Gillette Co. reported a decline in first-quarter earnings on
weaker results in its Duracell battery line. Gillette had net income of $258
million, down 4 percent from $269 million a year earlier.

   Per-share earnings were 24 cents, 2 cents above Wall Street expectations and
unchanged from a year ago.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             642 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 Detroit Free Press
                             All Rights Reserved

                                Detroit Free Press

                   APRIL 18, 2000 Tuesday METRO FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BODY & MIND; Pg. 8F

LENGTH: 1604 words

HEADLINE: A LAB ABUZZ WITH HOPE A $10 MILLION GIFT FROM LOCAL DONORS IS BRINGING
TOP BRAIN CANCER RESEARCHERS TO DETROIT

BYLINE: PATRICIA ANSTETT FREE PRESS MEDICAL WRITER

BODY:

   Brain tumor research has been a little like stamp collecting, says Dr. Tom
Mikkelsen. One piece at a time, scientists have assembled a molecular blueprint
that shows which brain cells turn cancerous.

   But when does the first cell go astray? And exactly where in the molecular
assembly line does the signal that allows a cell to copy itself get translated
incorrectly, thus creating cancer?

   The questions have led to intense research to find better treatments for the
17,500 Americans diagnosed each year with new cases of primary brain tumors.
This is cancer that originates in the brain and is distinctly different from
cancer that spreads there.

   Brain tumors are a major medical challenge because they are fast-growing,
hard to remove surgically and often incurable.

   Five years ago, only 5 percent of patients with glioblastoma, one of the most
common types of primary brain tumor, were alive 5 years after diagnosis.

   Now, with promising advances, "we're truly on the edge of incredible
breakthroughs," says Dr. Mark Rosenblum, chairman of neurosurgery at the Henry
Ford Health System in Detroit.

   Improvements in brain tumor treatments are being added so fast that Rosenblum
tells patients "not to believe anything you read, not even anything I have
written" about their survival odds.

   Generous Detroiters

   Progress against brain tumors is being helped by generous private
philanthropy, notable at a time of health care cutbacks. Here in Detroit, a $10
million gift from David and Doreen Hermelin and a circle of friends created the
Hermelin Brain Tumor Center at Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit.

   The Hermelins have had a longtime interest in cancer. Over 20 years, they
have raised tens of millions of dollars for the cause. But their interest in the
field changed dramatically in December 1998, when David Hermelin was diagnosed
with glioblastoma.

   At the time of his diagnosis, he was ambassador to Norway. He is a partner in
Hermelin Colburn Colburn, a Troy insurance firm, and co-owner of the Palace of
Auburn Hills and Pine Knob Entertainment Centers.

   With characteristic enthusiasm, Hermelin, 63, started to contact friends
about donating money for a new brain tumor research center in Detroit. He's a
notorious fund-raiser and jokes that people don't recognize him if his hand is
in his own pocket. "My friends say that to know me is enriching and
impoverishing," he says.

   The $10 million gift helped Ford assemble an international team of scientists
and clinicians headed by Mikkelsen, a Canadian whose work is attracting broad
interest. With nearly 30 scientists and clinical staff members, the Hermelin
Brain Tumor Center, which Mikkelsen codirects with Rosenblum, ranks as one of
the nation's biggest programs, even though it's only 7 months old.

   "Our contribution was easy," Hermelin says. "It was money."

   Next month, two more research scientists, Oliver Bogler and Irene Newsham, a
husband and wife from Richmond, Va., each with cancer gene discoveries of their
own, will join Mikkelsen and longtime collaborator Sandra Rempel, who directs
the center's molecular biology laboratory and who discovered a gene that appears
related to how a brain tumor spreads. They work from a string of sleek, clean
labs that exude excitement and progress. The walls are lined with papers they
have presented at scientific meetings or published.

   "This is a new era, and the David Hermelin Brain Tumor Center will prove it,"
Rosenblum says.

   42 years of cell phones

   Hermelin, one of Detroit's true power brokers, has been a cell phone user
since 1958. "I was almost attached to it," he says. For years, he used the
phone's antenna like a laser pointer during speeches.

   Hermelin always held the device next to his right ear, with the antenna
pointing back. That is exactly where doctors removed a large tumor in December
1998. He knows there's no proof of a link between cell phone use and brain
cancer.
The cell phone industry says study after study has found that the devices are
safe and that they meet government radiation limits. Doctors like Mikkelsen say
there is no good evidence that there's a connection. But there also is little
information about what has caused a rising incidence of brain tumors.

   Hermelin is a typical brain tumor patient. Most cases occur at middle age, as
people in their 50s and 60s near retirement and have "sold the house and bought
the motor home," Mikkelsen says. Symptoms include headaches, seizures, memory
and vision loss, and behavior changes. In Hermelin's case, his peripheral vision
deteriorated.

   Mikkelsen notes that brain tumors are hard to stop because they often have no
distinct border with normal tissue. Only under a microscope is their distinctive
appearance clear. They're pale, have shrunken or dead centers and spindly arms
called filaments that reach out and allow tumor cells and blood vessels to
invade new territory.

   A promising treatment

   Mikkelsen's team has been testing numerous compounds by using brain tissue
from a large tumor bank that has 1,700 specimens collected since 1993.

   One of the most promising, called CAI (its longer name is
carboxyamidotriazole), began an important phase of testing last month in
patients after surgery.

   About 54 patients at nine centers, including Ford, will take CAI once a day
during and after a 6-week course of radiation. Scientists believe the medicine
and radiation may have a synergistic effect when administered simultaneously.
Patients will take CAI as long as it works.

   CAI -- which was identified to treat infections in chickens but never used
for that purpose -- targets substances called growth factors on the surface of
cancer cells. These growth factors give instructions to tumor cells and blood
vessels to grow, Mikkelsen says.

   CAI blocks a signal that allows a cell to make new blood vessels, a process
call angiogenesis. In small, earlier studies of patients who had ovarian and
certain other cancers, CAI stopped cells from spreading half the time, Mikkelsen
says.

   What excites researchers is that CAI does not appear to damage healthy
tissue, as other types of chemotherapy do. Its main side effects are minor
nausea and an upset stomach. Doctors try to minimize that by asking patients to
take one pill at bedtime.

   The same drug is being studied among lung and ovarian cancer patients, but it
did not pan out in prostate cancer, says Dr. Elise Kohn, a medical oncologist at
the National Cancer Institute in Bethesda, Md. The graduate of Groves High
School in Birmingham and the University of Michigan heads the NCI's molecular
signaling section in the Laboratory of Pathology.

   CAI was one of 28 compounds Kohn screened. NCI independently moved the drug
into clinical studies when the large pharmaceutical company Merck & Co. "elected
not to participate," Kohn says. She credits Mikkelsen for convincing others to
use the drug for brain tumors.

   "He's worked really hard. He believed in it, and he pushed for it. And I'm
pleased to be collaborating with him," she says.

   More research on the way

   Later this year, Ford's research team hopes to participate in a gene therapy
study for primary brain tumors. The approach is another way of fixing a cell at
the precise spot in its molecular machinery where cancer begins. "Gene therapy
lets us put back what is lost when cancer develops," Rosenblum says.

   "If you understand what gets lost, you can predict what to put back and
reverse the activity that makes a cell a tumor." He equates molecular approaches
to finding and treating the Achilles' heels of a cancer cell.

   The advances in the laboratory complement other progress in surgery,
radiation and diagnostic screening.

   One machine, called MEG, for magnetoencephalography, allows doctors to create
a map of the brain that shows the sites of a person's nerve cells for thinking,
moving, hearing and seeing. MEG basically uses coils -- something like antennae
-- to pick up magnetic fields associated with the brain's electrical signals.
Those fields are overlaid on other images from a better-known test called
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).

   Together, the two tools improve the safety of brain surgery, Rosenblum says.
One patient's eyesight was restored after surgeons relieved the pressure a tumor
was placing on a vision center in the brain, he says. Those and other advances
give Rosenblum reason to believe that major progress will be made against brain
tumors in the next 5 years. "It's mandatory that physicians give patients and
their families the hope that is real today," he says.

   The Hermelins sit on the sidelines. "It's called the waiting room," says
Hermelin. He's a high-charged, positive man who spent most of his life rising
early to get to work. Last month, he began a new round of chemotherapy. If CAI
works in newly diagnosed patients, it might next be offered to patients like
him.

   "I hope I went through this for the sake of a greater good," Hermelin says.
"The greater good is to make this a controllable condition.

   "When you find people in your own backyard so highly trained and dedicated,
you are motivated to do more."

   * For information on the Hermelin Brain Tumor Center, call 313-916-2241, 7-5
weekdays, or anytime to leave a mesage. You also can visit the Henry Ford Health
System Web site at www.henryfordhealth.org. Scroll to the neurosciences
reference.
TO LEARN MORE

   The American Brain Tumor Association is a nonprofit organization in Des
Plaines, Ill., with resources and information on brain tumors. For information,
see its Web site at www.abta.org or call 800-886-2282, 8-4 weekdays.

NOTES: COVER STORY

GRAPHIC: Photo HUGH GRANNUM, Detroit Free Press; Photo JOHN MEIU, Special
to the Free Press;
Dr. Tom Mikkelsen examines slides of tumor cells with researchers Nancy Lemke,
Dunyue Lu and Shugang Ge.
David and Doreen Hermelin recently helped raise $175,000 for three local cancer
charities at an event for the grand expansion of Birmingham's Townsend Hotel.
A compound known as CAI shows promise against some tumors.
Dr. Tom Mikkelsen examines tumor cells under a microscope.
Dr. Tom Mikkelsen, codirector of the Hermelin Brain Tumor Center at Henry Ford
Hospital in Detroit, prepares a tumor for a tissue culture growth.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             643 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                      April 17, 2000, Monday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Part 1; Page 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2325 words

HEADLINE: COLUMN ONE;
 A THRIVING PIONEER OF GENE TESTS;
 GIRL WHO WAS FIRST TO RECEIVE CONTROVERSIAL THERAPY IS FARING BETTER THAN COULD
BE IMAGINED 10 YEARS AGO. SCIENTISTS WILL AGAIN LOOK TO HER TO VALIDATE CASE.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   ". . . A great day for the world. A great day for medicine. Gene therapy has
been approved. Our daughter is the first patient in the world to receive it."

   Those were the words that a tired but exhilarated Van DeSilva penned into her
personal journal on the evening of Sept. 14, 1990. Her 4-year-old daughter,
suffering from an extremely rare and fatal disease that cripples the immune
system, had just made medical history.

   Ten days earlier, at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md.,
Ashanthi DeSilva sat quietly watching the children's adventure fantasy movie
"Willow" as researchers repeatedly drew blood from her tiny arm. They extracted
white blood cells from the samples, then transferred those into tissue culture
in the lab. As the cells grew from tens of millions to billions, scientists
added a corrected cell that--it was hoped--would do the work that her own flawed
genes could not.

   On the day that her mother wrote those uplifting words, Ashanthi was injected
with the cells containing the healthy genetic message. The daring experiment in
gene therapy had seemingly gone well and scientists celebrated their arrival on
the cutting edge of a new medical frontier.

   Today, Ashi, as she is known, is a thriving teenager in Ohio, a 13-year-old
who gets all A's and Bs, plays the piano and basketball and rarely gets a cold.

   She is not cured: Ashanthi still must take a drug that helps keep her
disorder under control. But her body produces some cells with the new gene and
is faring better than scientists had dared imagine 10 years ago.

   Gene therapy, however, is under siege. Federal agencies have begun to crack
down on experiments, after the unexpected death of a man who was not fatally ill
when his gene therapy began. Scientists and government officials have expressed
skepticism about cases like Ashi's, arguing that anecdotes do not constitute
proof. And the public has grown weary of New Age medicine, worried that the
early promise of high-tech science has given way to unacceptable risks.

   Now, scientists again look to Ashi to validate their case.

   Sometime this summer, doctors again will take blood samples from her, again
grow them in the lab and again genetically change the cells and return them to
her body.

   But this time the corrected cells will be stem cells--the purest kind. This
time, researchers will transplant them into her bone marrow, hoping that the
marrow, from then on, will stop producing the genetically defective cells and
only produce those that are genetically perfect.

   And this time, they hope that they finally will have their proof.

   Dr. R. Michael Blaese, the former NIH researcher who treated Ashi in 1990 and
is designing the new, more advanced therapy she will receive soon, is baffled by
the current furor over gene therapy. He believes that, without the therapy she
received, Ashi likely would have died in childhood from her disorder, which left
her vulnerable to one infection after another.

   While her body is still making cells with the bad genes, many of the good
genes inserted years ago are still circulating in her system, helping to keep
her healthy, he said. He thinks that the public is holding gene therapy research
to an unrealistically high standard.

   "This field was supposed to be magic. And people think that, if you don't
reach a high level of expectation, you are a failure," he said.

   Success Measured in Increments

   "The reality is that success often

   comes in increments. Something may be of value, even if it's not a cure. To
say that gene therapy has never helped anyone is simply false."

   The original rationale behind gene therapy was to treat genetic diseases by
replacing a non-functioning or defective gene, which was the case with Ashi.
While gene therapy experiments still focus on genetic disorders, the field has
broadened considerably in recent years to look at gene therapy approaches to a
range of other diseases, among them cancer, heart disease and AIDS.

   Since 1990, 4,000 patients have participated in 378 gene therapy trials, of
which 343 are still underway. There are 32 gene therapy trials ongoing in
California, according to federal health officials. Some of the sites in Southern
California are UCLA, City of Hope National Medical Center in Duarte,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Scripps Clinic in La Jolla, USC, Childrens Hospital
Los Angeles and Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in San Diego.

   Gene therapy research became controversial after 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger
of Arizona died in September after receiving experimental gene therapy for a
liver disorder at the University of Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy.

   Since his death, federal health officials determined that the institute
violated federal regulations in the conduct of the study. They halted all gene
therapy there and began to tighten oversight on all researchers doing gene
therapy experiments.

   For Ashanthi's coming experiment, her doctors--as they are required to
do--sought and received permission from the Food and Drug Administration months
ago. And they also won the blessings of an NIH advisory panel that oversees gene
therapy research. Approval by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Panel is no longer
required as it was in the early days of gene therapy. But the panel has the
right to request a review, and it did, likely because "of the current climate,"
Blaese says.

   Federal health officials acknowledge that the field has produced some
encouraging results, recent among them reports on treating hemophilia and in
bypassing clogged coronary and leg arteries.

   But, overall, until there is definitive scientific proof, they tend to
dismiss many such cases as anecdotal.

   'Hints of Success'

   "We do have some hints of success, but those are anecdotal studies," said
Lana Skirboll, NIH's director of science policy, who is one of the officials in
charge of her agency's investigation of gene therapy practices.

   "The scientific community is hesitant to talk about successes without peer
review and duplication," she added.

   Usually, however, science requires carefully designed clinical trials with
"controls" for comparison purposes and large numbers of volunteers so that
statistically significant differences can be documented.

   But highly experimental gene therapy has been tested for the most part only
on small numbers of very ill people, who often have died from disease--making it
difficult to prove success.

   In 1993, for example, Blaese conducted a gene therapy trial on 15 patients
with glioblastoma, a deadly brain cancer. There were no controls. All of the
patients were very ill and had failed conventional therapy.

   All 15 received experimental gene therapy. They were given a gene designed to
change the metabolism of the cancer cells, making them resemble a herpes virus,
so they would be vulnerable to the antiviral drug acyclovir. The hope was that
cells treated with the gene would be killed by the drug.

   Fourteen died, victims of their brain cancers. One man, however, is alive and
cancer-free seven years later. Gene therapy was a last resort for a dying
man--he had had surgery, chemotherapy and radiation, all of which had failed.
The cancer had returned in three separate sites.

   Would he have died without gene therapy? Blaese thinks so but he cannot prove
it.

   "He had a bad brain tumor and it came back. He had gene therapy and it went
away," said Blaese, who now conducts genetic research for a private company,
Kimeragen Inc. in Newtown, Pa., but still serves as an NIH consultant.

   "It's very difficult to say with certainty that the gene therapy cured him.
He might have been luckier than hell to respond when others didn't. It wasn't a
controlled clinical trial, so the scientific community dismissed it as
unproven," Blaese said.

   "One anecdotal case of a 'cure' gets no attention," he added. "But those same
people who dismiss it will jump on a single anecdotal case of a terrible side
effect, or death, and paint the entire field with a broad brush. And that's very
frustrating."

   Ashanthi's parents, originally from Sri Lanka and now living in North
Olmsted, a suburb of Cleveland, are saddened that Gelsinger's death has thrown
pessimism over a field they believed saved their daughter.

   "I feel very sorry for Jesse's family," said Van DeSilva, a homemaker whose
husband, Raj, works as a chemical engineer. "A child is dead and that is so very
sad. My heart is broken for his parents. I'm sure his mom and dad feel a lot of
pain.

   "But what am I going to say? I cannot say anything bad about gene therapy. It
worked for us," she added. "In my heart, my little girl was cured that day--and
the part of my heart that belonged to her was healed too."

   Ashi became ill soon after birth. She began suffering persistent bouts of
diarrhea and vomiting, rashes that covered her body and infections, one after
another.

   It took two years to figure out what was wrong with her. She was diagnosed
with adenosine deaminase deficiency, an extremely rare genetic disorder that
cripples the immune system. Only a few dozen children in the world have it.

   It involves a defect in the gene responsible for producing an enzyme critical
to the functioning of the immune system--adenosine deaminase.

   The enzyme is responsible for clearing the body of a toxin that is produced
in the normal course of cell metabolism. If the body cannot rid itself of the
toxin, deoxy-adenosine, it poisons the cells of the immune system. Without this
enzyme, the body cannot fight infections. Ashi was developing high levels of the
toxin, which was causing her immune system to fail.

   Doctors at Rainbow Babies Hospital in Cleveland knew that NIH
researchers--Blaese and Dr. W. French Anderson, now at USC, and Dr. Ken
Culver--were exploring the possibility of using gene therapy to treat the
disorder. But the idea had never before been tested.

   Listening to Blaese and the others describe the potential and the risks,
Ashi's mother kept thinking: "I want this treatment for my daughter."

   She said that she was never frightened. Instead, "I was thrilled. I was
grateful. I was happy for my little girl."

   At age 2, Ashi had begun taking a drug, PEG-ADA, that helped replace the
missing enzyme and rid her body of some of the deadly toxin. Still, immune
system tests on her showed that "things were not going so well," Blaese said.

   "The enzyme helped but I was very worried for Ashi that she would ultimately
succumb to her disease, even though she was getting the drug," Blaese says.

   Others had failed to survive on the drug, which must be taken for life. And
it is very expensive--as much as $ 400,000 a year, depending on the dose.

   On Aug. 1, 1990, the three scientists received approval for their
groundbreaking experiment from the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. In the
drama of making its decision, committee members described the moment as "truly a
historic occasion."

   On Sept. 4, 1990, the DeSilvas brought Ashi to NIH, where researchers took
blood from her arm four separate times. She was very stoic, rarely crying during
the repeated blood drawings. From her blood, cells were extracted that later
would be put back into her body containing the new genes.

   "There are a lot of things that go through your mind when you prepare to do
something you've never done before," Blaese remembered. "You agonize over
whether you've done everything. . . . What scares you is if there's something
you haven't thought about."

   Nothing went wrong. It was routine.

   In fact, "she seemed like a happier kid the next day," her mother recalled.
"She was hugging us and kissing us. I remember telling the doctors, 'I think you
gave her the 'happy' gene.' "

   Ashi stayed at NIH three days so she could be closely watched, then was sent
home. Three weeks later she came back and the process was repeated.

   Over the next two years, she received 10 more treatments--monthly at first,
then gradually stretched out over more months. Her last session was in August
1992.

   Nearly eight years after she received her final treatment, Ashi still has a
high proportion of the new, corrected cells circulating in her body, doing what
they are supposed to do.

   "We looked at the level of enzyme produced by her T-cells, and before she had
the treatment, it was zero," Blaese said. "After each treatment, the number of
cells producing the enzyme increased in number. In August 1992, more than 50% of
her circulating cells carried the gene.

   Ashi still receives a weekly injection of the drug, administered by her
mother. But the dose, which is typically given by body weight, is the same as it
was 10 years ago--meaning that she needs far less of it today than she otherwise
would.

   Some still question whether she is doing well because of the experiment or
because of the drug or because of both. No one is willing to take the risk of
stopping the drug.

   Dr. Donald Kohn, director of gene therapy at Childrens Hospital Los Angeles,
in 1993 tried a procedure similar to the one that Ashi soon will receive on
three newborns with the same immune disorder as Ashanthi. His team transplanted
gene-corrected stem cells obtained from the babies' umbilical cord blood when
they were only 4 days old.

   That experiment proved safe but disappointing. Only a few new corrected blood
cells were produced. The three babies he worked with--approaching age 7--are
still taking the drug PEG-ADA.

   But he agrees with Blaese that improved techniques could make a big
difference this time, adding that all of these attempts represent "very
important, positive steps."

   There are better methods for growing cells, and a more active retrovirus to
use to introduce the new cells into the body, raising the odds that it will
work.

   And, if so, Ashi's body will stop making cells with the defective gene and
only make cells with the right gene--in other words, a cure for her--and a boon
for gene therapy.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ashanthi DeSilva, 13, the world's first gene therapy recipient,
studies for upcoming school exams.  PHOTOGRAPHER: RON KUNTZ / For The Times
PHOTO: (A2), MEDICAL LEGEND--Ashanthi DeSilva was suffering from a rare, fatal
disease at age 4 when she became the world's first gene therapy recipient. Today
she is a thriving teenager. But gene therapy is under siege. Federal agencies
have begun to crack down on experiments. A1 PHOTOGRAPHER: Associated Press

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000


                             644 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 16, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. I-2

LENGTH: 409 words

HEADLINE: Qualcomm's bottom line remains sound

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Stock of Qualcomm has been volatile this year following last year's huge ride,
but the fundamentals are in good shape, analysts say.

   "Qualcomm's bottom line should remain in a sharp uptrend through fiscal 2001,
at least," says George Rho of Value Line.

   Earnings per share more than tripled in the quarter ended in December, fueled
by growing acceptance of the company's code division multiple access, or CDMA,
technology that generates fees, royalties and chip-set sales.

   Still, Qualcomm stock "is best-suited for aggressive, momentum-oriented
investors," Rho says.  Value Line gives the stock its highest (1) rating for
timeliness, but its average (3) for safety.

   "Motorola and Nokia are trying to catch up with Qualcomm" on chip-sets, says
Pete Peterson of Prudential Securities, noting that the two companies are
teaming up to promote an open standard for next-generation CDMA chip technology.
This move "signifies the importance of CDMA as a part of the next-generation
technology," he says.

   He sees Qualcomm stock reaching $183 in 12 months.

   U.S. Laboratories

   Last year, U.S. Laboratories, a test and inspection company, had revenues of
$16.4 million.  For fiscal 2000, revenues will come in at $29 million, says
David N. Allen of Granite Financial Group.

   Over the past year, the company has made six acquisitions.  Five are in the
test and inspection business for the construction industry, but the largest
provides inspection of critical components for industrial markets, including
aerospace and telecommunications, Allen says.

   The backlog currently is $16.3 million, up from $10 million in late 1999. The
company should enjoy long-term revenue growth of 25 percent a year: 8 percent to
10 percent from internal growth and 15 percent to 17 percent from acquisitions,
Allen says.

   Earnings per share for the year 2000 should come in at 48 cents, well above
last year's 21 cents, says the analyst, who has a long-term purchase
recommendation on the stock.

   Collateral Therapeutics

   Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities has raised his price target
on Collateral Therapeutics to $90 from $36 based on promising test data on
Generx, the company's developmental heart treatment.

   The data represent "a landmark in biotechnology research in that it is, to
our knowledge, the first demonstration of gene therapy efficacy in
cardiovascular disease," Drake says.  He has a strong buy on the stock.


LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2000


                             645 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             April 16, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. I-2

LENGTH: 398 words

HEADLINE: Qualcomm's bottom line remains sound

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Stock of Qualcomm has been volatile this year following last year's huge
ride, but the fundamentals are in good shape, analysts say. "Qualcomm's bottom
line should remain in a sharp uptrend through fiscal 2001, at least," says
George Rho of Value Line. Earnings per share more than tripled in the quarter
ended in December, fueled by growing acceptance of the company's code division
multiple access, or CDMA, technology that generates fees, royalties and chip-set
sales. Still, Qualcomm stock "is best-suited for aggressive, momentum-oriented
investors," Rho says.

   Value Line gives the stock its highest (1) rating for timeliness, but its
average (3) for safety. "Motorola and Nokia are trying to catch up with
Qualcomm" on chip-sets, says Pete Peterson of Prudential Securities, noting that
the two companies are teaming up to promote an open standard for next-generation
CDMA chip technology.

   This move "signifies the importance of CDMA as a part of the next-generation
technology," he says. He sees Qualcomm stock reaching $183 in 12 months. U.S.
Laboratories Last year, U.S. Laboratories, a test and inspection company, had
revenues of $16.4 million.

   For fiscal 2000, revenues will come in at $29 million, says David N. Allen of
Granite Financial Group. Over the past year, the company has made six
acquisitions.

   Five are in the test and inspection business for the construction industry,
but the largest provides inspection of critical components for industrial
markets, including aerospace and telecommunications, Allen says. The backlog
currently is $16.3 million, up from $10 million in late 1999. The company should
enjoy long-term revenue growth of 25 percent a year: 8 percent to 10 percent
from internal growth and 15 percent to 17 percent from acquisitions, Allen says.
Earnings per share for the year 2000 should come in at 48 cents, well above last
year's 21 cents, says the analyst, who has a long-term purchase recommendation
on the stock. Collateral Therapeutics Analyst Peter F. Drake of Prudential
Securities has raised his price target on Collateral Therapeutics to $90 from
$36 based on promising test data on Generx, the company's developmental heart
treatment. The data represent "a landmark in biotechnology research in that it
is, to our knowledge, the first demonstration of gene therapy efficacy in
cardiovascular disease," Drake says.

   He has a strong buy on the stock.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             646 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Columbus Dispatch
                            Columbus Dispatch (Ohio)

                            April 13, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: EDITORIAL & COMMENT, Pg. 12A

LENGTH: 424 words

HEADLINE: GENOME PROJECT AT END OF RACE, COOPERATION WOULD BE USEFUL

BODY:


   The human genome project, expected to be completed in several weeks, is
potentially one of the most important scientific advances of the past several
centuries. Dr. J. Craig Venter, president of the Celera Corp., last week told a
congressional subcommittee that the Rockville, Md., company has finished
analyzing all necessary pieces of human DNA.

   By mapping the human genetic code, which contains a sequence of 3 billion
chemical units, the genome project is expected to bring improvements in early
detection and treatment of diseases and new approaches to prevention.

   Complete knowledge of the human genome will enable scientists to decipher the
mutations and genetic differences that make some people susceptible to disease
and others not. Some scientists predict diseases such as sickle-cell anemia and
cystic fibrosis will be routinely cured through gene therapy.

   Celera jumped into the genome race 22 months ago in competition with a
publicly financed consortium. Though the consortium has cast doubt on Celera's
work in the past, the group did not challenge Venter's statements. There has
been some cooperation between the two groups, but now relations seem strained.

   Because public money supports the consortium, the group should be doing
everything possible to foster good relations and share knowledge that could lead
more quickly to practical uses.

   In the past three weeks, as the end game of the genome project was played
out, the competitors have been flinging intellectual spitballs. This is
counterproductive. Although they are pursuing different strategies, each side
could learn from the other.

   Venter, in his testimony, pointedly attacked the quality of the public
consortium's work. Perhaps this was in retaliation to a consortium official's
charge two years ago that Venter would produce "the Mad magazine version of the
human genome.''

   Such backbiting is unseemly. Recently, however, the two sides were civil
enough to agree on standards that the Patent and Trademark Office should adopt
to allow for the patenting of genes. Genes should not be patentable until a
clear description of their role and utility can be given, the two sides said.
Although Celera is clearly ahead at this point, the public consortium has laid
out much of the technical bases for decoding the human genome and made this
information available to researchers.

   Both groups have done work of enormous importance for the future of medicine.
Advances, no doubt, would be hastened under a more amicable working
relationship.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000


                             647 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    April 13, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 826 words

HEADLINE: PITT HONORS DISCOVERER OF CELLS' AGING ENZYME

BYLINE: BYRON SPICE, SCIENCE EDITOR, POST-GAZETTE

BODY:


   Elizabeth Blackburn wasn't looking for a cancer cure 25 years ago when she
began scrutinizing the odd bits of DNA located on the ends of each chromosome.
She didn't set out to find a way to halt the aging process.

   And the Australian-born molecular biologist is quick to note that she hasn't
found either of those things -- yet. When she and a student finally identified
the enzyme that keeps those chromosome tips in good repair, however, they
uncovered important insights into how cells divide, how they turn malignant and
how they grow old and die.

   The discovery of the enzyme, called telomerase, launched the career of
Blackburn, who has since won a number of major scientific awards. She will
accept the most recent, the University of Pittsburgh's Dickson Prize in
Medicine, this afternoon when she delivers a lecture in Oakland.

   The prize, which this year totals $ 50,000, recognizes individuals who have
made significant, progressive contributions to the field of medicine.

   Telomerase has yet to be translated into a treatment for anything, but its
impact on molecular genetics has been profound. "It's been very important for
understanding how chromosomes are replicated," the process by which cells pass
on their genetic instructions, said William Saunders, a Pitt biologist who
studies how cancers arise when that process goes awry.

   Genes are made of DNA and packed into bundles called chromosomes, which are
found in the nuclei of most of the body's cells. Human cells contain 23 pairs of
chromosomes. In the mid ' 70s, when Blackburn was a postdoctoral fellow at Yale
University, she became fascinated by chromosome tips. Tools for studying the
structure of these molecules had just become available to biologists "and there
were hints that the ends were special," she recalled. "But that could have meant
anything."

   As it turned out, the tips, called telomeres, act much like the sleeves at
the ends of shoelaces, keeping the chromosomes from fraying. This is
particularly important when cells divide; as chromosomes copy themselves, the
telomeres keep chromosomes from sticking to each other, which can cause a cell
to turn malignant, Saunders said. In most cells, the telomeres get shorter each
time the cell divides until they finally disappear and the cell dies.

   Telomerase, which Blackburn discovered with student Carol Greider in 1980 at
the University of California at Berkeley, is an enzyme that works to rebuild
those caps.

   It thus helps keep telomeres young, allowing them to reproduce indefinitely.
Normally, it's actively made in only a few types of cells, such as hair
follicles, the intestinal lining and sperm cells.

   Most cancer cells also produce telomerase. Activation of the gene that
produces telomerase is not something that would harm a cell. But in cells
undergoing other genetic changes that lead to malignancy, "telomerase is one of
the things that gives them a push, a green light to keep dividing," Blackburn
said.

   Simply eliminating telomerase or its gene does not cure cancer. Saunders
noted experiments with genetically engineered mice that lack the telomerase gene
show that these "knockout" mice can develop cancer.

   Still, it seems reasonable that an agent that blocks telomerase or
inactivates its gene could be used with other treatments, said Blackburn, now a
professor at the University of California, San Francisco.

   In other cases, scientists may want to increase telomerase activity,
restoring the youth of the telomeres and thus extending the reproductive life of
cells. Earlier this year, researchers at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute in Boston
reported that liver cirrhosis was more severe in telomerase-deficient mice than
in regular mice and that giving these mice the telomerase gene seemed to slow
the progression of the disease.

   Telomerase is an unlikely fountain of youth; the aging process involves many
other genes, so telomerase gene therapy may do little to increase longevity. But
Blackburn suspects telomerase may find use in treating various types of organ
failure, not just liver cirrhosis. Telomerase gene therapy might help damaged
hearts or kidneys regenerate themselves. The danger, of course, is that such
therapy might also unleash a cancer.

   All that can be said with any certainty is that telomerase research has
created some new opportunities.

   "It just opens some really promising doors," Blackburn said. "Lots and lots
of doors. We're all very interested in what we can do, but it's not clear how it
will play out."

   Blackburn will deliver a public lecture, "Telomere Capping and Cell
Proliferation," at 4 p.m. today in lecture room 6 of Scaife Hall, 3550 Terrace
St., Oakland. A reception will follow in the Scaife Hall lobby.

   Blackburn will deliver a public lecture, "Telomere Capping and Cell
Proliferation," at 4 p.m. today in lecture room 6 of Scaife Hall, 3550 Terrace
St., Oakland. A reception will follow in the Scaife Hall lobby.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, PHOTO: Elizabeth Blackburn

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000


                             648 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                        April 13, 2000, Thursday , METRO

SECTION: METRO / SOUTH TEXAS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 592 words

HEADLINE: Mini-Medical School opens doors to public;San Antonians learn about
latest advances

BYLINE: Cindy Tumiel

BODY: Blanca Avalos is a high school junior, but she already feels a career
calling.

    She is being drawn to the adrenaline-pumping life of emergency medicine,
either inside the hospital emergency room or out on the streets in an ambulance,
where she can stay active and save lives.

    "I am a fast-paced person and I want to be able to help people," Avalos
said.

    As she spoke, a rescue drill unfolded on the lawn outside the University of
Texas Health Science Center. A fire truck roared across the parking lot, and an
ambulance crew from the San Antonio Fire Department jumped out, rushing to a
volunteer who pretended to have a heart attack on the steps of the medical
school.

    Avalos and about 40 other people watched as paramedics and emergency medical
technicians demonstrated the newest piece in their toolbox - a computerized
device that talked rescuers through their chore, telling them when to check the
pulse and when to administer CPR.

    "It's exciting," Avalos said afterward. "You have to be calm, yet quick."

    The Jefferson High School student was among 300-plus San Antonians who made
a trip to the health science center recently for the opening session of the
university's Mini-Medical School.

    The annual program gives community residents the chance to meet faculty from
the medical school, peek inside their classrooms and laboratories and learn
about some of the latest advances in understanding and treating disease.

    "The purpose is to bring medicine to the community," said Dr. Cervando
Martinez, associate dean for continuing medical education.

    The program will continue for the next two Tuesdays from 7 to 9 p.m. There
still is time to enroll for one or more of the remaining sessions, which will
cover the brain and living with illnesses. For information, call 567-1925, or
visit the program's Web site, http://minimedschool00.uthscsa.edu/.

    The four-week program offers a smorgasbord of insights into emergency
medicine, nursing, dentistry, medicine and laboratory research. It has proven
popular with undergraduate and high school students, who said they were
exploring career options.

    Mia Armstrong and her mother, C.C. Armstrong, settled into Robin Leach's
lab, where the associate professor of cellular and structural biology is
investigating the genetics of prostate cancer.

    While her mom took a few notes, Mia, a junior at St. Mary's Hall, clustered
with other students around the scientist as Leach opened the seal of a container
that resembled a giant milk bottle. Frosty steam bubbled out - the liquid
nitrogen that had been used to preserve thousands of sample cancer cells that
were sealed inside.

    "This is the mad scientist part of the job," Leach joked as steam spewed
from the container.

    But it's the serious side of the work that attracted Mia, who already is
taking advanced science courses and hopes to study genetics in college.

    "I just find it interesting," she said. "I think it's important to pinpoint
the causes of diseases and find ways to do gene therapy."

    This is the third year of the community outreach program, and response to
the invitation has been better than ever, Martinez said.

    In addition to a strong turnout at the San Antonio campus, the program is
being broadcast via closed circuit television to more than a dozen remote
locations in Corpus Christi, the Rio Grande Valley, Laredo, Zapata and Karnes
County. Organizers estimate that 600 people are participating.

    ctumiel@express-news.net


GRAPHIC: PHOTOS BY DELCIA LOPEZ/STAFF : Jun Ma, 10, a fourth-grader at Glen Oak
Elementary School, watches as graduate students show how to draw micro-organisms
into a tube during the Mini-Medical School at the University of Texas Health
Science Center.; Students watch as emergency medical technicians Hector Obregon
and Daniel Ochoa work on Angus Hodgson during a heart attack simulation at the
Mini-Medical School. The school opens every year at the health science center.;
Students listen as a paramedic talks about the importance of stabilizing a
patient during the first session of the Mini-Medical School. The University of
Texas Health Science Center annually opens the school to let the public meet the
faculty, see the classrooms and get a peek at the latest advances in medicine.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000


                             649 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           April 12, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-2

LENGTH: 790 words

HEADLINE: Viruses hold promise as gene therapy tool

BYLINE: Matthew Weitzman; Matthew D. Weitzman is an assistant professor in the
Laboratory of Genetics at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies.

BODY:
 We are all too familiar with virus infections and the resulting symptoms that
plague us.  Although we generally do not think kindly of these little pests,
they have become incredible tools for today's biologist.

   Studies of how viruses interact with host cells are teaching us about how
cells work.  Viruses also are providing a toolbox for the modern molecular
biologist, supplying reagents to manipulate DNA.

   Gene therapy is a developing area of biomedical research that has the
potential to benefit immensely from viruses and the lessons they can teach us.

   Recently, however, the present status and future potential of gene therapy
have been put under the intense spotlight of scientific and public opinion.
Jessie Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who enrolled in a gene therapy trial to correct
a fatal genetic disorder, died soon after the treatment.  This tragic event
highlights our need to understand more about how to bring therapeutic genes into
the body.

   The aim of gene therapy is to introduce into cells genetic material to
prevent or reverse a pathologic process.  It was originally conceived as a means
to treat genetic disorders resulting from alterations or deletions of a single
gene.  The idea is to introduce a normal copy of the gene to restore the
function of the absent or distorted gene.

   Other applications aim to express new genes that supply therapeutic
functions, such as decreasing artery wall thickness in coronary disease or
delivering lethal toxins to cancer cells.

   The major obstacle to the success of gene therapy is how to deliver safely
the therapeutic gene to the correct tissue.  The delivery of genetic material
can be likened to other delivery systems used to transport information.  For
example, to send someone a document, you make a copy, put it in a package, stick
on an address label and send it by mail.  The document will arrive at the
correct location where it will be read and filed for future reference.  These
same stages are required for the transfer of genetic information.

   One attractive route being explored for gene delivery takes advantage of the
innate ability of viruses to get their genes into cells.  Viruses have evolved
over thousands of years to be efficient carriers of genetic material.  Viral
genes carry the code for proteins that take over the cell and make us ill.

   To generate gene delivery systems, called vectors, viral genetic material is
removed and replaced with therapeutic genes.  This reduces the virus' ability to
reproduce and cause disease, turning it instead into a package that carries the
genes we place inside.

   To harness the therapeutic potential of viruses, we must first understand how
they achieve the steps required for transporting genetic material.

   Viruses have developed ways to make multiple copies of themselves.  We can
engineer cells to make them produce thousands of copies of a viral vector
carrying a therapeutic gene.

   To direct the gene to the correct site in the body, various strategies are
being explored for "addressing" the virus to specific cell types using proteins
expressed on the surface.

   Once the genetic material has been delivered into the target cell by the
vector, it must be read in order to get the therapeutic benefit.  The cell uses
the sequence of molecules in the DNA of the vector to convert the information
into a protein.

   A cure to genetic diseases requires the information in the therapeutic genes
to be filed for future retrieval.  Some viruses do this naturally by
incorporating their genes into the genetic material of the host cell.

   However, when filing genetic information, it is important to put the gene
into a safe location.  In the same way that filing a document into the wrong
folder of your filing cabinet would mess up the document in that file, inserting
genetic material into important cellular genes could have deleterious effects.
Therefore, the ideal vector would insert its contents into a safe region of the
human genome without affecting crucial cellular genes.

   Gene therapy is a young field, and it will take time before its true
potential is realized.  It is likely that approaches used with today's vectors
will be replaced by improved strategies.  As we learn more about viruses, we
will be able to combine the desirable features from different viruses to make
better packages to carry the therapeutic genes.

   Eventually we will have multiple mail services for genes, each customized for
different diseases.  In the mean time, we still have much to learn about
delivering genetic information, and viruses will continue to be our allies in
the quest to cure diseases with gene therapy.

   Life Watch, written by Salk scientists, appears the second Wednesday of the
month.


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2000


                             650 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            April 12, 2000 Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE; Pg. E-2

LENGTH: 778 words

HEADLINE: Viruses hold promise as gene therapy tool

BYLINE: Matthew Weitzman, Matthew D. Weitzman is an assistant professor in the
Laboratory of Genetics at The Salk Institute for Biological Studies.

BODY:

   We are all too familiar with virus infections and the resulting symptoms that
plague us.

   Although we generally do not think kindly of these little pests, they have
become incredible tools for today's biologist. Studies of how viruses interact
with host cells are teaching us about how cells work.

   Viruses also are providing a toolbox for the modern molecular biologist,
supplying reagents to manipulate DNA. Gene therapy is a developing area of
biomedical research that has the potential to benefit immensely from viruses and
the lessons they can teach us. Recently, however, the present status and future
potential of gene therapy have been put under the intense spotlight of
scientific and public opinion. Jessie Gelsinger, an 18-year-old who enrolled in
a gene therapy trial to correct a fatal genetic disorder, died soon after the
treatment.

   This tragic event highlights our need to understand more about how to bring
therapeutic genes into the body. The aim of gene therapy is to introduce into
cells genetic material to prevent or reverse a pathologic process.

   It was originally conceived as a means to treat genetic disorders resulting
from alterations or deletions of a single gene.

   The idea is to introduce a normal copy of the gene to restore the function of
the absent or distorted gene. Other applications aim to express new genes that
supply therapeutic functions, such as decreasing artery wall thickness in
coronary disease or delivering lethal toxins to cancer cells. The major obstacle
to the success of gene therapy is how to deliver safely the therapeutic gene to
the correct tissue.

   The delivery of genetic material can be likened to other delivery systems
used to transport information.

   For example, to send someone a document, you make a copy, put it in a
package, stick on an address label and send it by mail.

   The document will arrive at the correct location where it will be read and
filed for future reference.

   These same stages are required for the transfer of genetic information. One
attractive route being explored for gene delivery takes advantage of the innate
ability of viruses to get their genes into cells.

   Viruses have evolved over thousands of years to be efficient carriers of
genetic material.

   Viral genes carry the code for proteins that take over the cell and make us
ill. To generate gene delivery systems, called vectors, viral genetic material
is removed and replaced with therapeutic genes.

   This reduces the virus' ability to reproduce and cause disease, turning it
instead into a package that carries the genes we place inside. To harness the
therapeutic potential of viruses, we must first understand how they achieve the
steps required for transporting genetic material. Viruses have developed ways to
make multiple copies of themselves.

   We can engineer cells to make them produce thousands of copies of a viral
vector carrying a therapeutic gene. To direct the gene to the correct site in
the body, various strategies are being explored for "addressing" the virus to
specific cell types using proteins expressed on the surface. Once the genetic
material has been delivered into the target cell by the vector, it must be read
in order to get the therapeutic benefit.

   The cell uses the sequence of molecules in the DNA of the vector to convert
the information into a protein. A cure to genetic diseases requires the
information in the therapeutic genes to be filed for future retrieval.

   Some viruses do this naturally by incorporating their genes into the genetic
material of the host cell. However, when filing genetic information, it is
important to put the gene into a safe location.

   In the same way that filing a document into the wrong folder of your filing
cabinet would mess up the document in that file, inserting genetic material into
important cellular genes could have deleterious effects.

   Therefore, the ideal vector would insert its contents into a safe region of
the human genome without affecting crucial cellular genes. Gene therapy is a
young field, and it will take time before its true potential is realized.

   It is likely that approaches used with today's vectors will be replaced by
improved strategies.

   As we learn more about viruses, we will be able to combine the desirable
features from different viruses to make better packages to carry the therapeutic
genes. Eventually we will have multiple mail services for genes, each customized
for different diseases.

   In the mean time, we still have much to learn about delivering genetic
information, and viruses will continue to be our allies in the quest to cure
diseases with gene therapy. Life Watch, written by Salk scientists, appears the
second Wednesday of the month.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             651 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 12, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 2A

LENGTH: 690 words

HEADLINE: Protections found lacking Follow-up report: People in medical studies
still at risk

BYLINE: Edward T. Pound

DATELINE:  WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON -- In a sharply critical report, federal investigators
say the Department of Health and Human Services has made only
"minimal progress" in protecting the many thousands of participants
in clinical trials, despite prior warnings that the system for
safeguarding patients was seriously flawed.

   Citing heightened concern over the safety of participants in gene-therapy
experiments and in testing of new drugs and medical equipment,
HHS Inspector General June Gibbs Brown points to the case of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18. He died last September in a gene-therapy experiment
at the University of Pennsylvania.

   Brown says that since his death, HHS has been examining ways to
improve oversight of such trials. She had called for reforms in
a report in June 1998. She says, however, that in reviewing the
agency's efforts, her investigators found "minimal progress in
strengthening continuing protections for human subjects participating
in research." She says HHS had failed to implement most of her
proposals.


   Her new report prompted congressional criticism of HHS. Rep. John
Mica, R-Fla., says that the inspector general's report shows that,
despite hearings last year, "very little progress has been made
to protect people who agree to participate in clinical trials."

   Mica says that a House subcommittee he chairs will soon demand
answers from HHS at a hearing.

   Rep. Tom Bliley, R-Va., chairman of the House Commerce Committee,
says, "I am appalled that so little action has been taken."

   Bliley adds that his panel will take "a special interest in these
trials and investigating the adequacy" of HHS' oversight.

   The Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of
Health, the HHS arms responsible for oversight of clinical trials,
said in a statement that they "are committed to ensuring the
protection of participants." They said "patient protection is
priority No. 1," and they are looking for ways to protect participants
"without stifling important clinical research."

   In her June 1998 report, Brown focused on Institutional Review
Boards (IRBs). Composed of scientists and lay people, about 3,000
to 5,000 IRBs across the country review and approve research at
universities and hospitals. Their job: to ensure that trial participants
are protected and recognize the risks involved in testing.

   The inspector general has said repeatedly that trial participants
often did not have real protections because the IRBs were overwhelmed
with work and made decisions in a "rushed atmosphere."

   Across the country, tens of thousands of clinical trials that
involve experimental drugs, medical devices and gene therapy are
under way. Some research is federally funded, but most is financed
by pharmaceutical companies and other commercial interests.

   In her new report, Brown examines whether the FDA and NIH followed
her reform recommendations. She gives them a failing grade. She
credits the FDA and the NIH's Office of Protections from Research
Risks for stepping up enforcement: Federally funded research projects
at seven institutions were suspended.

   "But overall," she says, "few of our recommended reforms have
been enacted."

   For instance, Brown says, "minimal progress has been made in
moderating workload pressures of IRBs." She also says the FDA
and NIH should require IRBs to review trials more closely and
be held "accountable for results." She says that neither NIH
nor the FDA had required sponsors of the trials to notify IRBs
of prior clinical reviews.

   "Sometimes sponsors shop around for an IRB that will give their
protocol a favorable review," her report says. The inspector
general also says conflict of interest continues to be a problem.
Clinical research provides revenue and prestige to institutions,
she says, and some of them expect IRB members to support the research
while protecting participants.

   "The increased commercialization of research and the growing
importance of research revenues for institutions heightens the
potential for conflicts of interest in clinical research," the
report says.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2000


                             652 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                       April 11, 2000 Tuesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A1

LENGTH: 2586 words

HEADLINE: INDUSTRY CASH A POTENT HABIT

SERIES: MEDICAL RESEARCH: CAN WE TRUST IT?
SPECIAL REPORT / LAST OF THREE PARTS

BYLINE: MATTHEW KAUFFMAN And ANDREW JULIEN; Courant Staff Writers

BODY:

   Jonathan King was on his own.

   The MIT professor had come to Washington in 1981 for a congressional hearing
on the growing financial ties between academia and industry. Surrounded by
cash-happy school officials and gray-suited pharmaceutical executives, King
tried to deliver a sober message, warning lawmakers that there was a dark side
to mixing science and capitalism.

   "Look, you lose something this way, too," King told the congressional panel.
"Don't think that you are just going to get gravy here. We are going to lose
certain things, lose a certain aspect of the integrity of the educational
system, particularly in biomedical sciences."

   King had a lurking fear that spring afternoon that no one was really
listening.

   Nineteen years later, he's sure of it.

   "Those hearings were a little window," King said. "And that window closed
immediately."

   For decades, a small band of reformers has warned that the blurring of
academia and industry would change the culture of campus science and endanger
the reputation of medical research.

   And for just as long, there has been little impetus for reform.

   Why? Because the key players -- not just researchers, but also university
officials and government policy-makers -- have found corporate cash to be a hard
habit to break.

   Harvard, for example, has long set the standard for the nation with its
strict conflict-of-interest policy -- although those rules still allow
researchers to pocket thousands of dollars from corporate benefactors.

   Now, a special committee is reviewing that policy. But rather than tightening
the rules, Harvard -- which must compete with the likes of Yale, Stanford and
MIT for new talent -- is moving toward letting its scientists forge closer
financial ties with business, lest entrepreneurial researchers head off to more
lucrative pastures.

   "That's one of the motivations behind this review, the sense that Harvard is
out of step, too tough, compared to other places," said Dr. David Blumenthal, a
prominent Harvard researcher who has published a number of studies on the link
between money and medical research. "That may or not be a reason for changing
the rules. But it is nevertheless a statement, I think, about where the field
has moved.

   "There is a high level of comfort, in most academic health centers, with
relationships that they would not have been comfortable with a decade ago."

   Money U.

   In the late 1980s, concerned concerned federal health officials launched an
effort to limit the ties between researchers and industry. But angry scientists
scuttled those plans and -- after six years of debate -- the government simply
handed off the problem to the schools.

   Few saw the irony of placing the responsibility for controlling conflicts of
interest in the hands of those who stood to benefit from them. Faculty
researchers have long been expected to cover a portion -- often a majority -- of
their salary through outside grants from public or private sources. As the NIH
budget tightened, industry-sponsored research took pressure off schools and
faculty members to come up with dollars for salaries.

   At the same time, corporations are famously generous with contract money.
When faculty members at Harvard do corporate-funded research, for example, the
companies are charged an add-on fee as high as 69.5 percent to cover the
university's indirect costs, such as building upkeep.

   It is also an open secret in academia that drug company money pays for much
more than the true direct and indirect cost of the sponsored research.

   "That, I think, modifies the way people look at it sometimes," said Dr.
Michael Todd, editor in chief of the journal Anesthesiology. "They say, 'Sure,
you want to pay me $2,000 [per patient] for a $1,000 study, I can use the money
to do something that I think is worthwhile.' In a tough funding world, sometimes
that was the only way to keep a research operation going."

   With little incentive to cut back on industry money, most schools have
adopted a simple rule that ruffles few feathers: Faculty members who own
substantial stock or receive consulting fees above what is deemed a troubling
amount -- typically $10,000 or $20,000 a year -- are required to alert school
officials.

   Administrators then typically look for ways to "manage" the conflict, which
often involves additional oversight of the research, or a requirement to
disclose the conflict when the research is published, or placing limits on when
a researcher can sell stock.

   It rarely means turning down the money.

   University officials say they are serious about keeping potential conflicts
in check. Julie Gottlieb, a conflict-of-interest watchdog at Johns Hopkins
University Medical School in Baltimore, said the dean's office scrutinizes any
financial relationships that might influence a researcher's work.

   "It provides the faculty with an opportunity to think twice about how they
conduct their research in light of financial interests," Gottlieb said. "It does
make them aware that there's a need for a second look and that the institution
is doing its best to maintain the integrity of the research."

   But even if schools can resist the lure of industry cash, it's unclear that
their faculty can. A year ago, Blumenthal was playing chauffeur to a researcher
he was recruiting for his well-respected Institute for Health Policy at Harvard.
As he navigated the streets of Boston en route to the imposing medical school
building, Blumenthal gave a little sales pitch on the virtues and opportunities
of joining the most prestigious university in the world.

   The recruit was listening. But first, he had a critical question.

   Just how strict, the recruit wanted to know, are Harvard's policies on
financial conflicts of interest?

   "It was very much an issue in the negotiation with this person," Blumenthal
recalled. "He was someone who had outside commercial involvements, both
consulting and equity holding. And he wanted to maintain them or at least be
held harmless for any income loss."

   Blumenthal wasn't surprised. Because it wasn't the first time.

   "I know in other recruitments, this does come up," he said. "They have
started companies. They have clinical research involvements.

   "And they don't want to give them up."

   Pressures At The FDA

   With universities under pressure, consumers might expect protection from the
FDA, which for more than 60 years has held the task of protecting the nation's
drug supply.

   "If you're talking about a drug that's not yet approved, then all bets are
off, because the FDA is going to do its job," said Jeff Trewhitt, a spokesman
for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, the industry's
leading trade group.

   But lately, not everyone shares that confidence. The FDA, long criticized for
its slow pace in approving drugs, began facing pressure in the 1980s to get new
therapies quickly into the hands of doctors. By the end of the decade, Congress
imposed a new culture on the FDA, transforming it from a classic adversarial
watchdog agency into a kinder, gentler bureaucracy in which pharmaceutical
companies were treated as "stakeholders."

   Industry loves the new look.

   "There is a discernible change in attitude," Trewhitt said. "They're not
going to go with us 100 percent of the time by any stretch of the imagination,
but there's also this attitude of 'Let's talk through it.' "

   But critics say the FDA has gone too far in striking a collegial pose with
industry.

   "First of all, it's not collegial at all," said John Gueriguian, an outspoken
former FDA scientific officer. "It's, industry tells you what to approve and you
approve it. That's not collegiality."

   Over the last five years, the FDA has approved a record number of drugs at a
record pace -- with a record number of the new medicines later pulled off the
market for safety issuess, although a report by FDA staffers concluded the
withdrawals were not linked to a speedier review process.

   The FDA also relies heavily on the same academic researchers who have taken
money from industry, giving the agency a conflict of interest problem of its
own. When new drugs or devices show promise and prove worthy of full scientific
hearings, the agency scours academia for the top medical minds to serve on
advisory committees, whose recommendations in favor of a drug are almost always
accepted.

   When those panels meet, one of the first orders of business is a rundown of
the names of advisory committee members -- sometimes a majority of the panel --
who have been granted waivers allowing them to judge drugs and devices made by
companies with whom they may have financial ties.

   Last year, for example, the FDA invited 18 top scientists to review troubling
reports that some patients taking the arthritis drug Enbrel had come down with
serious, and sometimes fatal, infections. It was a classic FDA task -- balancing
the benefits of a new medical therapy against the potential risk.

   Professors flew in from Harvard, Johns Hopkins, Boston University; from
schools in North Carolina, Indiana and Arizona. They met in Gaithersburg, Md.,
under the mammoth chandeliers of a Holiday Inn ballroom.

   And of the distinguished group of 18 distinguished experts, 10 had been
identified as having financial relationships -- with the manufacturer or with
competitors -- that had the potential to compromise their objectivity.

   John Treacy, who oversees advisory committees for the FDA's Center for Drug
Evaluation and Research, can picture an ideal world in which the agency could
call on top experts with no conflicts and no potential for bias. But Treacy
accepts a cold reality: As the lines between industry and academia blur, there
simply aren't enough of them.

   "Particularly when you get into the narrow, more focused areas, it really is
difficult because all the researchers have some number of interests," Treacy
said. "It's awfully hard to find someone who's not had support for research from
one of these companies."

   Debate Over Disclosure

   Among scientists, the debate over conflict of interest rarely leads to a
discussion of putting more distance between industry and academia. Rather, the
hot question is how far scientists should go in publicly disclosing their ties.

   "This is a complex problem," said Joel Lexchin, a staff physician at Toronto
Hospital. "I think there are some basic principles to start with. The first one
is transparency -- that there has to be disclosure about where money's coming
from, who's getting the money, who's supplying it."

   Disclosure, Lexchin says, is not a cure-all. But those who advocate more
significant reform -- change that might limit the flow of money to researchers
-- are generally pushed to the fringe of the debate.

   And those who have tried to impose tougher rules haven't always succeeded.
Compared with other journals, the prestigious New England Journal of Medicine
has radical rules limiting the influence of financial conflicts in its pages.
Writers with financial ties to their topics may publish reports of original
research, but are prohibited from writing editorials or reviews of new
medicines.

   But two months ago, the journal said that 19 of the 42 drug reviews published
in the last three years -- nearly 50 percent -- were written by scientists who
had taken research funds or consulting fees from the drug's manufacturer.

   The journal's admission that it failed to follow its own policy has now
raised questions about reports recommending drugs for AIDS, breast cancer,
diabetes, asthma, multiple sclerosis and other ailments.

   Dr. Marcia Angell, the journal's editor in chief, said she has redoubled
efforts to only publish drug reviews written by scientists with no ties to the
pharmaceutical industry.

   But Angell said she cannot be so strict when it comes to the heart of the
journal's content: the peer-reviewed reports of original medical research. With
links to pharmaceutical companies so pervasive, she said that there would be
little left for the journal to publish.

   "That," she said, "would have been the end of the New England Journal of
Medicine."

   Even with the emphasis on disclosure as the cure for conflict, the
application is spotty. The New England Journal of Medicine and the Journal of
the American Medical Association ask authors to reveal their relationships with
companies affected by their work, but many other journals do not.

   Many schools require their professors to disclose financial conflicts when
writing journal articles or speaking at conferences, although journal editors
and conference sponsors are under no obligation to publicize them.

   In some circles, even disclosure is a controversial policy, with some
prominent scientists bristling at the idea.

   Leaders of the journal Nature published an editorial three years ago decrying
what they called "financial correctness" in science. The editors said virtually
all biotechnology papers include authors with financial ties to industry, and
that absent some evidence of fraud or deception, "this journal will persist in
the stubborn belief that research as we publish it is indeed research, not
business."

   Kenneth Rothman, editor of the journal Epidemiology, believes the attention
to financial conflicts of interest is insulting to researchers and amounts to a
"new McCarthyism in science."

   Rothman says disclosing the financial ties of researchers does nothing to
help readers evaluate the scientific work. Instead, it only casts suspicion on
the work without any evidence of misconduct.

   'All That Money'

   Some reformers agree with Rothman on one point: that disclosure does not
solve the problem. Sheldon Krimsky, a Tufts University professor and one of the
most vocal advocates for change, says disclosure is important, but it doesn't
cleanse research of the effects of conscious or unconscious bias. He suggests
creating a government fund for clinical testing of drugs, to put some distance
between the companies and the researchers.

   Dr. Raymond Woosley, chairman of pharmacology at Georgetown University, has
been pushing a similar idea for years, proposing several national "centers for
education and research in therapeutics" that would evaluate and compare drugs
already on the market. After three years of lobbying, Congress approved the
idea. But while Woosley envisioned a $75 million annual budget, Congress
appropriated just $2.5 million.

   Another critic of the current system, Dr. David Spodick of St. Vincent
Hospital in Worcester, Mass., looks to grass-roots reform, calling on research
scientists to "take the pledge" that they will steer clear of all financial
entanglements.

   Few have taken him up on the offer.

   And Dr. Charles R. Goldman, director of the Public Psychiatry Training
Program at the University of South Carolina School of Medicine, thinks few will.

   Recent scandals over patient deaths in gene-therapy studies may lead to a
crackdown on the conduct of clinical trials. And the embarrassing gaffe
involving writers in the New England Journal of Medicine may bring more
vigilance in disclosing conflicts.

   But Goldman, like many other reform-minded scientists, doubts any real change
will come to pass. His reason is simple: As the culture of academic science has
changed, he believes the lure of industry money has become insurmountable.

   "That's why I get back to 'follow the money,' " Goldman said. "Because I
think all the disclosure and all the committees and safeguards and bureaucratic
controls in the world probably can't counter just the force of all that money."


GRAPHIC: PHOTO: (COLOR), TONY BACEWICZ / The Hartford Courant
GRAPHICS: (2 B&W)
; PHOTO: JONATHAN KING, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, thinks closer ties between science and industry have changed the
culture of academic research. With corporate money an integral part of
university landscape, he said, there is little incentive for reform.; GRAPHIC 1:
SHIFTING LANDSCAPE; [Library note: This graphic was unavailable for htis
database.]; GRAPHIC 2: DISCLOSURE FDA STYLE; The Food and Drug Administration
frequently calls on academic experts to help evaluate new medical therapies --
even when those experts have financial ties with industry. Although the agency
identifies which scientists have conflicts, the details are kept secret. This
1998 waiver letter, blacked out by the FDA, was obtained through a Freedom of
Information Act request.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2000


                             653 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                             April 09, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES; Pg. 8

DISTRIBUTION: NORTH PINELLAS TIMES

LENGTH: 533 words

HEADLINE: Golf tourney April 28 to raise funds for cystic fibrosis

BYLINE: EILEEN SCHULTE

BODY:


   Like many fathers, Gary Dimmer believes his daughter, Caroline, is a pretty
great kid.

   The 12-year-old seventh-grader loves to ride the horse her family leases and
plays a bassoon in the school band.

   But the fact the Palm Harbor girl can play notes on the bassoon is amazing
because she  has a genetic disease called cystic fibrosis, which causes her to
cough almost constantly.

   She coughs because cystic fibrosis causes  abnormally thick, sticky mucus,
leading to chronic and sometimes fatal lung infections and digestive problems.

   Life expectancy for a person with CF is about 30 years.

   To help raise funds for the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, the agency looking
for a cure for the disease, Dimmer is organizing the fifth annual Pinellas
County Golf Classic at 11:30 a.m. (shotgun start at 1 p.m.) April 28 at
Lansbrook Golf Club.

   The field will consist of 36 four-person teams.

   Dimmer, a sergeant on the Pinellas County Sheriff's Office narcotics squad,
said the tournament usually sells out, and two-thirds of the needed players have
already signed up.

   He never knows for sure, however, if the tournament will  sell out until the
last week of registration, so he asks that any interested players register now.

   The cost is $ 75 per individual golfer and includes the post tournament
awards dinner, complimentary lunch and goody bag. Four-person corporate teams
can play for $ 500 (cost includes company signage on the course and business
name in the program).

   For information or to register as a player or hole sponsor (sponsorships cost
$ 100), call (813) 286-0266.

   Dimmer's financial goal this year is $ 15,000. The money raised from the
tournament is important not just to Dimmer, but to two fellow sheriff's
deputies: Ken Adamczyk and John Miller. Adamczyk has two daughters with CF and
Miller has a niece with the disease.

   Caroline Dimmer gets up at 6 a.m. every day to do therapy which also calls
for her to breathe in medications.

   She repeats the procedure in the evening.

   "Genetic illnesses come in different forms of severity," said Dimmer. "She's
on the mild side but it's still CF. They get infections in their lungs. What
ultimately kills them is the scarring on the lungs from the infections."

   Caroline's CF was diagnosed in 1997.

   Since that time she has spent relatively few days in the hospital; Dimmer
said other children with the disease often spend two weeks out of each year in
the hospital receiving massive doses of antibiotics to combat infections.

   This year she has missed three weeks of school due to CF.

   Since Caroline's diagnosis, Dimmer has read everything he can having to do
with CF. He believes researchers using gene therapy are closing in on a cure.

   "I threw myself into it 110 percent," he said.

   Fire and water

   Tarpon Springs firefighter Stan Splinis, center, tries to float during
firefighter water survival training Wednesday under the watch of training
officers Tim Pilson, left, of the Palm Harbor Fire Department and Don Sayre of
the Tarpon Springs Fire Department. About 180 firefighters are participating in
the training at the YMCA of North Pinellas to build confidence should they fall
into water while in gear.


GRAPHIC: BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, SCOTT KEELER; Tarpon Springs firefighter Stan
Splinis tries to float during firefighter water survival training Wednesday
under the watch of training officers Tim Pilson, of the Palm Harbor Fire
Department and Don Sayre of the Tarpon Springs Fire Department.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2000


                             654 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 9, 2000 Sunday, ORLEANS

SECTION: LIVING; Pg. E8

LENGTH: 920 words

HEADLINE: GENETIC RESEARCH AIMS TO STEM TIDE OF AGING AND DISEASE

BYLINE: By Kevin Coughlin Newhouse News Service

BODY:

   If the millennial party was a dud, cheer up. Maybe 2100 will be more fun.

   Breakthroughs in science and technology should help many reach that distant
New Year's Day, according to experts who believe life spans of 150 years or more
are possible within the next half-century.

   "It's quite conceivable within 50 years or so, we could double the human life
span. ... The truth is, there is no maximum life span," asserts Gregory Stock,
director of the Program on Science, Technology and Society at the University of
California at Los Angeles.

   Research on several fronts is fueling optimism for a fountain of youth. The
Human Genome Project, a DNA road map expected by 2003, holds the promise of
dramatic gene therapies to solve diseases and, perhaps, the aging process
itself.

   Powerful new drugs soon may be tailored to our individual genetic quirks
without side effects. When organs and body parts wear out, new ones might be
bioengineered from our own stem cells, or from animals. Synthetic skin is here
already.

   Seeking the ultimate payday, companies like California's Geron Corp. are
exploring the enzyme telomerase as a trigger to make cells replicate
indefinitely. Other targets of research are growth hormones and antioxidants, to
eliminate harmful "free radical" molecules that are byproducts of metabolism.

   Others chase clues in nature, where lobsters, sea turtles and sea anemones
appear impervious to Father Time.

   If fruit flies are any indicator, there might be a move to throttle sex
drives. Studies suggest that delaying reproduction to a ripe old age, over many
generations, yields hardier, hoarier flies. Only the sturdiest survivors pass
along their robust genes.

   Mice, on the other hand, live longer on near-starvation diets. Scientists
speculate that severe calorie restriction stalls rodent reproduction, somehow
suspending the aging clock. Not much fun, but food for thought. Monkeys are
dieting now.

   Researchers from the University of California at San Francisco, meanwhile,
doubled the life of the humble nematode worm, C. elegans, by tweaking two of its
genes.

   All these pieces of the aging puzzle may come together swiftly, academics
say, as ever-faster computers help researchers decipher findings of the Human
Genome Project.

   That international effort is mapping the sequence of 3 billion chemical
"letters" that encode our genetic structure.

   Once the sequence is complete, the real work begins: discovering functions of
specific genes, and how to switch them on or off for desired effects.
Understanding the genes that control a person's immune system, for example,
might lead to a bioengineered pig liver that his body won't reject after
transplantation.

   Within a decade, genetic tests to predict a person's susceptibility to
diseases should become routine, writes Francis Collins in the December issue of
Scientific American.

   Collins, director of the National Human Genome Research Institute, expects
genetic therapies for some diseases between 2010 and 2020. He anticipates
genetically designed drugs for diabetes and high blood pressure, without side
effects, and cancer drugs matched to a patient's likely response.

   By 2050, Collins contends, many diseases will be cured at the molecular
level, before any symptoms appear. He thinks a combination of gene and drug
therapies will boost the average life span -- now 76 years in the United States
-- to 90 or 95 years. Like Stock of UCLA, MIT biologist Leonard Guarente
foresees life spans doubling by 2100.

   If that happens, thank your lucky stem cells, or your telomeres.

   Telomeres cap the ends of chromosomes, like the plastic tips on shoelaces.
These tips grow shorter each time certain cells replicate, finally getting so
short that cells quit dividing. Halt this shrinkage -- with telomerase -- and
aging might be postponed, some scientists suspect.

   Declaring stem-cell research the "Breakthrough of the Year," Science magazine
claims these magical cells someday may repair damaged nerves and grow new hearts
and livers.

   What's astounding about stem cells is their chameleon nature. A stem cell in
a human embryo can become a blood cell, a bone cell or any other kind of cell.
Until they get their marching orders, embryonic stem cells bear the hallmarks of
immortality. Their telomeres don't shrink. The potential fascinates scientists.

   When researchers in 1998 kept embryonic and fetal stem cells alive, ready for
morphing into spare body parts, excitement was tinged by controversy. Some
groups feared such research would promote abortions, and the United States and
other countries banned or restricted use of human fetal tissue.

   Since then, however, studies of mice found that adult stem cells also may be
adaptable. Stem cells from mice brains and muscles can become blood cells. Mouse
marrow cells, injected into brains of newborn mice, have turned into brain
cells. These studies hint at future treatments for muscular dystrophy and
paralysis.

   Advanced Cell Technology of Worcester, Mass., is now cloning stem cells for
research by fusing adult human cells with egg cells extracted from cows. But
don't buy a 22nd century time-share just yet, cautions Huber Warner of the
National Institute on Aging.

   For one thing, he says, it's a big leap from worms, flies and rats to homo
sapiens. It's unclear if telomerase ultimately extends life or causes cancer.
And the whole business of identifying genes, delivering them where you want them
and making them perform on command is enormously challenging.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2000


                             655 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     April 7, 2000, Friday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL, Pg. B-4, NORTH NEIGHBOHOODS

LENGTH: 738 words

HEADLINE: NO HEADLINE

BODY:


   BUTLER COUNTY STATE EMPLOYEE'S DEATH PROBED

   State police in Butler County were investigating the death of a Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources employee who was run over by another employee
in Moraine State Park Wednesday.

   Trooper Randall D. Michel said Jeffrey A. Parsons, 34, was throwing trash
into a truck on the shoulder of U.S. Route 422 in Prospect when Clifford Vance
Elliot, 51, driving a pickup truck, hit him from behind.

   Parsons, of Chicora, was pronounced dead at the scene by the Butler County
coroner.

   Gretchen Leslie, press secretary for the conservation department, said both
men were seasonal employees at the park.

   Michel said Elliot was driving west. The vehicle Parsons was throwing trash
into was parked illegally, police said.

   Elliot hasn't been charged.

   Parsons had worked for the department for four years. He was married and had
a daughter.

   Elliot will be allowed to return to work after taking a mandatory "fit for
duty" physical exam, Leslie said. The department will await the state police
investigation before beginning its own.

   CLARION COUNTY

   $ 100,000 offered for one buck

   A Clarion County couple has increased the reward offer to $ 100,000 for
information leading to the return of their prized whitetail buck.

   Rod and Diane Miller of Knox had offered a $ 25,000 reward for the return of
Goliath, a 28-point buck that was stolen from their deer farm in October. Diane
Miller said Wednesday that the investigation is ongoing but she and her husband
decided to increase the reward to improve the chance of getting the buck back.

   The Millers said they could retire on the stud fees they stand to make from
the buck, which was only 2 years old.

   The Millers said Goliath was just the kind of buck that deer breeders and
hunting preserves want to draw big-spending hunters. Investigators suspect the
thief drugged the animal and dragged it across a field to a waiting pickup
truck.

   ERIE

   Murder accomplice tried as juvenile

   A 16-year-old boy charged with aggravated assault in the stabbing death of a
man who witnessed a beating will be tried as a juvenile in exchange for his
testimony that helped convict three others of first-degree murder.

   Erie County Judge John Bozza on Wednesday decided that Dan Nitu would be
tried as a juvenile rather than face more than 20 years in prison if convicted
as an adult in the April 28 death of his best friend, 18-year-old Martin
Ondreako.

   Nitu testified last month that he stabbed Ondreako only because he was afraid
Ondreako's killers would kill him if he didn't. A jury on March 9 convicted Neil
Simpson, 17, Willie Williamson, 19, and Francisco DeLeon, 23, in Ondreako's
death.

   Nitu said they killed Ondreako because he told police that Williamson and
Simpson attacked and robbed a 48-year-old Erie man last April.

   The three will be sentenced April 26. Nitu, also charged with possessing an
instrument of a crime and hindering apprehension, faces incarceration in a
juvenile facility until he turns 21. When he is released, his record will be
expunged.

   HIGHLANDS

   Teachers reach contract accord

   The district's teachers union has reached a tentative contract agreement.

   Neither side would release details yesterday. Teachers will vote on the
proposal next Friday while the school board will consider it at its next meeting
April 17.

   The 225 Highlands teachers went on strike twice this school year. Their
previous agreement expired June 30.

   ERIE

   Legislator has brain cancer

   Though Italo Cappabianca is unopposed in his bid for a 12th term as a state
representative, he faces a formidable opponent: brain cancer.

   Cappabianca, a Democrat from Erie's 2nd District, had a malignant tumor
removed from his brain in July. Last week, a brain scan showed another mass, so
he is scheduled to undergo gene therapy in Pittsburgh. The process could begin
as early as Monday, when Cappabianca has an appointment in the neurosurgery
department at UPMC for an MRI test. Depending on the results, surgery to remove
the growth could be done that day or the next, he said.

   Meanwhile, the husband of Linda Bebko-Jones, a state representative from the
1st District, also will undergo gene therapy in Pittsburgh.

   Her husband of 25 years, Tom, had been cancer-free for two years when he
found out in February that the disease had returned. He had battled cancer of
the throat, tongue and neck.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2000


                             656 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                            April 6, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; IDEAS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1662 words

HEADLINE: EnGENEering the future

BYLINE: Jane Lampman, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor

DATELINE: BOSTON

HIGHLIGHT:
Biotech revolution spawns vocal opposition, as science enters brave new world -
with ethical debate trailing far behind.

BODY:



   Young people in monarch-butterfly costumes darted about the crowd, and
white-coated "scientists" gave suspicious injections to giant vegetables. The
street theater at the rally in Boston's Copley Square last week was full of
pointed good humor, but the speeches against biotechnology were deadly serious.

Just down the street, the BIO 2000 Conference welcomed more than 10,000
scientists and businessmen to what one termed "not Beantown but Genetown." The
industry is grabbing the global spotlight, raising a stunning $ 8 billion on the
stock market this year, but taking some blows from growing public resistance to
genetically modified crops.

Most people agree on the potential of the biotechnology revolution to radically
transform society. But views vary widely on how much it will be for good or for
ill, and who should have a say in influencing the directions it takes.

The industry tends to see public concerns as resulting primarily from lack of
information. "Less than half of Americans over 18 know anything about
biotechnology," Dan Eramian, vice president of communications for Biotechnology
Industry Organization, told one session. "We just haven't communicated." BIO has
initiated an ad campaign with the theme: "Biotechnology, a big word that means
hope."

Indeed, insiders - exulting in the dazzling breakthroughs and in what they see
as "the biotechnology century" - feel they are on the cusp of a new world with
untold benefits for everyone. As one company president enthused, "If we are
successful, everything will change - our health, our food, ourselves."

The 1,500 protesters who showed up in Boston for a "counter-conference" to the
industry meeting, called Biodevastation 2000, held sessions on dangers posed by
various biotechnologies and efforts of nongovernmental groups to counter them.
They see an industry driven by visions of tremendous profits, rushing into a
brave new world with huge risks to health and the environment and insufficient
government oversight. Some feel decisions are being made without the public
involvement demanded by a democratic society.

"The biotechnology industry is making decisions that affect all life on Earth,
and they're doing it behind closed doors," says Brian Tokar of the Institute for
Social Ecology. "They have no right to control our seeds, our genes, and our
future." Activists working to build a grassroots movement included farmers,
consumers, geneticists, public-interest lawyers, and disabled and indigenous
people from several states and countries.

Theirs, however, are not the only voices seeking to be heard. Ever since the
cloning of the sheep Dolly, with its implications for human cloning, public
interest groups, and particularly religious communities, have expressed deep
concerns about the unprecedented ethical and social issues that biotechnology
raises.

And recently, even a star member of the gung-ho technology world has added his
voice to the chorus. In the current issue of Wired magazine, Bill Joy, computer
wizard and chief scientist of Sun Microsystems - deeply troubled by the unique
ways in which genetics, robotics, and nanotechnology could get out of control
and pose a threat to the human species - urges scientists to relinquish the
right to push forward in certain areas even though they know how.

While nuclear power could be carefully controlled by the military and required
difficult-to-obtain resources, he says, these technologies are commercially
driven and require only knowledge that is broadly available. "The new Pandora's
boxes ... are almost open," he adds. "Yet we seem hardly to have noticed."

Indeed, the breakthroughs come at such a pace from various parts of the world
that even scientists are taken by surprise. And it seems problematic that the
ethical debate will ever fully catch up.

Both the president's National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC) and BIO have
publicly called for broad public discussion of the issues. But it's far from
clear in what venues the discussions will flourish. NBAC has held hearings on
cloning and the ethics related to research on human stem cells and human
biological materials. Bioethics conferences are held at some universities. Carl
Feldbaum, president of BIO, the industry trade association, says he and his
staff meet regularly with all sorts of organizations.

Religious and industry leaders have engaged in meetings set up by groups such as
the Hastings Center and the Templeton Foundation. Mark Hanson, who led such
sessions at the Hastings Center to discuss patenting and cloning, says they
reflected "a great deal of misunderstanding between the secular and religious
worlds."

Both have work to do for dialogue to be fruitful, says Dr. Hanson, now at the
Center for Practical Ethics at the University of Montana at Missoula. Religious
communities need to "identify and research the theological dimensions of genetic
technologies," and industry leaders "should educate themselves about the range
of values questions" raised by their technologies and "resist the temptation ...
to approach moral and religious issues merely as marketing or communication
problems."

Some industry voices are encouraging "ever-greater engagement with the public."
Eric Lander, director of the Whitehead Institute at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology in Cambridge, told his colleagues, "There has been an explosion of
issues in the past year, and we don't have the trust of the public." Ticking off
issues such as gene patenting, diagnostic testing, and therapies that could
produce "designer children," Dr. Lander emphasized the need to engage in
thoughtful discussion, and to be seen to have that discussion "in good faith."

Biotech agriculture has become a lesson in how not to do this. The intense
public backlash in Europe and Japan - and some in the US - against genetically
modified (GM) crops and foods has had such impact that farmers are expected to
reduce their plantings by as much as 25 percent this year. Worldwatch Institute
says: "Stock prices for companies are falling, exports ... are tumbling, and
questions are mounting about the liability for what is turning into a major
debacle for farmers."

A class-action suit on the part of farmers has been filed against Monsanto,
charging inadequate testing and an attempt to monopolize the seed industry.
Another suit has been filed against the Food and Drug Administration by the
Iowa-based Alliance for Bio-Integrity, charging misrepresentation of risks and a
violation of federal law that requires demonstrated safety before marketing.

Industry representatives throw up their hands in disbelief, saying they've
tested their products for years. Mr. Feldbaum says, "They're trying to make a
case based on people's fears, not on a shred of evidence. Can people point to a
single instance of even an allergic reaction" to such foods, he asks. One
illustration to the contrary, he adds, is that 90 percent of today's cheeses are
actually made purer by using a GM enzyme rather than the scrapings from calves'
stomachs.

Still, the extent of testing has become an issue. Studies showing potential
dangers to monarch butterflies and to soil organisms from transgenic corn have
led the Environmental Protection Agency to consider broader testing. The FDA
held a set of public meetings at the end of 1999 on whether its policy for
ensuring safety of bioengineered foods should be modified. A bill introduced in
the House of Representatives would put foods through a premarket approval
process. And bills to mandate labeling have been proposed in Congress and 14
state legislatures.

Mr. Eramian acknowledges that in terms of public perception, the industry's
"most important challenge is the development of trust." The question of trust is
most challenging when it comes to human genetics, where the use of fetal tissue
in research and the patenting of life forms have already outraged many.

The death last year of Jesse Gelsinger, a young participant in a gene-therapy
experiment, revealed lax procedures on the part of researchers. Soon after, it
was learned that more than 650 "serious adverse events" had occurred in other
experiments which had not been reported as required.

Some critics say gene therapy is being hyped for commercial reasons, that the
relation between DNA and observable traits is much more complex. Ruth Hubbard,
of the Council on Responsible Genetics, in Cambridge, Mass., speaks of the
"fallacies of genetic determinism - that genes are causes and their malfunction
the basis of disease. Nothing depends on the function of a single gene," she
says. "Genes are not autonomous."

Most troubling to many, along with cloning, is the capability that now exists
for "germ-line interventions," in which genetic modifications would be passed on
to children. It is now being done with animals, but a voluntary moratorium
exists on human germ-line research. "While I'm not willing to rule it out
forever," Lander says, "I'd like to ban it now. I wouldn't want some cowboy to
do it in the next five to 10 years." Others, however, have begun to describe
future scenarios that include it, along with clear societal divisions between
the "GenRich" and the "Naturals."

Using genetics for human enhancement rather than therapeutics poses huge ethical
dilemmas. Eric Parens, an associate at the Hastings Center in Garrison, N.Y.,
says no institution in the US today is constituted as a forum for discussing
such big-picture issues. The center hopes to begin a project that would help
fill that vacuum.

"The risks are huge," Dr. Parens says. "I'm surprised by how little attention
these developments have received... Nobody is educating people, and it's
crucially important that we have a public conversation."

   (c) Copyright 2000. The Christian Science Publishing Society


LOAD-DATE: April 05, 2000


                             657 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Christian Science Publishing Society
                     Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)

                            April 6, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: FEATURES; IDEAS; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 820 words

HEADLINE: Shaping a genetic revolution

BYLINE: Jane Lampman

BODY:



   The "smart mice" with more memory (from Princeton labs) are touted as leading
eventually to brainier humans. Then five little piggies (with cute names, of
course) are cloned to go to market for organ transplants. Biotech stories now
frequent the front pages, and along with the marvels (and sometimes hype), they
almost always conjure up perplexing questions. Here are some of the issues that
stir controversy over biotechnology developments:

Patenting of genes: Who owns life?

Biotech companies have patented thousands of gene sequences in what some have
called "the latest Gold Rush." Firms say patents are essential to spur the
financial investment needed to develop technologies that will save lives and
improve health. Some religious and other groups object, saying genes should not
be "owned" in the way patenting allows, which encourages commodification and a
reductionist view of life. Others argue that the Supreme Court case that opened
the way for patents was based on a mistake, breaking with historical precedent
which said products of nature could not be patented. So many patents are being
approved that it may become too complex to uphold.

Genetic testing

Diagnostic testing and screening are now most common with pregnant women and
babies, and in law enforcement, but are expected to become a widespread
practice. Pressures are likely to develop from insurers and other institutions
for genetic information - and for people to subscribe to therapies so as not to
pass on genes associated with bad outcomes. Many see the potential for a
resurgence of eugenics. Some in medicine worry about genetic determinism, just
as medicine begins to move away from reductionism toward a more holistic view,
including aspects of spirituality.

Genetically engineered medicine

Some 100 drugs and vaccines are on the market and 350 in the last stages of
trials. The industry sees a genetic basis for many diseases and promises cures
for chronic illnesses. Gene-therapy experiments have been conducted for years.
The death of at least one participant and adverse effects on several hundred
others have sparked a debate about the safety of experiments and the need for
greater reporting and public disclosure of data.

With the prospect that drugs and therapies will be costly, some say only the
rich will benefit, and that resources might be better spent on other forms of
preventive care and public health needs with broader impact.

Xenotransplantation



Genetic modification of animals, particularly pigs, is seen as the current
answer to the lack of organs for thousands of people awaiting transplants. One
firm says 50,000 pigs a year would be needed to meet the demand in the United
Kingdom alone. A multi-billion-dollar-a-year industry for cloned pigs is
expected to develop. Critics raise animal-rights issues, point to the threat of
introducing new diseases into the human population, and say much more could be
done to procure human organs.

Extending life

In the new field of anti-aging research, human cells would be used to build
spare body parts, and parts "that never grow old." Enthusiasts are pushing for
more government funding and less interference. At a recent conference in
Philadelphia, scientists, theologians, and bioethicists debated with some
intensity whether biomedicine should try to "cure dying." They posed questions
on the meaning of life, the social good and bad that might result, who would
have access to therapies, and the possible impact on limited medical resources.

Genetically modified (GM) foods

Issues include safety, environmental impact, and labeling to allow consumer
choice. More than half the acreage of corn, soybeans, and canola in the US and
Canada are transgenic, and 60 to 70 percent of all processed foods in US
supermarkets contain GM ingredients. The industry touts higher yields,
resistance to pesticides and predators, and more nutritious foods. Some farmers
claim lower yields and higher costs. Concerns include pollen "drift" affecting
other crops, the threat of producing "superweeds" and toxins that harm helpful
insects. Critics charge inadequate testing for long-term impacts and call for
adoption of the "precautionary principle," whereby producers must show evidence
of safety before marketing.

Human enhancement

Moratoriums currently exist on human cloning and what is called germ-line
modification, which would pass modified genes on to progeny. (Europe has banned
both.) But a convergence is developing between reproductive techniques and
genetics which could blur the line between therapeutics and "enhancement" -
opening the door to "designer babies" and eugenics, with profound implications,
many say, for human identity, family relations, and social justice.

   (c) Copyright 2000. The Christian Science Publishing Society


LOAD-DATE: April 05, 2000


                             658 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                       April 6, 2000 Thursday, LAKEFRONT

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 1B2

LENGTH: 831 words

HEADLINE: A RAY OF HOPE;
GENE THERAPY OFFERS PROMISE FOR TODDLER

BYLINE: By Susan Langenhennig West Bank bureau

BODY:

   Stricken by a fatal genetic neurological disorder, 3-year-old Lisette Guth's
life is like a wind-up clock, gradually running out of energy and sluggishly
struggling to keep on ticking.

   On good days, the Algiers Point toddler giggles and coos, smiling and turning
her big brown eyes toward her mother as mom whispers sweet encouragement into
her ear.

   On bad days, Lisette's arms and legs loll limp and lifeless; her head flops
heavily to one side of her miniature wheelchair.

   The bad days foreshadow what's to come as Lisette's Canavan disease
progresses and her limited motor skills and physical abilities fade. They're
also an indication that Lisette's time is about to run out.

   But there is hope for the Guth family.

   Eighteen months ago, Lisette was one of 15 children in the nation to undergo
an experimental gene therapy treatment for Canavan's disease at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia.

   The results were promising, if only temporarily.

   "Six months following the therapy, she was greatly improved. She was very
alert, her eyesight was improved, her hearing was better. You could see a real
difference," said Desiree Loeb-Guth, Lisette's mother and a registered pediatric
nurse at St. Charles General Hospital. "But after the six months, there's been
no more improvement."

   Pending federal approval, Lisette is scheduled to undergo the second phase of
the treatment within the next few months.

   But the research, which is privately financed by parents of children with
Canavan's disease, and the cutting-edge treatments are extremely costly.

   And the Guths' medical insurance will not cover the expense of the
procedures.

   To help raise money for research and offset some of Lisette's mounting
medical bills, the Guths' friends and family members are holding a "Blue Jeans
for New Genes" fund-raiser Sunday at the Banks Street Bar and Grill, 4401 Banks
St. near Jesuit High School.

   The casual event will include food, soft drinks, beer and live Zydeco music
provided by Sunpie Barnes and Friends. Tickets are $25 and can be purchased by
calling 362-3792.

   All money generated from the event will go toward the Canavan Research Fund,
to treat children with Canavan's disease regardless of their ability to pay for
the procedures.

   In addition, a parade of prizes raffle will be held to raise money
specifically for Lisette's care.

   *** Holding out hope ***

   Canavan's disease is a genetic disorder that causes the brain to swell from a
buildup of a certain protein. The abundance of the protein destroys the
protective sheaths around nerve fibers in the brain, short-circuiting the
nervous system and stifling normal childhood development.

   Children with Canavan's disease cannot walk, talk or support their heads.
Lisette can't roll over or grab and hold objects, and she has limited eyesight
and hearing.

   Patients are not expected to live past 10 years old, and many lose most
quality of life by age 4, falling into a coma-like state.

   "At about 4 months old, we started noticing that she wasn't doing the things
that normal babies do," Guth said. "She didn't sit up or grab at things. By 6
months, it was clearly evident that something was wrong."

   Lisette was diagnosed with Canavan's disease on Oct. 28, 1997.

   "Our hearts sank. I didn't know how I was going to cope with it. My husband
was crying hysterically," Guth said. "We were told she probably would die by age
4 or 5."

   Not long after the diagnosis, the Guths found out about the gene therapy
research.

   In September 1997, doctors inserted a reservoir under Lisette's scalp,
leaving a small bump right below the sandy brown curls on her hairline.

   A few months later, healthy copies of the ASPA gene were injected into the
reservoir.

   "She started developing a fever, which was to be expected, and she became
very lethargic and didn't eat for a few days," Guth said. "But then she
gradually improved."

   While the positive effects of the initial surgery have worn off, Desiree and
Douglas Guth are optimistic that the next stage in treatment will produce
similar signs of improvement in their daughter.

   The next treatment, however, comes at a time when experimental gene therapy
has become a national political hot-button issue, dragged into the limelight
after the recent, high-profile death of a teen-ager undergoing another type of
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The Food and Drug Administration is now taking a hard look at gene therapy
and is forcing researchers to do more non-human testing before experimenting on
living patients.

   That's frustrating to families like the Guths, who feel like they're racing
against a clock.

   "This research is very fragile. It can only be done with money and government
approval," Guth said. "It's a disaster that all this political attention came
right now. I don't think this will bring a cure to Lisette, but our main goal is
to help improve her quality of life and to help future generations. She has a
hard life ahead of her."

GRAPHIC: Desiree Loeb-Guth of Algiers Point holds her daughter, 3-year-old
Lisette, who was born with Canavan disease, a very rare genetic neurological
disorder.  A fund-raiser for Lisette is planned for Sunday at the Banks Street
Bar and Grill. [COLOR] STAFF PHOTO BY SUSAN POAG

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2000


                             659 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    April 05, 2000, Wednesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: THISWEEK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 979 words

HEADLINE: Big plans at UTMB;
Research to look at genes, environment

SOURCE: Staff

BODY:

   The University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston is establishing a
specialized program - the Sealy Center for Environmental Health and Medicine -
to study how the environment affects health.

   Dorthea Wilson, vice president of research for UTMB at Galveston, said the
center will research "asthma, skin cancer and other diseases impacted by the
environment."

   The sixth John Sealy Center at UTMB is among several programs planned by UTMB
for the next five years.

   "We will distribute four grants each year for the next five years to
(research) environmental health, gastrointestinal diseases and neuroscience,"
said Dorothea Wilson, vice president for research at UTMB at Galveston.

   Wilson said the medical branch also is preparing to move into genomics, or
"sequencing the human gene to acquire information to eventually treat disease
through gene therapy." She said genomics will allow doctors to create drugs
tailored for individuals.

   The environmental health center will be established with funds from the John
Sealy Memorial Endowment Fund for Biomedical Research, Wilson said. Other grants
will finance research programs in neurosciences, gastrointestinal health and
bioinformatics, which uses computers to analyze data in the biological sciences.

   Under R. Stephen Lloyd, director of UTMB's National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences Center at Galveston, the new center will allow
UTMB to address statewide environmental health needs.

   "We envision this as a center without walls, so we can take advantage of the
university's multidisciplinary strengths in environmental medicine," said Lloyd,
who also is a senior scientist in the Sealy Center for Molecular Science, one of
the five Sealy centers previously established by the foundation.

   A 40-member, full-time faculty will direct research using approximately $ 15
million in current grants in such specialties as internal medicine, pediatrics,
pathology, pharmacology and toxicology, structural biology and molecular
science.

   "With the resources of this new Sealy Center, we will be able to raise the
caliber of our research, education and outreach in clinical and basic sciences,"
Lloyd said.

   At the same time, the Sealy Center for Environmental Health and Medicine will
seek to educate the public about how environmental pollutants and toxicants in
the air and water affect quality of life and health.

   The new bioinformatics initiative at UTMB allows scientists to use computers
to gather, look for patterns and study data acquired from the international
human genome project, which will eventually identify the sequence and structure
of all human genetic material. Identifying the patterns will give researchers
clues about how to cure and perhaps prevent disease.

   "Having this information and being able to analyze it will revolutionize the
approach to clinical research and affect every biomedical discipline," said
Bruce Luxon, UTMB's associate professor of Human Biological Chemistry and
Genetics and chairman of the task force that proposed the idea for
bioinformatics.

   The endowment fund was established in 1986, when the Sealy and Smith
Foundation and the university saw a need to provide a base of support for
biomedical research at UTMB. Each agreed to donate a total of $ 25 million over
five years to endow a fund for biomedical research.

   That $ 50 million investment grew and, by 1998, surpassed $ 100 million.

   Income from the endowment has supported various health research programs,
including the establishment of five multidisciplinary Sealy Centers.

   The first, the Sealy Center for Molecular Science, was followed in quick
succession by centers for molecular cardiology, aging, cancer cell biology and
structural biology.

   "At a time when financial issues were a concern for UTMB, it was essential
for us to continue encouraging outstanding scientific efforts," said Dr. John D.
Stobo, UTMB president. "Standing shoulder to shoulder with the Sealy and Smith
Foundation, we have been able to do that."

   Wilson said the awards resulted from a grass-roots approach to research, in
which faculty in the four areas were asked to develop detailed plans to enhance
their programs.

   Each successful grant proposal came from a multidisciplinary task force -
basic scientists, faculty members and clinicians from a wide array of
specialties.

   The Sealy Center for Environmental Health and Medicine program was
established in response to a proposal from a task force of 15 faculty members
representing 12 departments and centers at UTMB.

   The Sealy Memorial Endowment award for gastrointestinal health will add four
faculty members focusing on gastrointestinal cancer, inflammation and infection,
and on the liver.

   The grant primarily will cover start-up costs - establishing laboratories and
initial salary support until external funding is available.

   A second use of the funds will be to finance pilot research projects in which
two or more labs collaborate on one program.

   "We hope these will be projects that will be successful rapidly - quickly
qualifying for NIH and other external grants," said Dr. Luis Reuss, professor of
physiology and biophysics and chair of the gastrointestinal disease task force.

   The neurosciences funding will enhance UTMB's strengths in the study of brain
injuries and the nervous system through recruitment of an assistant professor in
the Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology.

   "The importance of research at an academic medical center such as UTMB cannot
be overstated," Stobo said. "Not only is this endowment valuable because of the
dollars the research attracts in grants from the National Institutes of Health
and other external sources, it also is important because the entire community we
serve - locally, nationally, even internationally is enriched by the strides we
take in education and health care."



LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2000


                             660 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                     APRIL 5, 2000 Wednesday SFCITY EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 537 words

HEADLINE: CONGRESS ASKS PENN FOR GENE-THERAPY DATA A HOUSE COMMITTEE WANTS
CONFIDENTIAL FINANCIAL AND PATIENT RECORDS. THE SCHOOL SAID IT WOULD COMPLY.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A congressional committee yesterday asked the University of Pennsylvania to
hand over confidential financial and patient records related to a gene-therapy
experiment that led to the death of an Arizona teenager here last fall.

   In a letter to Penn President Judith Rodin, the House Commerce Committee said
the documents were essential for "an accurate understanding of the facts"
surrounding the Sept. 17 death of Jesse Gelsinger.

   The committee also asked for related documents from the Food and Drug
Administration, which regulates human gene-therapy experiments.

   Penn spokesman Kenneth J. Wildes Jr. said last night that the university
would cooperate "fully and completely" with the congressional probe. A
spokeswoman for the FDA said the agency had not yet received the letter, but
indicated it would also cooperate.

   Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died at Penn's teaching hospital four days after
getting an experimental gene drug to correct an inherited liver disorder.

   Penn scientists believe that high levels of the disarmed cold virus used to
deliver a corrective gene to Gelsinger's liver set off a fatal immune-system
response. It is believed to be the first death directly stemming from gene
therapy.

   Several other patient volunteers who preceded Gelsinger suffered temporary
side effects from the viral vector, but there were no other deaths.

   An FDA investigation found multiple safety violations in the Penn experiment
and prompted the agency to shut down the university's seven other gene-therapy
trials until patient safety can be assured.

   Penn's Institute for Human Gene Therapy, headed by Dr. James M. Wilson, has
been working feverishly to get the FDA ban lifted.

   In its letter to Rodin, the Commerce Committee asked for the records of
patients who volunteered for the trial, including the 18 who were actually
treated and others who were approved for treatment but had not yet received it.

   The committee also requested records about the financial relationship between
Penn and Genovo Inc., the privately held, for-profit biotech company that Wilson
founded to commercialize his discoveries.

   The committee also wants to see financial records related to Penn's
recruitment and hiring of Wilson and a colleague, Dr. Nelson Wivel, former
director of the government's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), the
government body that oversees gene therapy.

   In addition, the committee has asked for all communications to and from
Arthur Caplan, Penn's bioethicist, who opposed an earlier plan by the Penn
scientists to conduct their experiment on newborns suffering from a fatal form
of the liver disease.

   Pete Sheffield, a Commerce Committee spokesman, said the documents were being
sought "to make sure that no stone is left unturned" in examining the Penn death
as a possible indicator of problems that may plague other gene-therapy
experiments.

   "We are not passing judgment at this point, but we want to get everything we
can get our hands on," he said.

   The committee, headed by Reps. Thomas J. Bliley Jr. (R., Va.) and John D.
Dingell (D., Mich.), has begun interviewing people in connection with the Penn
trial. It is expected to hold public hearings in several months.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             661 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    April 5, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 8D

LENGTH: 1753 words

HEADLINE: Pumping blood into 'bio-bypass' Heart, cancer treatments proving hard
to validate

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

BODY:

   Two years ago, Floyd Stokes, a 59-year-old peanut farmer, told
reporters that his crushing chest pain had been miraculously relieved
by a new gene therapy for the heart.

   "Even after I had my bypass, I never felt as good as I do now,"
said Stokes, crediting an injection of genes that prompted blood
vessels to grow and resupply his blood-starved heart.

   Two years later, he's feeling fine. "I work seven days a week,
and some days are 16 hours long," says Stokes, who lives in Stephenville,
Texas. "I don't ever slow down because of my heart."


   Nevertheless, researchers have encountered frustrating stumbling
blocks that are likely to keep the bio-bypass from becoming a
mainstay of heart disease treatment for years.

   The main hurdle is that researchers have failed to prove scientifically
that the treatment, known as coronary angiogenesis, works. And
they're so uncertain about how to obtain proof that some of the
competing pioneers in the field gathered March 12 in Anaheim,
Calif., to pool insights.

   Advocates of the approach are eager to master angiogenesis because
it offers unique promise for treating both heart disease and cancer,
the nation's leading killer diseases.

   For heart disease, doctors use genes or proteins to stimulate
growth of blood vessels. They're trying to steal a trick from
human development and grow new arteries in adults with plaque-packed
arteries. In cancer, the goal is to develop medicines that block
the blood vessels that sustain tumors.

   William Li, president of the Angiogenesis Foundation in Cambridge,
Mass., says that there is a vast gulf between cancer and heart
specialists. Researchers studying angiogenesis, Li says, now work
in "two vertical silos," heart disease and cancer, often without
sharing insights. "This is a field in which 1,000 mistakes can
be made, and every one will be made," he says. "What's not acceptable
is making the same mistake your competitor made last week."

   Li advocates the merging of key aspects of heart disease and cancer
research under the banner of angiogenesis. But that's a long way
off. And researchers must figure out a way to prove that angiogenesis
can remedy heart disease.

   No significant difference

   In the past year, the two best tests of angiogenesis in heart
disease flopped. Results from the latest failure were reported
last month at a meeting of the American College of Cardiology
(ACC) in Anaheim.

   That study of 337 men and women was the largest and best controlled
trial of angiogenesis in heart disease. As part of the study,
doctors infused either the blood vessel growth factor known as
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) or a placebo into two arteries
that supply blood to the heart.

   Researchers hoped to prove that FGF-2 boosted exercise tolerance
in people with clogged arteries by increasing blood flow to the
heart. But volunteers given FGF-2 didn't last much longer on the
treadmill than those on a placebo.

   "There were modest increases in the treatment groups, but they
did not reach statistical significance," says Bruce Scharschmidt,
director of clinical development for the study's sponsor, Chiron,
an Emeryville, Calif., biotech firm.

   "We really need more information to decide what future studies
should be done," he says.

   Many questions remain, researchers say. For instance, how do you
prove that you've stimulated new blood vessels to grow when they're
so thin that they're virtually invisible?

   Modern scanners are designed to picture major arteries, not new
vessels thinner than a human hair. And without clear images, researchers
wonder, how can they measure success or failure? By a patient's
performance on an exercise test? On tests that assess the patient's
quality of life?

   The Chiron study showed that patients and their doctors both reported
substantial improvement using "quality of life" measures regarded
as accurate, reliable and reproducible. Although the results are
not as concrete as before-and-after images showing a web of new
vessels around the heart, David Cohen of Harvard University notes
that quality-of-life measures have ushered many drugs, including
Viagra, onto drugstore shelves.

   Researchers also haven't decided which angiogenic agents work
best and how they should be given. As proteins? As genes? If you
use genes, do you deliver them in their naked form or in a virus
or cell?

   Doctors have become wary of using weakened viruses as packages
for gene therapy since September, when a University of Pennsylvania
patient had a fatal allergic reaction to the virus in which his
experimental treatment was enclosed.

   Experiments halted

   Early in March, federal regulators halted a series of angiogenesis
experiments by Vascular Genetics as part of an investigation into
problems in the field. Vascular Genetics used plain -- so-called
naked -- genes to avoid the types of reactions that proved fatal
in the Pennsylvania study.

   Vascular Genetics' lead investigator, Jeffrey Isner, has provoked
controversy for another reason. He initially made headlines by
touting successes in small groups of patients, without using a
comparison group to validate his experiments. Such studies are
notoriously unreliable.

   But Isner says he and his colleagues have completed a strictly
controlled study of growth-factor gene therapy in 50 people with
clogged leg arteries. "We were halfway through a study in the
heart when the FDA put us on hold."

   Isner defends his initial decision to test gene-based angiogenesis
in a few patients without using a control group by citing the
novelty of the procedure. "Nobody had ever tried it," Isner
says. "You don't know the dose, how often it can be given, whether
it will cause harm. Once that's established, designing a trial
is pretty straightforward."

   But it may take years to decide which angiogenic agents are best
and how to use them, says Nicholas Chronos of the Atlanta Cardiovascular
Research Institute and a co-leader of the Chiron trial. "We are
developing the field at the same time we are developing the agents."
<>

   Testing ways to control vessel growth

   Researchers have made more progress in developing angiogenesis
blockers for cancer in part because exploiting angiogenesis was
the brainchild of a cancer researcher, Judah Folkman at Children's
Hospital in Boston.

   So far, about 6,500 cancer patients have taken part in trials
of anti-angiogenesis drugs.

   Eleven of the drugs have reached Phase 3, the large-scale clinical
trials that offer the best evidence of whether a drug should be
approved.

   Only 1,500 patients have taken part in clinical trials of angiogenesis
in heart disease.

   And none of the eight angiogenesis medicines that target coronary
artery disease has reached Phase 3.

   That is likely to change, thanks to growing excitement about the
technology's promise, says William Li, president of the Angiogenesis
Foundation in Boston.

   By 1998, industry and government had plowed an estimated $ 4 billion
into angiogenesis research, Li says. And 200 biotech, medical-device
and drug firms -- including all of the majors -- have launched
studies into aspects of angiogenesis.

   The effort has begun to yield dividends. Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceuticals
of Raritan, N.J., has won government approval for a growth factor
that helps heal diabetic foot ulcers.

   Sold as Regranax, the growth factor has been available for two
years.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS, B/W, C.J. Gunther for USA TODAY (2); Halted in midstudy:
Jeffrey Isner's gene therapy might grow vessels, ease heart disease. 'I never
felt as good': Heart patient Floyd Stokes, taking a stress test in late 1998, is
an angiogenesis success story.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2000


                             662 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                     April 04, 2000, Tuesday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 247 words

HEADLINE: Texas firms plan IPOs as Nasdaq plunges

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: DALLAS

BODY:

   DALLAS - A number of Texas companies that are preparing to go public must
have winced Monday about the Nasdaq plummeting more than 7 1/2 percent.

   Both technology and biotech companies in the state have filed in recent days
to make initial public offerings.

   On the high-tech side, CheMatch.com of Houston, which provides an Internet
marketplace for buyers and sellers of commodity chemicals, plastics and fuel,
filed to raise $ 50.4 million. Irving-based BroadbandNOW, which provides
high-speed Internet access, indicated it hopes to raise $ 115 million. And
Austin-based ClearCommerce Corp., which makes software for online transactions,
filed to raise $ 57.5 million. None indicated a target price for shares.

   On the biotech side, Tanox of Houston plans this week to offer 7 million
shares at $ 27 to $ 30 with the goal of raising $ 126 million. The company
develops antibodies.

   Lexicon Genetics of The Woodlands, which looks for genes useful in
development of pharmaceuticals, plans to offer 10 million shares at $ 22 to $ 24
apiece and hopes to raise $ 100 million. J.P. Morgan is among the firm's
underwriters.

   Genometrix of The Woodlands, which provides gene-related information, hopes
to raise $ 102 million with its IPO, and Introgen Therapeutics of Austin, which
makes gene-therapy products, wants to raise $ 92 million.

   All the firms have filed to list their stocks on the Nasdaq. The
technology-heavy exchange suffered huge losses Monday.









LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2000


                             663 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         April 2, 2000 Sunday, ALGIERS

SECTION: PICAYUNE; Pg. 1F1

LENGTH: 836 words

HEADLINE: GENE THEAPY OFFERS PROMISE FOR TODDLER

BYLINE: By Susan Langenhennig West Bank bureau

BODY:

   Stricken by a fatal genetic neurological disorder, 3-year-old Lisette Guth's
life is like a wind-up clock, gradually running out of energy and sluggishly
struggling to keep on ticking.

   On good days, the Algiers Point toddler giggles and coos, smiling and turning
her big brown eyes toward her mother as mom whispers sweet encouragement into
her ear.

   On bad days, Lisette's arms and legs loll limp and lifeless; her head flops
heavily to one side of her miniature wheelchair.

   The bad days foreshadow what's to come as Lisette's Canavan disease
progresses and her limited motor skills and physical abilities fade. They're
also an indication that Lisette's time is about to run out.

   But there is hope for the Guth family.

   Eighteen months ago, Lisette was one of 15 children in the nation to undergo
an experimental gene therapy treatment for Canavan's disease at Thomas Jefferson
University in Philadelphia.

   The results were promising, if only temporarily.

   "Six months following the therapy, she was greatly improved. She was very
alert, her eyesight was improved, her hearing was better. You could see a real
difference," said Desiree Loeb-Guth, Lisette's mother and a registered pediatric
nurse at St. Charles General Hospital. "But after the six months, there's been
no more improvement."

   Pending federal approval, Lisette is scheduled to undergo the second phase of
the treatment within the next few months.

   But the research, which is privately financed by parents of children with
Canavan's disease, and the cutting-edge treatments are extremely costly.

   And the Guths' medical insurance will not cover the expense of the
procedures.

   To help raise money for research and offset some of Lisette's mounting
medical bills, the Guths' friends and family members are holding a "Blue Jeans
for New Genes" fund-raiser April 9 at the Banks Street Bar and Grill, 4401 Banks
St. near Jesuit University in Uptown New Orleans.

   The casual event will include food, soft drinks, beer and live Zydeco music
provided by Sunpie Barnes and Friends. Tickets are $25 and can be purchased by
calling 362-3792.

   All money generated from the event will go toward the Canavan Research Fund,
to treat children with Canavan's disease regardless of their ability to pay for
the procedures.

   In addition, a parade of prizes raffle will be held to raise money
specifically for Lisette's care.

   *** Holding out hope ***

   Canavan's disease is a genetic disorder that causes the brain to swell from a
buildup of a certain protein. The abundance of the protein destroys the
protective sheaths around nerve fibers in the brain, short-circuiting the
nervous system and stifling normal childhood development.

   Children with Canavan's disease cannot walk, talk or support their heads.
Lisette can't roll over or grab and hold objects, and she has limited eyesight
and hearing.

   Patients are not expected to live past 10 years old, and many lose most
quality of life by age 4, falling into a coma-like state.

   "At about 4 months old, we started noticing that she wasn't doing the things
that normal babies do," Guth said. "She didn't sit up or grab at things. By 6
months, it was clearly evident that something was wrong."

   Lisette was diagnosed with Canavan's disease on Oct. 28, 1997.

   "Our hearts sank. I didn't know how I was going to cope with it. My husband
was crying hysterically," Guth said. "We were told she probably would die by age
4 or 5."

   Not long after the diagnosis, the Guths found out about the gene therapy
research.

   In September 1997, doctors inserted a reservoir under Lisette's scalp,
leaving a small bump right below the sandy brown curls on her hairline.

   A few months later, healthy copies of the ASPA gene were injected into the
reservoir.

   "She started developing a fever, which was to be expected, and she became
very lethargic and didn't eat for a few days," Guth said. "But then she
gradually improved."

   While the positive effects of the initial surgery have worn off, Desiree and
Douglas Guth are optimistic that the next stage in treatment will produce
similar signs of improvement in their daughter.

   The next treatment, however, comes at a time when experimental gene therapy
has become a national political hot-button issue, dragged into the limelight
after the recent, high-profile death of a teen-ager undergoing another type of
gene therapy at the University of Pennsylvania.

   The Food and Drug Administration is now taking a hard look at gene therapy
and is forcing researchers to do more non-human testing before experimenting on
living patients.

   That's frustrating to families like the Guths, who feel like they're racing
against a ticking clock.

   "This research is very fragile. It can only be done with money and government
approval," Guth said. "It's a disaster that all this political attention came
right now. I don't think this will bring a cure to Lisette, but our main goal is
to help improve her quality of life and to help future generations. She has a
hard life ahead of her."

GRAPHIC: Desiree Loeb-Guth of Algiers Point holds her daughter, 3-year-old
Lisette, who was born with Canavan disease, a very rare genetic neurological
disorder. Lisette has been participating in a new gene therapy program at Thomas
Jefferson University in Philadelphia. [COLOR] STAFF PHOTO BY SUSAN POAG

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2000


                             664 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      April 2, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OUTLOOK; Pg. B01

LENGTH: 1416 words

HEADLINE: Face It: We Can't Research Death Away

BYLINE: Daniel Callahan

BODY:


   "She fought her cancer to the very end," a friend of mine said admiringly of
an aunt who had just died. "She just wouldn't give up." I could appreciate that
remark, an echo of Dylan Thomas's injunction to "not go gentle into that good
night." Yet I could not help recalling the earlier death of a man I knew, when
those close to him voiced an equally common refrain: "How wonderful it was to
see the way he accepted death--peacefully, totally resigned."

   Well, which is the better end? It is a question as old as human life, and it
becomes more difficult to answer the closer we get to the moment of decision.
Almost everyone can think of some moribund elderly person who, having for years
declared utter opposition to tubes and machines, decides at the last minute that
they look better than the alternative. Both doctors and patients are reluctant
to admit that the end is near. One more throw of the technological dice, however
desperate, seems preferable. Death, after all, is seen as the ultimate failure.

   It is easy to forget how recent that attitude is. Death was never the foe of
ancient medicine, which could do little about it in any case. Comfort and care
were physicians' goals with the dying. But beginning with Francis Bacon and Rene
Descartes in the 16th and 17th centuries, both of whom urged physicians to
prolong life, medicine's struggle against death was gradually given primacy.
Curing, not caring, became the dominant impetus of biomedical research, an
enterprise that rapidly accelerated in the second half of the 20th century. With
the successful eradication of most lethal infectious diseases in mind, wars were
declared against cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's and the other killers still
on the list. The constant increases in the budgets of the National Institutes of
Health in recent years testify to the fury, and popularity, of that war.

   With that research drive came a curious twist, one that has not been
sufficiently noticed. Death has, in effect, been transmuted into a biological
accident, a contingent event that need not happen. "Old age" is no longer a
medically acceptable cause of mortality on death certificates. A specific
disease must be identified. And why do people die from disease? Not because
biology demands it; that was the old rationale. No, they die because of their
poor health habits, like smoking, which can be changed; or because of bad
genetic luck, which gene therapy will someday overcome; or because they received
shoddy health care, which a more equitable system could eliminate; or because
this year's technology is not quite good enough for what ails them, but next
year's will be; or because research has not yet found, but sooner or later will
find, cures for all lethal diseases. As William Haseltine, chairman of Human
Genome Sciences, has wondrously put it, "Death is a series of preventable
diseases." Death, in short, need not happen.

   Of course, no one quite says that immortality is medicine's ultimate aim.
That would sound outlandish. But the medical researcher has turned into a kind
of sharpshooter, aiming to pick off the causes of death one by one, denying that
any of them are beyond the reach of science. "If research is not pursued," the
Nobel laureate Joshua Lederberg once remarked to me, "the blood of those who die
will be on our hands." The Human Genome Project, designed to map the basic
building blocks of human life, is expected to open the door to the final
explanation of disease and from there to its eventual conquest. If death isn't a
biological accident, then everything that causes it surely is.

   This view of death is optimistically rooted in a vision of endless progress.
The trouble is, it is utterly antithetical to a central premise of good
palliative care--the relief of pain and suffering--at the end of life. That
premise is that death is a part of life, that doctors and patients should accept
that reality, and that a good death should be as much a medical aim as a longer
life. Put more bluntly: There is a basic ambivalence, even a kind of schism, at
the core of medicine about death. One part of medicine, the palliative care
part, wants to make peace with death. The other, the research part, will have
nothing to do with that kind of detente. Only the eradication of death seems
tolerable--at least that is the logic underlying the passion for research, if
not its stated finale.

   This schism, I've come to think, helps explain why it has been so hard to
improve care at the end of life. Fewer than 20 percent of Americans have signed
an "advance directive," a document specifying how they want to be treated as
they are dying; even more disturbing, having one is no guarantee that doctors or
family members will honor it. Neither doctors nor patients are quite sure what
stance to take toward death--they are torn between fighting and acquiescing.

   Now, it may well be that this schism is unavoidable. We want both to combat
death and yet find a way to accept it when the fight is lost. That is easy to
imagine, but it is increasingly difficult to draw the line in practice. No
perfect reconciliation may ever be possible. Even so, it is worth asking whether
the tension can be relieved. There are some reasonable possibilities.

   The research community should make premature death, not death itself, the
enemy. The aim should not be an indefinitely increasing life span, but a life
long enough to go from childhood to old age. Thereafter, caring--not
curing--should take priority. In practical terms, it would mean shifting
research dollars toward diseases that statistically tend to kill people
prematurely.

   The federal government now defines a premature death as one that occurs
before the age of 65. This definition is obviously arbitrary (it might well be
raised a bit) but not necessarily unwise or capricious. It might best be
understood as a death that occurs before a person has lived long enough to
experience the typical range of human possibilities and aspirations: to work, to
love, to learn, to procreate, to see one's children grow up as independent
adults. On the whole, my own observation (as someone who is now 69) is that a
life span of 65 or thereabouts is generally sufficient for these purposes,
though we might want to set a longer life as a goal. Japanese women now have an
average life expectancy slightly over age 80. If everyone could reach that age,
that would be enough as a research ideal, a good stopping point.

   Two hundred years ago, the French philosophe Condorcet articulated a utopian
dream: a long life span in good health followed by a quick death. That
dream--and not the conquest of death--is within medicine's grasp. It would give
those people who had taken care of their health over a lifetime a good chance to
live beyond 80 with comparatively little help from expensive and aggressive
medical technologies.


   For doctors at the bedside, a new aim is imperative: to understand that a
peaceful death for a patient is as important a medical ideal as the now-dominant
aim of preserving and extending life. These ideals should be in fruitful tension
with each other, with physicians open to moving in either direction depending
upon the patient's wishes and medical possibilities. But the prevailing bias
toward treatment should be balanced by a strongly corrective tilt toward
palliative care, simply allowing patients to die. That tilt is in line with how
many doctors I have worked with in Europe see their role. They find Americans'
quandary over when life "should" end something of a mystery--"People die," they
shrug. The wise patient, moreover, will be someone who understands that death is
not ultimately escapable, not an accident--that a good death requires its
acceptance, hard though that may be.

   The eradication of death is not a sensible medical goal, explicitly or
implicitly. More to the point is a view of medical progress which understands
that chronic illness, physical and mental disability, and an inability to
function--not death--are the great opponents of a good life. The close of a life
that must end sooner or later anyway is not as terrible as suffering a lingering
death. Medicine can do something about that.



   Daniel Callahan is director of international programs at the Hastings Center,
a research institute in Garrison, N.Y., devoted to ethical problems of medicine
and biology. This article is adapted from his March 2 essay in the New England
Journal of Medicine.



LOAD-DATE: April 02, 2000


                             665 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                 April 1, 2000, Saturday, Orange County Edition

SECTION: Business; Part C; Page 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words

HEADLINE: IRVINE'S EDWARDS LIFESCIENCES BULLISH ON THE EVE OF IPO

BYLINE: From Reuters

BODY:


   Shares of Edwards Lifesciences Corp., an Irvine developer of cardiovascular
products, are scheduled to begin trading officially Monday amid a bullish
earnings outlook.

   The new company, which is being shed by Baxter International Inc. in
Deerfield, Ill., will compete against Boston Scientific Corp., Guidant Corp. and
Medtronic Inc. in providing products to treat cardiovascular disorders, a market
Edwards estimates at $ 100 billion a year. Edwards had $ 809 million in revenue
last year, excluding some sales in Japan.

   "It is very competitive, but cardiovascular disease is the No. 1 killer and
the No. 1 medical expense," Edwards Chief Executive Mike Mussallem said. He said
the new company, which logged net income of $ 41 million last year, should be
able to boost earnings as much as 20% this year.

   Edwards seeks to take advantage of the aging populations in the United States
and Europe and the increasing affluence of countries in emerging markets.

   "There are a lot of demographics driving this market," he said.

   Edwards focuses on products and services for heart surgery, critical care,
vascular products and services and said it is the worldwide leader in both
tissue replacement heart valves and heart valve repair products.

   Edwards is an investor in companies such as Sangamo BioSciences Inc., which
is involved in the burgeoning field of developing gene therapies for the
treatment or prevention of disease.

   Baxter shareholders will receive one share of Edwards for every five shares
of Baxter they own.

   In 1996, Baxter similarly spun off medical supply distributor and
manufacturer Allegiance Corp., which was later acquired by Cardinal Health Inc.

   Baxter shares rose $ 1.19 to $ 62.69 on the New York Stock Exchange. Edwards
shares, which will also trade on the New York Stock Exchange, have begun trading
at $ 14.50 to $ 16.50 on a "when-issued" basis, a category for shares that have
been authorized but not yet issued.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2000


                             666 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    March 30, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A20; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 225 words

HEADLINE: Gene Therapy Hopes

BODY:


   The March 7 front-page article "Caution Over Gene Therapy Puts Hopes on Hold"
quoted me out of context. I want to make clear that the National Organization
for Rare Disorders strongly supports gene therapy research and is fearful that
negative publicity will stifle the future of this promising medical technology.

   The article indicated that I am "upset with hemophilia patients' desperate
demands for access." Those are not my words. The hemophilia trials have never
been brought into question, and they do not involve the adenovirus that has
raised safety questions. I did tell the reporter that in past adenovirus
experiments on cancer patients, some of the informed consent documents that I
reviewed did not tell the truth about risks and gave patients unrealistic
expectations of benefit. The FDA repeatedly said it had no power to force
investigators to change the documents, nor could the National Institutes of
Health demand changes, because only local institutional review boards have
governance over these consent documents. This led to cancer patients demanding
access to gene therapy trials because they felt it was their "last chance," even
though there was no evidence that volunteers had benefited from these
experiments.

   ABBEY S. MEYERS

   President

   National Organization for Rare Disorders

   New Fairfield, Conn.



LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                             667 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                    March 29, 2000, Wednesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL/FOREIGN; Pg. A24

LENGTH: 705 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECHNOLOGY / ISSUES;
BIOTECH ANALYST CALLS FOR AN INFORMED PUBLIC

BYLINE: By Richard Saltus, GLOBE STAFF

BODY:

   Admitting that the biotech industry bungled in its effort to win popular
acceptance of genetically modified foods, a leading genome scientist yesterday
warned that such episodes will happen again and again unless companies and
researchers begin serious public discussions about the ethics and safety of
their work.

   Simply advising, "We're scientists - trust us" is a tactic "that just doesn't
wash," said Eric S. Lander, director of the Whitehead/MIT Center for Genome
Research, one of the laboratories trying to decipher the entire human genetic
blueprint. "The industry ought to be out in front on the issues instead of
behind them."   On the whole, "We ain't done a good job" on creating acceptance
of genetically modified foods, Lander said. "We don't have the public trust on
this."

   Lander's criticisms at the Bio2000 conference in Boston followed two days of
protests against biotechnology outside the Hynes Veterans Memorial Convention
Center, much of it centered on plants that have been genetically modified to
grow faster, resist pests, or have other desirable traits. Four men were
arrested Monday for allegedly dumping what they said were genetically modified
soybeans in front of the convention center.

   Some biotech industry officials said they fear that the mounting attacks on
genetically modified foods could bring a broader backlash against biotechnology
- from using genes to treat diseases to cloning animals and human body parts.

   Yet, even as Lander called for greater candor, others at the biotechnology
conference worried that greater public disclosure about genetically modified
foods could tarnish the industry, rather than help it.

   In particular, food industry leaders fear that labels identifying products
containing genetically modified ingredients would scare consumers away.

   "It looks like the surgeon general's warning on cigarettes," said Gene
Grabowski, spokesman for Grocery Manufacturers of America, referring to a square
label that would be required on biogenetic foods under a bill introduced in
Congress by Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, an Ohio Democrat.

   Lander said the public's ignorance is an important part of the biotechnology
industry's public relations problems.

   The public is "deeply, deeply uneducated," Lander said.

   Unless some respected agency such as the National Academy of Sciences
clarifies the complex issues for the public, "We're going to be constantly
fighting over a constant stream of issues - some of them crazy, some not - in an
endless series of soundbites," Lander said.

   The other current biotech dispute, gene therapy, has been clouded by the
death of a patient last year from an experimental treatment, as well as the
subsequent shut down of several gene therapy trials by the government. While
Lander did not fault the industry for this public relations disaster, he said
the field was unprepared for it.

   Also featured at the forum yesterday, sponsored by the Whitehead Institute,
was Dr. Philip Reilly, a physician and lawyer who directs the Shriver Center for
Mental Retardation in Belmont. Like Lander, Reilly offered a more nuanced view
of public distrust of biotechnology than has been expressed by officials of the
Biotechnology Industry Organization, who have generally dismissed the
demonstrators' concerns as being based on ignorance.

   Reilly, who has consulted with biotech companies on ethical and social
issues, called on the industry to become far more involved in educating young
people about their work.

   "I would have every biotechnology [company] in America adopt 10 high school
biology teachers" and update the educators on the changing field, he said.

   Genetically modified foods are only one area with the potential to alarm the
public because of biotech's expanding powers, Reilly said.

   He compared the use of biotech-based prenatal testing for birth defects and
other medical problems to the eugenics movements earlier in the century that
tried to "improve" the gene pool by limiting reproduction of those considered
sub-par.

   "Prenatal testing goes to the heart of religious beliefs of people in this
country," Reilly said. "There is a kind of eugenics implicit in this, but more
insidious than in the past."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, Exhibitors worked the floor yesterday during the Bio2000
conference at the Hynes Veterans Memorial Convention Center. / GLOBE STAFF
PHOTO/JANET KNOTT

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2000


                             668 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Hartford Courant Company
                         Hartford Courant (Connecticut)

                      March 29, 2000 Wednesday, STATEWIDE

SECTION: MAIN; Pg. A7

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: RESEARCHERS URGE SELF-REGULATION;
SETTING RESTRICTIONS WILL HELP GAIN PUBLIC TRUST AND ALLAY FEARS ABOUT GENETIC
PRIVACY, THE GENETIC ALTERATION OF FOOD AND THE USE OF FETAL TISSUE FOR
RESEARCH, A SCIENTIST SAYS.

BYLINE: WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer

DATELINE: BOSTON --

BODY:

   The biotechnology industry is reveling in fat financial times, but some
scientists warn that a lack of public trust has exposed the soft underbelly of
the genetic revolution.

    Researchers convening at the Biotechnology Industry Organization's annual
meeting Tuesday urged their colleagues to do more to regulate themselves.

   The distrust -- evident in the lingering presence of demonstrators protesting
genetically modified food -- stems in part from publicity about recent deaths
during gene therapy trials.

    It also arises from people's sense that the secrets of life now being
unearthed will somehow be turned against them, said Eric S. Lander, director of
the Center for Genome Research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research.

    People have good reason to be concerned about issues such as privacy, said
Lander, one of the chief architects of the landmark Human Genome project who
participated in a panel discussion Tuesday on the pitfalls of genetic research.

    The time has already arrived when scientists can give some people pretty
accurate odds on their risk of developing Alzheimer's disease or breast cancer,
he said.

    "When I do radio shows, people ask tremendously fearful questions," Lander
said. "They ask what protections are in place. The answer is basically none."

    Genetic privacy, the genetic alteration of food and the use of fetal tissue
for research are just a few of the issues currently facing the industry.
Meanwhile, new research is revealing even more troubling questions. For
instance, does the discovery of genes that govern behavior in animals threaten
our concept of human free will?

    "It's extraordinary how little we know about how to manage all this," said
Henri A. Termeer, president, chairman and chief executive of Genzyme Corp., a
Boston-area biotechnology company.

    Lander said the imminent completion of the human genome -- life's genetic
code -- will only be the first step in a process that will radically change the
lives of every individual on the planet. He said biotechnology companies should
start to regulate themselves, just as the founders of the industry did in the
mid-1970s when they first learned how to combine DNA from different species.


LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2000


                             669 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

              March 29, 2000, Wednesday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 3B

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 400 words

HEADLINE: USF says its trial of gene therapy likely to resume

BYLINE: WES ALLISON

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   The University of South Florida plans to reopen a gene therapy trial for
terminal cancer patients after reviewing more information about the death of a
patient in Arkansas who had the same treatment.

   Dr. Richard Heller, chairman of USF's Institutional Biosafety Committee, said
the committee voted on Tuesday to lift the suspension on the clinical trial
after the therapy's developer, Vical Inc. of San Diego, provided more details
about its safety and about the death of the patient in Arkansas.

   The committee agreed the treatment is reasonably safe, but it also changed
the patient consent form to reflect that it could, potentially, lead to death;
it dropped a sentence that said no one had suffered any serious side effects
from the drug, and it cut the word "remote" from a sentence explaining that
death was a possible side effect.

   The changes must be approved by USF's Institutional Review Board, which
oversees all trials at the school, before the trial again can recruit patients,
but Heller expects that to happen soon.

   "They're not really significant changes, but they're changes that need to be
made so that the correct information is relayed to the patient before they
enroll in the study," Heller said.

   The USF College of Medicine was the only one of about 40 participating
centers to stop the trial after learning in January of the patient's death,
which the lead researcher at the University of Arkansas had indicated was
"probably" related to the gene therapy.

   The trial involves a drug called Allovectin-7 and is being tested in patients
around the United States who have severe forms of skin cancer, called melanoma,
that have not responded to other treatments. It uses altered genes to help the
body's immune system better target the cancer.

   Fewer than 10 people have gotten injections of Allovectin at the H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute at USF in Tampa, and none  has
suffered adverse affects, school officials said.

   Vical said that USF overreacted by stopping the trial last month and  that
the therapy has been used safely in more than 500 patients.

   Heller said the company has now provided data that show the Arkansas patient,
who died about two months after the treatment, likely died from other causes.

   Experimental gene therapy has come under scrutiny since the death last fall
of teenager at the University of Pennsylvania.


LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2000


                             670 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         March 28, 2000, Tuesday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,1C

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Md., Scotland in alliance to aid biotechnology firms; Lewin hails
sharing of people and ideas; Economic development

BYLINE: Mark Guidera

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Economic development officials in Maryland and Scotland said yesterday that
they have formed an alliance to encourage biotechnology companies in the two
regions to strike business relationships, collaborate on research and consider
setting up satellite operations on each other's turf before looking elsewhere.

    Richard C. Mike Lewin, Maryland's secretary of business and economic
development, said the alliance should create jobs in Maryland and foster close
working relationships between companies here and in Scotland.

    Lewin said at least three Scottish companies are pursuing business deals in
Maryland, though he declined to name the companies or provide other specifics.

    "That's just the tip of the iceberg," Lewin said. "I think we'll see the
whole range of collaboration in the future, from an exchange of scientists to
open discussions about specific projects in the labs."

    The agreement does not mean that companies interested in setting up
satellite sites in Maryland will receive any special treatment in terms of
expedited zoning clearance or other nuts-and-bolts help that companies do not
already receive, Lewin said. Rather, he said, the alliance puts in place a
framework for "sharing people and ideas."

    Also, it could open doors as Maryland economic development officials seek to
market Maryland as a prime locale for biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies
because of its growing concentration of companies in the sector, and proximity
to the National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

    Maryland and Scottish officials said the collaboration also is aimed at
improving access to new markets, and encouraging technology transfer and
investment opportunities between the regions.

    The alliance is the result of a number of trade missions between Scotland
and Maryland last year.

    Government officials are expected to join industry leaders in signing a
formal alliance resolution in Scotland this summer.

    Lewin and Peter Lennox, network director of biotechnology at Scottish
Enterprise, Scotland's economic development agency, announced the relationship
yesterday at BIO 2000, a biotechnology industry conference in Boston.

    "We have discovered many areas of common interest, which will have long-term
benefits for both communities. The alliance is a perfect opportunity to foster
even stronger links with another dynamic biotech cluster," Lennox said.

    Lewin said the regions, given their similarities, should prove a natural
fit. Both areas have large concentrations of scientists, government laboratories
and companies engaged in gene therapy, genetics and genomic research, as well as
an emerging bio-pharmaceutical business.

    For example, Maryland is home to PE Corp.-Celera Genomics Group, the
publicly held company gunning to be the first to complete a map of all human
genes, and MedImmune Inc., a developer of vaccines, infectious disease
treatments and drugs to fight various cancers.

    Scotland, meanwhile, is home to Axis-Shield PLC, a maker of diagnostic tests
for infectious diseases, and PPL Therapeutics PLC, the Edinburgh company that
made history by cloning Dolly, the sheep, and announced March 15 that it had
cloned five piglets using the same process.

    "Both regions have a long history of being at the forefront of bioscience,"
Lewin said.

    Scotland has about 250 biotechnology companies, many of them located in the
"Tartan Triangle" between Aberdeen, Glasgow and Edinburgh, while Maryland has
about 300 companies, more than 200 of them with headquarters in the Interstate
270 "high-technology corridor" between Bethesda and Frederick.

    Two Maryland companies have their European headquarters in Scotland:
Rockville-based Life Technologies Inc., a research equipment supplier to the
biotechnology industry, and BioReliance Corp., which contracts to manufacture
antiviral drugs.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                             671 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 28, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1738 words

HEADLINE: Two Paths to the Same Protein

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK

DATELINE: BOSTON, March 27

BODY:

   A legal showdown began here today that could determine whether some of the
biotechnology industry's most lucrative drugs will be vulnerable to lower-priced
competition.

   On one side is Transkaryotic Therapies Inc., a tiny company with technology
that could allow it to circumvent patents on drugs produced by genetic
engineering. In partnership with Aventis, the big European drug company, it
wants to sell its own version of Epogen from Amgen Inc., the biotechnology
industry's best-selling drug, with worldwide sales of about $4 billion.

    Amgen, which has become the biotechnology industry's superstar largely on
the strength of Epogen, has filed a patent infringement lawsuit to protect its
product.

   The trial in the United States District Court here comes at a time of growing
controversy over biotechnology patents. The issues in this case are different
from the recent furor over whether human genome data should be patented. Still,
the case could touch on one of the fundamental questions of the biotechnology
age -- just how far patents can extend to cover a substance found in nature.

   Besides the immediate stakes involved with Epogen, which is used to prevent
anemia in kidney dialysis patients, a validation of Transkaryotic's technology
could lead to cheaper versions of some other biotechnology drugs. These include
such wonder drugs as human growth hormone; alpha or beta interferon, which are
drugs used for treating hepatitis C and multiple sclerosis, respectively; or
Amgen's other billion-dollar product, Neupogen, which counters the adverse
effects of chemotherapy. Indeed, TKT, as Transkaryotic is usually called, says
it has six other drugs, which it will not identify, under development using its
technology that could eventually challenge products from other companies that
are now on the market.

   "It does raise the specter and concern that there could be a generic biotech
product," said Elise Wang, biotechnology analyst at PaineWebber.

   But if that might be bad news for investors in some of the established
biotechnology companies, it could be good news for consumers and health
insurers, because bio-engineered drugs are some of the most expensive in the
world, in part because they face little competition.

   Epogen costs about $8,000 a year for kidney dialysis patients. Cerezyme,
which produces sales of about $500 million a year for the Genzyme Corporation
and is used to treat a rare hereditary disease, costs about $170,000 a year for
each patient.

   Indeed, Genzyme agreed last year to acquire Cell Genesys Inc., a company with
technology similar to Transkaryotic's, in part to obtain patents it thought it
could use to block competition from TKT. The acquisition fell apart, however,
for unrelated reasons.

   The threat to other drugs besides Epogen will not materialize for years
because Transkaryotic, which is based in Cambridge, Mass., has not started
clinical trials on any of the other six products it is developing. And even
Amgen might be less vulnerable than first appears.

   Still, with the stakes so high, investors are watching the case closely. At
its health care industry investment conference in January, Chase H & Q invited
40 of its top institutional investor clients to an exclusive dinner at which two
law firms presented a tutorial on the case. PaineWebber hired a lawyer to
conduct conference calls analyzing the results of preliminary hearings that
began today.

   About 100 people, including some Wall Street analysts and investors in the
companies involved, attended today's hearing, in which Judge William Young began
to interpret some of Amgen's patent claims. The actual trial is scheduled to
begin sometime next month.

   Amgen's stock, which fell sharply last week on jitters about the case, rose
$5.8125, or 10.7 percent today, closing at $60.375, as Judge Young sided with
Amgen on the first term in dispute. Transkaryotic's stock fell $7.875, to
$70.25.

   At risk for Amgen is a chunk of its $1.8 billion in annual sales of Epogen,
which is also used to treat anemia in patients undergoing chemotherapy. Equally
threatened is Johnson & Johnson, which has an estimated $2 billion or more in
sales of the drug, which it calls Procrit, under license from Amgen. But with
many other products in their arsenal, neither company's fate rests on the
outcome of the patent dispute.

   If Transkaryotic loses, on the other hand, it would deal a severe, though
probably not fatal, blow to the company, which as yet has no products or
profits. "If TKT loses, it's a $30 stock," said Anders Hove, a representative of
BB Biotech, a Swiss investor that owns about 12 percent of Transkaryotic. "If
they win, it is a $150 to $200 stock in three weeks."

   Epogen, generically known as erythropoietin, or EPO, is a protein produced in
the kidney that stimulates the production of red blood cells.

   Amgen produces it using recombinant DNA, or gene-splicing, technology. It
clones the human gene governing the production of EPO and implants the gene into
hamster ovary cells, which then make the protein.

   Transkaryotic uses what it calls gene-activation technology. It relies on the
fact that all human cells have a complete set of genes, even though the gene for
producing EPO is not active except in kidney cells. So Transkaryotic inserts an
"on switch" into human cells grown in culture, activating the gene for EPO. The
switch is surrounded by genetic sequences that match those found upstream of the
EPO gene on the chromosome. That guides the switch to the spot where it will
turn on the EPO gene and not any other gene.

   Transkaryotic argues that its process is distinct from gene splicing and was
not even envisioned when Amgen got its first patents in the 1980's, and
therefore does not infringe on Amgen's work.

   "We think that we're doing something fundamentally different," said Dr.
Richard F. Selden, Transkaryotic's founder and chief executive.

   Amgen, however, has five patents related to EPO that together claim to cover
all versions of EPO made in cells of vertebrates. "Amgen's claims for EPO are
not limited to recombinant products," Rusty Day, a lawyer representing Amgen,
told the court today. "They are much broader than recombinant products."

   A key issue in the case, which was filed in 1997, is whether Amgen's patents
will be interpreted that broadly.

   At today's hearing, for instance, the attorney for Transkaryotic and Aventis
argued that the term "vertebrate" cells should not include human cells. But
Judge Young said he would take the term at its face value, to include human
cells.

   Transkaryotic argues the patents should not include all EPO because Amgen did
not invent the substance. Other scientists had isolated EPO from human urine
well before Amgen even existed, and one doctor even tried treating three anemic
patients with it.

   Indeed, Transkaryotic is hoping to get all of Amgen's patents invalidated by
claiming that Amgen defrauded the Patent and Trademark Office by withholding
information about this prior work and about the chemical composition of its EPO.
Amgen says the Patent Office was fully informed.

   "The real question is how strong is the U.S. patent system," Gordon M.
Binder, chief executive of Amgen, said after today's hearing. "TKT can do the
same thing to many other biotech products that they did to EPO."

   While some important rulings could come in the next few days, an ultimate
decision probably will not be issued for months. Whatever the outcome, it is all
but certain to be appealed.

   Still, many analysts say that Amgen, which has received some new patents on
EPO in the last few years, is in a strong position because it is making 18
claims of infringement.

   "The defendant must win on all the claims," said Edmund R. Pitcher, the
lawyer retained by PaineWebber to analyze the case. "It's as if you are standing
in a position and 18 bullets are coming at you. It doesn't do you much good to
dodge 17 of them."

   But Eric Schmidt, an analyst at SG Cowen, said he thought Transkaryotic would
win. "We don't believe the erythropoietin protein is patentable," he said.
"There's just too much prior art." Some of Amgen's more recently issued patents,
he said, had claims that had been broadened because Amgen knew of
Transkaryotic's work.

   Other analysts say Amgen will not be hurt too much if it loses the case
because it has already filed with the Food and Drug Administration for approval
to sell a second-generation version of Epogen that can be given less frequently.
The new version, called NESP, is likely to be approved next year, even before
Transkaryotic's version of first-generation EPO is released. TKT and Aventis,
formed by the merger of Hoechst A.G. of Germany and Rhone-Poulenc S.A. of
France, do not expect to apply to the F.D.A. for marketing approval until later
this year.

   Moreover, NESP will open up big new markets for Amgen. Under its agreement
with Johnson & Johnson, Amgen sells Epogen only for kidney dialysis in the
United States while Johnson & Johnson sells it for other uses domestically and
for all uses in Europe and some other countries. But Amgen will be allowed to
sell NESP for all uses in both the United States and Europe.

   Meanwhile, a victory for Transkaryotic would not necessarily mean smooth
legal sailing for its other drugs. Each one is likely to face a patent challenge
and each patent has different wording, lawyers say.

   Indeed, Amgen's own EPO patents are weaker in Europe than in the United
States, raising the possibility that Transkaryotic might lose here but be able
to sell in Europe, where a similar trial is scheduled to start in September.

   Analysts say TKT's threat is likely to be limited to the first generation of
biotech products like EPO, Neupogen, the interferons, insulin and growth
hormone. These proteins were known before gene splicing was developed. But now
biotechnology companies often discover new proteins, making it easier to get a
patent on the substance itself, no matter how it is made.

   If Transkaryotic wins, royalties from the sale of EPO would also go to Cell
Genesys, the company with similar gene-activation technology. That is because
Aventis licensed Cell Genesys' patents to prevent Cell Genesys from blocking
TKT. The license also extends to the second drug Transkaryotic and Aventis plan
to produce together. That drug, which is about to enter clinical trials, is
speculated to be Amgen's Neupogen.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Amgen's Epogen, used to prevent anemia during dialysis, is
threatened by a technology from Transkaryotic Therapies. (Associated Press)

Charts: "Cellular Division"
Transkaryotic Therapies has a technique that it says allows it to produce some
of the biotech industry's best-selling products without infringing on patents.
But Amgen claims that Transkaryotic is infringing.

CONVENTIONAL GENE-SPLICING APPROACH*

Gene is extracted from human cell

New DNA switch, in the on position, is combined with the gene that has the
coding to make the desired protein

Re-engineered genetic combination is Inserted into a nonhuman cell

Large quantities of the desired protein are produced

New DNA switch, in the on position, is added to human cell to bypass DNA in the
off position and prompt cell to make protein

(Source: Transkaryotic Therapies)

"Biotechnology Showdown"
Investors are closely watching the patent infringement dispute between
biotechnology companies Amgen and Transkaryotic Therapies.

Chart shows daily closing prices for Amgen
(Source: Bloomberg Financial Markets)


LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2000


                             672 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 28, 2000 Tuesday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 516 words

HEADLINE: PENN INSTITUTE OUTLINES GENE-THERAPY CHANGES

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In another attempt to reopen its stalled gene-therapy clinical trials, the
University of Pennsylvania again defended its conduct of a trial that caused the
death of an Arizona teenager last year.

   In response to a March 3 warning letter from the federal Food and Drug
Administration that detailed a number of problems with the trial, Penn and its
Institute for Human Gene Therapy yesterday said numerous measures were underway
to prevent the problems from reoccurring.

   In a 14-page letter to the FDA, the institute, led by scientist James M.
Wilson, said it had contracted with an independent company, Parexel
International Corp., to monitor all aspects of the institute's clinical trials.

   Among other proposed changes, the letter said, the institute would establish
procedures to rigorously ensure that patients recruited for trials met FDA
guidelines and that the federal watchdog agency would be promptly informed about
the progress of trials.

   The FDA's most recent charges said that the Institute for Human Gene Therapy
(IHGT) had not provided accurate information in its earlier responses.

   The Penn letter said: "As is usually the case in situations like this, IHGT
does not agree with all those statements, but it will not enumerate areas of
disagreement in this response. IHGT has done its very best to be completely
candid and thorough in all its communications with the FDA, and we will continue
to do so. We want to focus energy on the future."

   "The ball is very definitely in their court at this point," university
spokesman Ken Wildes said. "We have responded to their inquiry."

   FDA spokesman Lawrence Bachorik yesterday said the agency had not reviewed
the letter.

   "We're not going to speculate on any course of action," he said, explaining
that there was no time frame within which the agency had to act. "The goal in
any enforcement action is to bring the sponsor into compliance."

   The Penn response follows a heated and intricate series of charges and
parries.

   On Jan. 21, the FDA said that the Penn team had violated procedures in the
experiment, and it shut down all of the institute's human gene-therapy trials.
The agency said the scientists had recruited patients who did not fit the
experiment's rules, had inadequate patient-consent procedures, and had been
lackadaisical about reporting side effects.

   The FDA raised questions about whether Jesse Gelsinger, the 18-year-old who
died in the trial, should have received the therapy.

   On Feb. 14, the Penn scientists responded, saying the violations were
essentially procedural - the result of misunderstandings with the agency or
differences in medical judgment.

   On March 3, the FDA rejected the explanations. The agency said experiments
with monkeys should have raised concerns about treating Gel-singer. The FDA said
it was not promptly notified of the animal tests.

   Yesterday, Penn team members reiterated that the animal experiments did not
suggest that their medicine was dangerous. The letter clarified that no monkey
had died after receiving the same medicine later given to Gelsinger.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             673 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 28, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 797 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:
 SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA

   Websense prices IPO at $14-$16

   Websense Inc., a San Diego-based company that helps firms monitor employee
Web usage, has set the price for its initial public offering at $14 to $16 per
share.  The company will be offering 4 million shares.  Websensefiled its IPO in
January.

   Qualcomm acquires Within Tech

   Qualcomm said yesterday it bought a small software company, Within
Tecchnology Inc., in the clearest signal yet that the wireless company will
bolster, not bail its Eudora Products division.  Terms of the deal were not
disclosed.  Earlier this month, Qualcomm officials fended off questions about
the fate of Eudora, which makes the company's popular but profitless line of
e-mail products.  Within's engineers have consulted with Qualcomm for the last
several years and the acquisition "will allow us to build on the work we've
already done together," Jeffrey Belk, vice president and general manager of
Eudora Products, said in a prepared statement.

   WebSideStory in new partnership

   San Diego-based WebSideStory announced a content partnership with ZDNet.
Under terms of the agreement, selected global Internet use from WebSideStory's
StatMarket.com will be published on the ZDNet AnchorDesk site.  Financial terms
of the agreement were not released.

   Syntricity boosts its financing

   San Diego-based data-management software firm Syntricity Inc. yesterday
announced the completion of a $6 million second round of venture capital funding
from Palomar Ventures, KLM Capital, Windward Ventures and private investors.
The privately held company will use the money to accelerate development of
Internet-based software, as well as expand customer support and engineering.

   UroGen gets $500,000 grant

   San Diego-based UroGen said it received a two-year, $500,000 grant from the
National Cancer Institute for development of a prostate cancer gene therapy
designed to replicate in prostate cancer cells and destroy them, then deliver a
therapeutic gene to the tumor site.

   Molecular gets Chugai payment

   San Diego-based Molecular Biosystems Inc. announced Chugai Pharmaceuticals
Inc. of Japan has paid it $2 million as Molecular prepares to begin clinical
trials in Japan for radiology using Molecular's flagship ultrasound imaging
agent, Optison.

   CAIS sells to Evergreen network

   CAIS, a San Diego software firm, announced that Evergreen Teller Services
Inc. has selected its products for Evergreen's network of public Internet
access-equipped kiosks.  The kiosks comprise traditional ATMs, a pre-paid phone
card dispenser and an Internet kiosk.  Terms of the agreement were not released.

   Aurora, Pfizer expand agreement

   Aurora Biosciences said it has expanded a 1999 agreement allowing Pfizer
additional access to Aurora's master compound store, which it termed a "modular
compound storage system designed for long term storage of chemical samples under
environmental control." The original agreement was for five years and was
anticipated to bring Aurora $50 million.  Terms of the new agreement were not
released.

   OpenTV will acquire Spyglass

   OpenTV Corp. of Mountain View, a top maker of software for
interactive-television set-top boxes, is acquiring Spyglass Inc. for $1.93
billion in stock to gain Internet software for cellular phones.  OpenTV will
swap 0.7236 share for each of Naperville, Ill.-based Spyglass's 20.7 million
shares, or $93.38 a share based on yesterday's closing price.  That's 34 percent
higher than Spyglass's closing price Friday.

   WORLD AND NATION

   TrizecHahn will shed assets

   Global real estate developer TrizecHahn Corp said it will sell most of its
Canadian office portfolio for about $1.7 billion to create liquidity and seek
new technology investments.  An affiliate of the Caisse de depot et placement du
Quebec, Canada's largest institutional investor, said it would buy five
buildings owned by TrizecHahn in Montreal for an undisclosed amount.  The
majority of the remaining buildings in TrizecHahn's Canadian portfolio are
located in Calgary where real estate analysts said there was strong interest in
the assets.

   Talk.com buying Access One

   Telecommunications service provider Talk.com Inc. said it would buy local
phone service provider Access One Communications Inc. for about $208 million in
stock, positioning it to compete head-to-head in the Southeast with BellSouth
Corp. Talk.com also said it would receive an investment of $80 million from
Soros Private Equity Partners, the investment vehicle of Hungarian-born
billionaire George Soros.  In the Access One deal, Talk.com would issue 14.3
million shares of stock to shareholders of privately held Access One, which
operates in nine states across the southeastern United States.


LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000


                             674 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 28, 2000 Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-2

LENGTH: 777 words

HEADLINE: BUSINESS BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled from staff and wire reports

BODY:

   SAN DIEGO AND CALIFORNIA Websense prices IPO at $14-$16 Websense Inc., a San
Diego-based company that helps firms monitor employee Web usage, has set the
price for its initial public offering at $14 to $16 per share.

   The company will be offering 4 million shares.

   Websensefiled its IPO in January. Qualcomm acquires Within Tech Qualcomm said
yesterday it bought a small software company, Within Tecchnology Inc., in the
clearest signal yet that the wireless company will bolster, not bail its Eudora
Products division.

   Terms of the deal were not disclosed.

   Earlier this month, Qualcomm officials fended off questions about the fate of
Eudora, which makes the company's popular but profitless line of e-mail
products.

   Within's engineers have consulted with Qualcomm for the last several years
and the acquisition "will allow us to build on the work we've already done
together," Jeffrey Belk, vice president and general manager of Eudora Products,
said in a prepared statement. WebSideStory in new partnership San Diego-based
WebSideStory announced a content partnership with ZDNet. Under terms of the
agreement, selected global Internet use from WebSideStory's StatMarket.com will
be published on the ZDNet AnchorDesk site.

   Financial terms of the agreement were not released. Syntricity boosts its
financing San Diego-based data-management software firm Syntricity Inc.
yesterday announced the completion of a $6 million second round of venture
capital funding from Palomar Ventures, KLM Capital, Windward Ventures and
private investors.

   The privately held company will use the money to accelerate development of
Internet-based software, as well as expand customer support and engineering.
UroGen gets $500,000 grant San Diego-based UroGen said it received a two-year,
$500,000 grant from the National Cancer Institute for development of a prostate
cancer gene therapy designed to replicate in prostate cancer cells and destroy
them, then deliver a therapeutic gene to the tumor site. Molecular gets Chugai
payment San Diego-based Molecular Biosystems Inc. announced Chugai
Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Japan has paid it $2 million as Molecular prepares to
begin clinical trials in Japan for radiology using Molecular's flagship
ultrasound imaging agent, Optison. CAIS sells to Evergreen network CAIS, a San
Diego software firm, announced that Evergreen Teller Services Inc. has selected
its products for Evergreen's network of public Internet access-equipped kiosks.

   The kiosks comprise traditional ATMs, a pre-paid phone card dispenser and an
Internet kiosk.

   Terms of the agreement were not released. Aurora, Pfizer expand agreement
Aurora Biosciences said it has expanded a 1999 agreement allowing Pfizer
additional access to Aurora's master compound store, which it termed a "modular
compound storage system designed for long term storage of chemical samples under
environmental control."

   The original agreement was for five years and was anticipated to bring Aurora
$50 million.

   Terms of the new agreement were not released. OpenTV will acquire Spyglass
OpenTV Corp. of Mountain View, a top maker of software for
interactive-television set-top boxes, is acquiring Spyglass Inc. for $1.93
billion in stock to gain Internet software for cellular phones.

   OpenTV will swap 0.7236 share for each of Naperville, Ill.-based Spyglass's
20.7 million shares, or $93.38 a share based on yesterday's closing price.
That's 34 percent higher than Spyglass's closing price Friday. WORLD AND NATION
TrizecHahn will shed assets Global real estate developer TrizecHahn Corp said it
will sell most of its Canadian office portfolio for about $1.7 billion to create
liquidity and seek new technology investments.

   An affiliate of the Caisse de depot et placement du Quebec, Canada's largest
institutional investor, said it would buy five buildings owned by TrizecHahn in
Montreal for an undisclosed amount.

   The majority of the remaining buildings in TrizecHahn's Canadian portfolio
are located in Calgary where real estate analysts said there was strong interest
in the assets. Talk.com buying Access One Telecommunications service provider
Talk.com Inc. said it would buy local phone service provider Access One
Communications Inc. for about $208 million in stock, positioning it to compete
head-to-head in the Southeast with BellSouth Corp. Talk.com also said it would
receive an investment of $80 million from Soros Private Equity Partners, the
investment vehicle of Hungarian-born billionaire George Soros.

   In the Access One deal, Talk.com would issue 14.3 million shares of stock to
shareholders of privately held Access One, which operates in nine states across
the southeastern United States.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             675 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        March 28, 2000 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. B06

LENGTH: 515 words

HEADLINE: BUILDING THE BIOMEDICAL SECTOR

BODY:

   Gene therapy might someday offer cures for everything from lung cancer to
Parkinson's disease, but for New Orleans, the emerging field offers another
promise the possibility of a healthier economy.

   Imagine New Orleans as a biomedical center, a place where breakthrough cures
are discovered by well-paid medical researchers at universities and private
labs. Such an industry would bring jobs and money, not to mention prestige, to
the area.

   That's a vision worth pursuing, and area universities are doing their part.

   Earlier this year, for example, the medical centers of Tulane University and
Louisiana State University formed the Gene Therapy Research Initiative. The
joint program, which has a $6.5 million commitment from the state, will form a
private, nonprofit corporation that can draw on the assets of both schools and
LSU-Shreveport -- from labs and equipment to grants and researchers. The idea is
to create the kind of critical mass needed to make the New Orleans area a player
in the biomedical field.

   In a more recent development, Tulane University announced that it's hiring a
luminary in the gene therapy field.

   Dr. Darwin J. Prockop, director of gene therapy at MCP Hahnemann University
School of Medicine in Philadelphia, will head up the Tulane Gene Therapy Center,
bringing with him a team of about a dozen scientists and their grant money.

   That's quite a coup. Dr. Prockop pioneered the use of genetically altered
stem cells as a way to deliver corrected genes to patients. This approach avoids
the infection risk posed by using partially deactivated viruses, the more
conventional delivery system in gene therapy. It also reduces the chance that
the patient's immune system will reject the cells since the stem cells come from
the patient's own bone marrow.

   Dr. Prockop's team, working with St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital in
Memphis, Tenn., used stem cells to treat five children who suffer from
osteogenesis imperfecta. He also discovered the gene responsible for that
often-fatal disease, which causes extremely brittle bones. His team is working
on a stem-cell treatment for Parkinson's disease as well.

   The decision to recruit Dr. Prockop -- a process that took nine months -- and
to create a 12,000-square-foot headquarters for him shows that Tulane is serious
about its stake in the field. So, too, does the $15 million investment in the
Tulane Gene Therapy Center, $8 million of it from Columbia/HCA, which owns most
of Tulane's hospital.

   Dr. Paul Whelton, senior vice president for health sciences at Tulane,
described the center's work as "cutting-edge science" that will involve Tulane
Medical Center, as well as scientists at the university and at Tulane's primate
center in Covington.

   The kind of cutting-edge science that he's talking about is exciting in its
own right, but the idea that it can happen here is heady stuff.

   Many consider gene therapy to be the future of medicine. But making it the
future for New Orleans will require an aggressive effort -- the kind Tulane
showed in bringing a top-notch researcher here.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2000


                             676 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                     March 27, 2000, Monday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-10

LENGTH: 480 words

HEADLINE: AN END TO NEEDLE DREAD NEAR;
NEWEST DEVICES FOR HYPODERMIC INJECTION OF DRUGS WILL BE PAINLESS

BYLINE: MICHAEL WOODS, BLOCK NEWS ALLIANCE

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO --

BODY:


   Get set to say goodbye to the hypodermic needle and its "OUCH! "

   Both may become history as an exciting new family of painless drug-delivery
devices make their medical debut, developers predict.

   They may be critical for wide use of gene therapy and a new generation of
drugs made with biotechnology, according to Dr. Igor Gonda, of the Aradigm
Corporation in Hayward, Calif. He was among a panel of scientists who reported
at the 219th national meeting of the American Chemical Society.

   Biotech products like human insulin and human growth hormone are protein
molecules. If taken by mouth as pills, they would be digested and torn apart
just like meat or beans in the stomach and intestines.

   "The products of biotech almost invariably need to be injected," Gonda said.
"These molecules are too sensitive to be administered through the hostile
environment of the gastrointestinal tract. The skin is practically impermeable
to them."

   Scores of new protein-based drugs are being developed.

   An intensive, behind-the-scenes effort has been under way to find
patient-friendly ways of administering them. Many consumers balk at jabbing
themselves with a hypodermic needle several times each day.

   Scientists predicted that the research eventually will end the hypodermic
syringe's 150-year reign as the standard way of getting many drugs into the
body.

   A French surgeon, Charles-Gabriel Pravaz, developed the hypodermic syringe in
1853. He copied the design from a medical tool used in ancient times.

   "Eliminating pain and increasing convenience are primary advantages of these
new technologies, "said Dr. Mark Prausnitz, of the Georgia Institute of
Technology.

   Among the needle-alternatives described were:

   *An array of "microneedles" thinner than a human hair that pierce the skin
without causing pain.

   *A hand-held injector that painlessly shoots tiny drug pellets into the skin
at supersonic speeds.

   *An inhaler that uses ink-jet printer technology to spray tiny drug particles
into the lungs.

   *A truly cutting-edge device that uses microscopic razor-sharp blades to
painlessly pierce the skin so medicine can flow into the bloodstream.

   Some of the hypodermic needle-alternatives are being tested on humans in
clinical trials and could be on the market within a few years, scientists said.

   Currently, "skin patches" are the main way of painlessly giving drugs through
the skin. These medicated adhesive pads, however, can be used for only a handful
of drugs that pass easily through the skin and into the bloodstream.

   Prausnitz said that microprocessor-based drug delivery systems are being
developed to fill another major medical need: Giving drugs in a slower, more
natural way in response to body needs.

   "Many drugs are better administered slowly over time rather than all at once
as is done by injection," he said in an interview.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2000


                             677 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 26, 2000 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 033

LENGTH: 884 words

HEADLINE: Biotechs casting life in new light

BYLINE: By JULES CRITTENDEN

BODY:

   Expect miracles.

   That is the message from scientists who are working on the almost unthinkable
advances in biotechnology that could begin to change the way we live in the next
10 to 20 years, as researchers learn how to manipulate the genetic underpinnings
of life.

   While scientists, legislators and environmentalists debate the ethics of
tinkering with nature, work goes ahead that already is producing dramatic
results in agriculture and medicine, from the cloning of goats to produce new
drugs for stroke victims to the development of crops that administer vaccines.
Much of the work is being done by academic scientists and private-sector
researchers in and around Boston.

   "I believe that in the first quarter of the 21st century, genetics will
redefine medical care     just as antibiotics changed medicine forever, genetics
will change medicine forever," said Dr. Philip Reilly, director of the Shriver
Center in Waltham.

   "And its impact is much broader than that," said Reilly, who acts as a
genetics adviser to the Justice Department.

   "It has already profoundly changed the criminal justice system and is having
a similar affect on the world agricultural system."

   Groundbreaking biotech projects that are under way or envisioned by
scientists include:

   The cloning of goats, sheep and cows at the University of Massachusetts,
Tufts University and elsewhere to create biological drug factories, producing
uniform proteins used in drugs.

   The development of genetically altered animals to grow replacement organs for
"xeno-transplantation" into humans.

   Crops such as rice and bananas are being developed that have boosted
nutritional levels and that contain vaccines to help eradicate common
third-world diseases more cheaply than traditional vaccination programs.

   Fetal stem cell research that may allow doctors to replace destroyed nerve
cells, reversing paralysis in spinal cord injury patients.

   DNA testing already is routine to identify killers and rapists, and has
helped clear dozens of wrongly convicted people.

   At the heart of the revolution in medicine is the Human Genome Project, the
mapping of every gene in the human body by teams of scientists in Cambridge and
elsewhere in the United States and Britain. Preliminary results are due in the
spring, and the detailed identification of each of more than 130,000 genes is
expected within two to three years.

   "As we get a better understanding of gene sequences, we can rapidly begin to
understand the role genes play in diseases that are mysteries to us now," Reilly
said. That will help doctors diagnose who is at risk for some diseases. They
already are beginning to develop gene therapies to attack some diseases at their
genetic roots.

   "Clearly, we are approaching a watershed in the sequencing of the human
genome. That is going to radically change the rate of drug discovery and the
ability to target specific diseases," said Ashley Stevens, director of Boston
University's Office of Technology Transfer, which helps patent and market
scientific discoveries.

   James Collins, a BU professor of biomedical engineering, predicts the
development of "individualized medicine," where drugs are tailored to match each
patient's genetic makeup. He and others at BU also are actively working on
developing a "genetic toggle switch," gene structures that may one day be
developed into microscopic biological computers or robots by coupling biological
sensors to a gene-on, gene-off control.

   Collins suggested those could implanted into human patients for an almost
endless variety of functions such as controlling glucose levels in diabetics by
releasing or withholding insulin, destroying artery-clogging plaque, combating
cancerous tumors or controlling fertility as a form of birth control.

   "Our bodies are based on these sensor-based control systems, and developments
in biotech could repair or replace any of these problems," Collins said.

   Lita Nelsen, director of technical licensing at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, said biotech already has paid dividends in increased
understanding of human bio-chemical processes.

   "Medicines are much smarter," she said. "The drugs people take for heart
disease or blood pressure are based on a scientific understanding of what
bio-chemical processes are going on in the body rather than just testing to see
what works     genetic engineering is a really major tool. You've gone from a
rock to a high-precision machine in terms of your tool kit."

   Reilly of the Shriver Institute added that the way people take medicine is
likely to change.

   "In the next 10 years, we'll see an explosion of nutritional genomics," he
said. "The line between food and medicine will blur."

   Obesity, heart disease and even cancer may be averted by foods that are
modified to help people with specific genetic makeups.

   "As we understand the human genes, we'll understand how food causes the
expression of genes," said Fergus Clydesdale, professor of food science at UMass
Amherst.    Within the next decade, he suggested, "People will be able to buy
blood tests to find out what diseases they are at risk for, and they'll be able
to go to the supermarket and buy foods that are color-coded, each one formulated
to reduce the risk of disease in a particular genotype."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000


                             678 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 26, 2000 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 001

LENGTH: 1127 words

HEADLINE: Ready and waiting; Hub prepares for biotech protests

BYLINE: By JOSE MARTINEZ

BODY:

   A state police helicopter hovered over the Mass Pike by Tower Records
yesterday as Boston Police and barricades kept traffic from stopping in front of
the John B. Hynes Veterans Memorial Convention Center.

   "They're shooting video of the rooftops," one officer said.

   Welcome to ground zero for BIO 2000, the largest-ever gathering of genetic
scientists and industrialists from around the world.

   Protests are planned. Security is tight.

   And police say they are ready for anything but doubt the 1,000 activists
expected to march on the conference today will get out of hand like the more
than 50,000 demonstrators who rioted in Seattle last year.

   "We think the police have done a great job and we are confident this is going
to go well," said Micho Spring, a spokeswoman for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization putting on the international meeting for the 14th consecutive year.

   Police declined to talk about security preparations yesterday and canceled
two scheduled press briefings. "There's no new news," department spokeswoman
Sgt. Detective Margot Hill said.

   More than 7,000 industry insiders are registered for the conference today
that will touch on everything from pest-resistant crops and how to grow organs
in animals to transplant into humans to protecting intellectual property and
financing in the global marketplace.

   Critics say the scientists and CEOs driving the biotech industry are putting
profits ahead of concerns that altering genes in food and humans may have
unintended consequences on future generations.

   The organizers of Biodevastation 2000, an alternative conference on the
perceived ills of biotechnology, plan to hold a family-oriented rally on Copley
Square today. The rally will end with a parade down to the Hynes complete with
puppetry and street theater to express their concerns non-violently.

   Hundreds of activists have been meeting since Friday at Northeastern
University, where Biodevastation has been holding seminars about the need for
strict codes of ethics within the realm of biotechnology.

   "(Biotechnology) and its proponents are about to affect and already have
affected the quality of our relations with each other. The quality of how we see
each other. The quality of the world we leave to our children," said Beth
Burrows, founder of the non-profit Edmonds Institute.

   At Northeastern yesterday, Dr. Gregor Wolbring shook his head as a colleague
read off one of the tenets of the Genetic Bill of Rights, a list of 10
principles meant to protect "the biological integrity" of earth and man.

   "All people have the right to protection against eugenic measures such as
forced sterilization or mandatory screening aimed at aborting or manipulating
selected embryos," read Claire Nader, chairwoman of the Cambridge-based Council
for Responsible Genetics that drew up the list of protections.

   Wolbring, a 38-year-old biochemist, ethicist and assistant professor at the
University of Calgary, was born without legs - a birth defect caused by the once
highly touted pregnancy drug thalidomide.

   He contends that scientists are rushing headlong into developing tests to
determine if human embryos carry certain genes linked to certain disabilities or
other "undesirable traits," including Down's Syndrome and homosexuality, without
considering the consequences.

   Not only could genetic testing of fetuses lead to people like himself being
aborted rather than born but those who already are living with their
disabilities would be further devalued, Wolbring said.

   "Biotechnology and genetic science can alter the whole fabric of society. It
can pit one characteristic against another," Wolbring said. "Whatever they can
test for, it is very unlikely the target group will be the ones determining what
will be done to them.

   "Society has to wake up. It's not about me. It's about all of us," he said.

   Wolbring criticized the governments of the United States and Canada for
appointing no disabled people to sit on advisory boards meant to oversee public
policies on biotechnology.

   Wolbring also lashed out at BIO for inviting actor Christopher Reeve to come
to Boston to speak at the conference about how biotechnology and gene therapy
may lead to ways of repairing spinal cord injuries like his. Reeve was paralyzed
five years ago when he fell from a horse.

   "I don't blame him for coming - and why shouldn't he want to walk again?"
Wolbring said. "I blame the biotechnology corporations for exploiting him like
this without doing anything to alleviate the suffering of people who are
disabled now."

   But people like Suzanne Pattee, who has been enrolled as a patient in
clinical studies looking for a cure for cystic fibrosis since she was a
teenager, prefer to look at the potential good science can offer in the battle
against diseases like hers. She, like Reeve, will be attending BIO 2000 in hopes
of drumming up more money for research.

   "The median life expectancy is 32 years for people with CF today. That may
seem short, but it used to be just five years when I was born, so there has been
an improvement," said Pattee, 36 and vice president of public policy for the
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.

   Pattee said she shares some of Wolbring's fears about genetic selection,
particularly since doctors at fertility clinics already can test embryos for
certain genetic disorders before implantation.

   "I think we are a compassionate society where we won't turn our backs on
people, but maybe 50 years from now we will not be so compassionate," Pattee
said, "but I prefer to focus on finding a treatment for these diseases as our
goal."

   The organizers of today's Biodevastation 2000 rally and protest march have
made four demands of the biotechnology industry and federal regulators who are
beginning their own convention today at the John B. Hynes Veterarns Memorial
Convention Center.

   End the commercialization of genetically engineered products and hold
corporations fully liable for the negative consequences of what has already been
released.

   Abolish the ownership of all forms of life, including the patenting of seeds,
plants, animals, genes and cell lines. Criminalize biopiracy and protect the
rights of people around the world to sustain and strengthen traditional
land-based livelihoods.

   End corporate control over food and health, as enforced by institutions such
as the World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund and World Bank, and
reclaim public accountability and democratic control over the decisions that
affect our lives.

   Strengthen public regulations over potentially dangerous technologies,
recognizing the inherent uncertainty of genetic manipulation and placing the
burden of proof on its proponents to demonstrate that its proposed products are
safe.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000


                             679 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                    March 26, 2000, Sunday, Bulldog Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 16; Advance Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

HEADLINE: GENE INJECTION TESTED TO STEP UP HEALING;
 HEALTH: THERAPY IN LAB ANIMALS HAS MADE INJURED MUSCLES GROW STRONGER AND HAS
KNIT BROKEN BONES. SCIENTISTS HOPE THAT HUMAN EXPERIMENTS WILL SUCCEED.

BYLINE: IRA DREYFUSS, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   An injection of a therapeutic gene may someday help to heal an athlete's
badly damaged muscle, fractured leg or blown-out knee, researchers say.

   In lab animals, gene therapy has knit together broken bones and made injured
muscles grow stronger. Preliminary human trials already have begun, and experts
believe these experimental findings will develop into treatments.

   "I think the chances are extraordinarily high," said Dr. R. Rodney Howell, a
University of Miami School of Medicine professor who is president of the
American College of Medical Genetics, a professional group. "It's going to take
a while, but I think the chances are overwhelming it will work."

   Therapies may start to show potential for sports injuries in two to five
years, researchers say. "These are very complicated studies," Howell said. "The
time frame will be substantial. It's not going to be next week or next year."

   Much of the work centers on growth factors, proteins that the body produces
to help various tissues grow. Because genes direct the production of growth
factors, researchers are working on ways in which to add copies of these genes.

   One method is to genetically engineer a virus, such as one that causes the
common cold, by removing the illness-causing material and replacing it with a
growth factor-triggering gene. The virus is then inserted into a test animal,
where the new gene implants the growth factor gene in the cells.

   Another method is to remove cells from the test subject, add the growth
factor-triggering gene to those cells and inject them back into the subject. At
this point the virus method is more efficient, said an article in The Physician
and Sportsmedicine, a medical journal. But the engineering of a patient's own
cells could have greater potential, said researcher Johnny Huard of the
University of Pittsburgh, one of the paper's authors.

   Certain cells, known as muscle-derived stem cells, seem to be progenitors of
bone, tendon, ligament or muscle and can be directed to grow into one or the
other, Huard said. Substances called bone-muscle genetic protein seem to act as
the switch, but it's not yet known how the body decides which way to make the
cells develop, he said.

   However, in lab experiments, Huard and other researchers have been able to
heal tissue.

   Using muscle-derived stem cells, Huard's lab was able to almost completely
heal broken skulls in mice. Researchers at the UCLA School of Medicine healed
broken mouse leg bones with stem cells derived from marrow. And at Harvard
University, using growth factor carried on a virus, researchers were able to
make mice show progressive increases in muscle mass.

   The potential benefit for athletes could be healing of joints and bones that
are too badly damaged to heal well under current therapies, researchers said.
Ligaments and tendons tend to grow back slowly, so a boost from gene therapy
could speed the process.

   Muscle heals anyway, so gene therapy might only be needed for very bad
injuries, said Dr. Jay R. Lieberman of UCLA. But muscle-restoring techniques
could benefit people with muscle-wasting diseases such as muscular dystrophy.

   Injecting genes for anti-inflammatory proteins could treat joint diseases
such as arthritis.

   Scientists such as Howell think that findings from disease-focused studies
could carry over to benefit athletes. "The basic mechanisms by which they work
are very similar," he said.

   Human trials into possible benefits for athletes are in the early stages and
are aimed at establishing that the therapies are safe.

   One risk is that genetically engineered cells could grow out of control,
leading to cancer.

   Another possibility is that viral cells used to carry the gene may infect the
recipient with viral disease.

   And for athletes, there is the additional issue of doping. Genes that
normally occur in the body might not be found in tests by athletic
organizations, leading to the possibility that the winning athlete might be
simply the best engineered.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2000


                             680 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 3; Page 19; Column 3; Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

HEADLINE: DATABANK: MARCH 20-24;
Wall Street Shrugs Off Higher Rates Hike? No Problem

BYLINE: By VIVIAN MARINO

BODY:

   It was a winning week for both technology and industrial stocks after the
Federal Reserve met Wall Street's expectations of a modest increase in interest
rates.

   The Dow Jones industrial average, adding to its recent gains, ended the week
at 11,112.7, up 517.5 points. The Nasdaq composite index rose 164.9, to
4,963.03. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index, meanwhile, moved into record
territory every day last week, except Monday, ending at 1,527.46, up 62.99.

    Investors have reached the conclusion that in time the economy will slow to
a much more moderate, sustainable pace, a soft landing, " said Hugh Johnson,
chief investment strategist with the First Albany Corporation in Albany.

   The Fed raised short-term rates an additional quarter-point last week,
pushing up the key federal funds rate to 6 percent. It was the central bank's
fourth rate increase since June.

   Mr. Johnson said investors snapped up technology shares, taking advantage of
a sharp decline in prices earlier this month. They're still not cheap, but
they're about as good a bargain as you're going to get in the world of
technology, he said.   VIVIAN MARINO


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "STOCKS IN THE NEWS"

Microsoft
NYSE: MSFT
The software giant and the federal government may be nearing an antitrust
settlement that avoids a breakup of the company, The Wall Street Journal
reported last week.

Friday's Close: $111.6875
Week's Change: +12.39%
EST. '00 P/E66.32

Protein Design Labs
NNM: EDLI
The European Patent Office rejected broad claims on one of the company's two
patents for an antibody drug development technology. Similar patents were
approved in the United States and Japan.

Friday's Close: $96.8125
Week's Change: -46.56%
EST. '00 P/E--

General Electric
NYSE: GE
The company said its profit in the first quarter would exceed the
75-cent-a-share average estimate of analysts because of a 20 percent increase in
product orders from a year earlier.

Friday's Close: $159.0625
Week's Change: +13.72%
EST. '00 P/E42.56

MicroStrategy
NNM: MSTR
The maker of data-delivery software said that an accounting change would reduce
its financial results for 1998 and 1999, leaving a loss of at least 43 cents a
share in 1999. First-quarter results also will be hurt.

Friday's Close: $129.00
Week's Change: -43.11%
EST. '00 P/E518.07

Collateral Therapeutics
NNM: CLTX
The company reported positive results from the first two phases of its angina
drug, a gene therapy, and said it planned to begin large-scale trials shortly.

Friday's Close: $38.375
Week's Change: +49.03%
EST. '00 P/E--

E.W. Blanch Holdings
NYSE: EWB
The provider of insurance services said it expected its first-quarter earnings
to be 10 to 35 cents a share, down sharply from earnings of 70 cents a share a
year earlier and well below the estimates of analysts.

Friday's Close: $19.75
Week's Change: -65.09%
EST. '00 P/E7.24

Metamor Worldwide
NNM: MMWW
PSINet agreed to acquire the company, which offers a variety of Internet
services, including Web page design, for $1.9 billion in stock, or about $45 a
share.

Friday's Close: $30.4375
Week's Change: 96.37%
EST. '00 P/E82.26

Hitachi
NYSE: Hit (A.D.R.'s)
The American computer parts maker Rambus asked the International Trade
Commission to investigate the import and sale of Hitachi products covered by
Rambus patents.

Friday's Close: $115.00
Week's Change: -4.96%
EST. '00 P/E--

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000


                             681 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 25, 2000 Saturday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 018

LENGTH: 458 words

HEADLINE: Amgen looks to court to protect Epogen patent

BYLINE: By ANDREA ESTES

BODY:

   Biotech giant Amgen next week will ask a federal judge in Boston to block a
Cambridge upstart from marketing its own copycat version of the multibillion
dollar drug Epogen.

   Amgen, the world's largest biotech company, is trying to prevent tiny
Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. from going ahead with plans to manufacture and sell
its own, cheaper knockoff.

   The stakes are enormous - if Transkaryotic wins, Amgen will lose its monopoly
and some of the $ 1.7 billion a year it collects in revenue. And the market for
the drug is only expected to increase - to as much as $ 10 billion worldwide by
2005, analysts say.

   Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., sued Transkaryotic in 1997, claiming the
company is violating its patents.

   "We have a good broad patent portfolio," said David Kaye, an Amgen spokesman.
"But when you have such a valuable product one thing you can be sure of is that
someone will try to take it from you."

   On Monday and Tuesday, federal  Judge William Young will hold hearings to
determine what processes and products the patents cover. Next month, he is
expected to conduct a trial to determine whether the patents have been violated.

   Amgen, which calls Epogen "the most successful product of the biotechnology
industry," says it has broad patents covering the drug and the way it is made.
It is a manufactured version of erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates red
cell production in the kidneys and corrects anemia brought on by kidney failure.

   Transkaryotic, which has tested its own version of the substance  but not yet
sought FDA approval, makes the drug in a different way.

   The firm, which has teamed up with pharmaceutical company Aventis, claims
Amgen's patents cover only its own process.

   "Amgen claimed we infringed their patent. We believe our process and product
are different," said Justine Koenigsberg, Transkaryotic's spokeswoman.

   Amgen uses traditional genetic enginering, taking human genes and injecting
them into hamster cells which then produce the substance.

   Transkaryotic modifies human cells and stimulates them to produce
erythropoietin, also known as EPO.

   Transkaryotic, which has 17 drugs in the pipeline, claims its new
technologies will shatter the patent protections built up by older biotech
companies.

   Amgen's stock slid more than $ 7 this week after Merrill Lynch analyst Eric
Hecht said he couldn't predict who will win the fight.

   "Despite having sought the opinion of outside counsel and conducting our own
review of the relevant patents," wrote Hecht, "we are not prepared to predict
the winner of the upcoming trial. We believe that investors who are betting on a
winner probably have no better than a 50-50 chance of being correct."
Transkaryotic's stock jumped about $ 8.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2000


                             682 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                      March 23, 2000 Thursday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 035

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: Boston Biotech 2000; Biotech debate heats up

BYLINE: By JENNIFER HELDT POWELL

BODY:

   Thousands of biotechnology executives and researchers from around the world
will descend on Boston next week  to show off the latest and greatest
technologies designed to improve food and health.

   They are expected to be met by hundreds of protestors.

   At issue is who profits, who benefits and the long-term effects of
technologies with the promise to revolutionize medicine and agriculture.

   The products and research will be highlighted at the four-day BIO 2000, an
industry conference that kicks off Sunday.

   But activists, gathering Friday for a counter-conference called
Biodevastation 2000, will highlight what they view as the downsides of the new
technologies.

   Activists contend that a blind hunger for profits drives the biotechnology
industry and leads companies  to ignore safety risks. Furthermore, they say, the
government is doing little to stop it.

   Their concerns range from pest-resistant corn to patents for human gene
sequences.

   As more companies seek rights to genes or gene sequences, the issue of patent
rights has risen to the forefront of the debate in recent years.

   Hundreds of researchers funded both with public and private money are
frantically working to map the human genome hoping that knowing more about the
genes will lead to new therapies and cures.

   The question is: Who will own the information? Research funded  with public
dollars will be made available to everyone. But if private companies patent
pieces of the puzzle they can require a fee for the information.

   As genes are decoded, some are afraid that the information will be used in
unintended ways. Insurance companies could use genetic testing to determine
whether to cover people or employers could use it to screen for certain
diseases.

   "We don't have good laws about who can have access to this information," said
Dr. Michael Grodin, who teaches medical ethics at Boston University.

   On the other hand, genes can only reveal so much, he said. They can show a
predisposition to a certain disease, but not whether a person will get it.

   "It's very naive to think that knowing your genes means you know who you are
and where you are going," Grodin said.

   Besides, everyone will have some kind of problem. "You've got to die of
something," Grodin said.

   In addition to ownership, activists  fear that biotech companies will exploit
the poor to benefit the rich, said Biodevastation organizer Arthur Foelsche.

   "When we see the way in which gene therapy gets practiced, it doesn't benefit
anyone but the very rich," he said.

   Researchers go to indigenous groups to glean genetic information, but those
people don't necessarily benefit from the research, Foelsche said.

   Among their agricultural concerns, activists  are afraid that changes to
crops designed to make them hardier or tastier will have long-term unexpected
environmental effects.

   A few studies have created a great deal of confusion, say biotechnology
observers. One of the best examples is a study of monarch butterflies.

   The study showed that in the laboratory, monarch butterfly caterpillars are
more likely to die when exposed to pollen from corn that had been treated with a
naturally occuring pesticide.

   The implications are that the treated corn is devastating monarch butterfly
populations across the world. But the research was done in the laboratory and
may have no relevance in the real world.

   Another product that raises concern is a soy bean resistant to the weed
killer Round Up. Proponents say use of the resistant soy bean plants will mean
less weed killer will be used.

   Activists say they believe farmers will become more likely to use Round Up
because they don't have to worry about the effects on their plants.

   "The bottom line of these products is profit," said Jessica Hayes, also a
Biodevastation organizer. "It's not about the consumer and it's not about the
farmer."

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000


                             683 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     March 22, 2000 Wednesday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 036

LENGTH: 452 words

HEADLINE: Patent problems hit biotech stocks

BODY:

   Nervousness about patents for genetic research accelerated a two-week
sell-off in biotech industry shares yesterday.

   Biotechnology shares  rose dramatically this year, but  have been in a sharp
decline for nearly two weeks.

   Yesterday's rout was partly prompted by a ruling in Europe against patent
claims made by Protein Design Labs Inc., one of the country's largest biotech
companies.

   Protein Design shares fell $ 37.81, or about 28 percent yesterday, closing at
$ 96.31.

   The collapse sparked a general retreat from biotech, as more than half of the
biotech shares on the Nasdaq Biotechnology index lost value by the end of
trading yesterday even as stock indexes jumped sharply.

   Industry analysts also say that a legal dispute between Amgen Inc., the
world's largest biotechnology company, and Transkaryotic Therapeutics Inc. of
Cambridge may be discouraging investors.

   Amgen, of Thousand Oaks, Calif., is trying to stop rival Transkaryotic from
marketing an anemia drug in Europe.

   But the sharp drop in biotech prices may simply reflect the move away from
Internet and technology companies to older businesses and traditional industrial
companies, said Carl Gordon, an analyst with OrbiMed Advisors.

   "This is really just a rotation away from all technology stocks, which
includes biotechnology."

   Many investors have thought of biotech stocks as recession proof since demand
for drugs is constant. But disputes over patent rights have cast doubt on the
industry's future.

   Demand for drugs may not fall prey to economic slumps, but the approval
process for drugs by the federal Food and Drug Administration is long and
expensive. Even if a drug shows promise and wins approval, profits can be
delayed for years.

   "People believed that biotech companies could grow even during economic
slowdowns, which is not the case," said Jon Hickman, a portfolio manager at
Jurika & Voyle, a money management company in Oakland, Calif.

   "And the biotech business has become more speculative with use of gene
therapy."

   Despite two weeks of setbacks, some analysts say biotech firms still have
potential.

   "Investors in biotech companies were making a lot of rash decisions and not
being very smart about it,"  said Mike DiCarlo, a portfolio manager with DFS
Advisors in Boston.

   "But there are many fine companies that are still worth investing in."

   The controversy over property rights to genetic information was compounded
when President Clinton recently hinted that it should not be patented.

   Photo Caption: SHARES DOWN: Biotechnology stocks have been taking a hit and
patent problems are worsening the situation. Jeff Strohm, above, works in
Genzyme's fermentation lab. Herald file photo


LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2000


                             684 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            March 22, 2000 Wednesday
                                  CITY Edition

SECTION: METRO NORTH; Pg. N3

LENGTH: 765 words

HEADLINE: Names and Faces

BODY:

   Surgery center addition

   Carole E. Lee, a registered nurse, has joined the staff of Meridian Plastic
Surgery Center in Carmel.

   Lee has more than 25 years experience in the health care industry. She
received her degree from Texas Woman's University in Houston.

   Scholarship at Syracuse

   Alison Meyer of Carmel was selected to receive a senior scholarship at
Syracuse University in New York.

   Meyer, a senior in the S.I. New-house School of Public Communication, was
selected for the scholarship because she consistently made the dean's list
during her first three years at the university.

   First curriculum director

   Scott E. Robison will be the first director of curriculum and instruction for
Westfield Washington Schools.

   Robison will begin his position on April 10 and will be responsible for
coordinating and evaluating the curriculum for kindergarten through Grade 12.

   Robison comes from the Metropolitan School District of Pike Township in
Indianapolis, where he created and implemented that district's school choice
program, which featured the New Augusta Public Academy, a year-round school.

   He has been leader of the academy since its opening in 1995.

   Robison also has been a classroom teacher in Pike Township and at New Albany,
a principal in Fort Wayne and director of the Indiana University Alumni
Association.

   He holds a bachelor's degree in education from Indiana University and a
master's degree in education/administration from Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis.

   Robison currently is working on a Ph.D. in school administration at Purdue
University.

   Gift planning officer

   George Nalywaiko has rejoined Anderson University's Development Office as a
gift-planning officer.

   Nalywaiko worked at Anderson University as assistant director of admissions
and director of admissions from 1974-85.

   Nalywaiko is a 1974 graduate of the university, with a major in sociology and
psychology.

   Before returning to the university, Nalywaiko worked at American United Life
Insurance Co. in Indianapolis.

   He worked at Warner Press in Anderson from 1985-95 as assistant vice
president of church and consumer sales, director of church relations and
advertising manager.

   Nalywaiko resides in Anderson with his wife, Pamela, and their children,
Jill, Joy and Heather.

   Conference presentation

   Brenda Earley, an occupational therapist with Procare Rehabilitation Services
of Community Hospital Anderson, will offer a poster presentation on the Graston
Technique this month at the 79th annual conference of the American Occupational
Therapy Association.

   The Graston Technique is an instrument-assisted method used in the treatment
of carpal tunnel syndrome and tennis elbow.

   Earley was one of several hundred speakers chosen for the nationwide
conference in Seattle, Wash.

   All-state band members

   Christina Block, Josh Ellis,   Amanda Imel, Michael Pan dorf,   Alaina Pritz,
Brian Shultz and Jeff Willy of the Hamilton Southeastern High School band were
selected for the 2000 Indiana All-State High School Band.

   The 110 band members chosen performed in concert March 12 at Hilbert Circle
Theatre in Downtown Indianapolis. The Indiana Bandmasters Association sponsored
the event. Nearly 1,400 young musicians applied to audition.

   Student at symposium

   Brittany Hyland, a junior at Westfield High School, was one of 48 students
statewide invited to participate in a recent molecular medicine symposium at
Indiana University Cancer Research Institute in Indianapolis.

   Brittany spent two days at the cancer institute learning about the latest
techniques in molecular biology and gene therapy. She also gained hands-on
laboratory experiences in one of the most modern cancer research centers in the
nation.

   The Indiana Association of Biology Teachers selected the participants from
more than 350 applicants.

   Military school promotion

   Cadet Cpl. Kareen Nicholas Dockery  of Carmel has been promoted to cadet
sergeant at St. John's Military School in Salina, Kan.

   Dockery had to pass both written and oral tests and appear before the
school's review/promotion board.

   Dockery, son of Mary Myers  of Carmel, is in his second year at the academy.

   The Names and Faces feature needs you to make it thorough and interesting! If
you live (or lived) in Hamilton, Boone or Madison counties and you've made news,
been appointed or involved in a newsworthy happening or career move, send your
name and accomplishment to us. Clear, black-and-white or color photos may be
included. Mail your information to Names and Faces, The Star and The News, Metro
North Bureau, 1350 S. Range Line Road, Carmel, Ind. 46032, or send it by fax to
(317) 816-4440.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             685 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      MARCH 22, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: LATEST CHANGES AT PENN HEALTH SYSTEM HAVE SOME OPTIMISTIC THE NEW
CHIEF EXECUTIVE IS WIDELY RESPECTED. AND THE DEPARTURE OF A HOSPITAL TURNAROUND
FIRM WAS GREETED WITH RELIEF.

BYLINE: Karl Stark, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   It has been a head-spinning few weeks for the University of Pennsylvania
Health System.

   Last month, the Hunter Group, the hospital turnaround firm, was brought back.
Last week, it was let go.

   Last month, the health system's chief operating officer, Robert Martin,
resigned. Last week, he returned.

   Last month, Peter G. Traber was named acting chief executive. Last week, he
became permanent in that post.

   Penn's management by flip flop feels unsettling to many in a system that lost
$198 million last year and laid off 20 percent of its workforce. University
President Judith Rodin, backed by the board of trustees, fired the longtime
health-system chief executive and medical school dean, William N. Kelley, on
Feb. 17, and the university continues to endure government scrutiny of its gene
therapy program.

   Still, many observers are viewing the current changes with something
resembling equanimity. Even critics of the health system's spending say that
Traber, who remains interim dean of Penn's School of Medicine, is widely trusted
and respected by his colleagues.

   The return of Martin, a seasoned cost-cutter, raises the possibility that
Penn might now cure itself. Last year, the Hunter Group laid out a road map for
fiscal renewal, listing about 400 recommendations. The firm's departure last
week - Rodin said that Hunter can be brought back at any time - is a further
relief for faculty members, who prefer that changes come from one of their own.

   "They were really scared that bringing Hunter back would bring more slash and
burn," said Elsa Ramsden, past president of the Penn chapter of the American
Association of University Professors and a frequent health-system critic.

   Ramsden called Traber "refreshing" and "remarkably candid." But she said "the
jury's out" on how the health system will fare financially. "I think he has his
work cut out for him."

   It may not matter what Traber does if he cannot stanch the financial losses.
The health system deficit last year cast a pall over the university's finances
and lowered its bond rating.

   The health system is slipping behind its budgeted projections for the fiscal
year, which ends June 30. Patient volumes for January and February fell about $5
million to $10 million behind budget projections, Traber said. He attributed the
shortfall to "overzealous budgeting in certain areas."

   "We're going to come pretty close to a break-even" for the year and achieve a
2 percent profit margin in 2001, he vowed.

   Traber, who previously chaired Penn's Department of Medicine, with a $140
million annual budget, now runs a health system and a medical school with a
combined budget of $1.9 billion.

   He must soon make major strategic decisions that could long shape the
region's second biggest health-care system. Many are anxiously awaiting a look
at the 2001 budget, scheduled to be released shortly, for clues to how Traber
will respond to the fiscal pressures.

   In one view, Traber, 44, must decide whether to continue Kelley's expansive
plans and make the health system's market share large enough to challenge the
area's two dominant health insurers. Or he may decide to reduce the fiscal risks
by narrowing the system's cornucopia of services and concentrating on centers of
excellence. Yale is one successful academic medical center that has taken the
focused approach.

   Traber's choice will likely determine what Penn does with its financially
struggling Pennsylvania Hospital and historically profitable Phoenixville
Hospital, where the medical staff voted unanimously last year to break away from
the Penn system.

   Leaders of the Jefferson Health System, the region's largest, are said to
still covet Pennsylvania Hospital, located within blocks of its flagship, if it
becomes available. Jefferson negotiated to take over Pennsylvania for nearly a
year before Penn swooped in and acquired the hospital in 1996.

   But Traber said it was premature to announce what steps the Penn system might
take. He did say he thought Penn's integrated system remained "a strong concept"
and that the system needed to be flexible to make each component financially
viable.

   Anytime a leader such as Kelley leaves, "there is going to be a good deal of
unrest during the transition," Traber observed.

   "We need to focus on the fundamentals of what we're doing. We don't have the
luxury of time."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO;
PHOTO
Peter G. Traber soon must make major strategic decisions.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             686 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                     March 22, 2000 Wednesday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2C

LENGTH: 452 words

HEADLINE: SOFTWARE FIRM NETGENICS PLANS IPO OFFER OF 5.5 MILLION SHARES

BYLINE: By MARCUS GLEISSER; PLAIN DEALER REPORTER

BODY:

   Cleveland-based NetGenics Inc. is ready to make an initial public offering of
5.5 million shares of its common stock to raise between $60.5 million and $71.5
million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The
company will use the money for working capital and general corporate purposes
including potential acquisitions.

   This follows a $21.3 million private equity financing Jan. 12 through
Muzinich & Co., the placement agent and also an investor. Additional investors
in that offering included Lombard, Odier & Cie and KECALP, an affiliate of
Merrill Lynch Co., and other individuals and funds. It had a $17.7 million
private placement in 1998.

   The company, which was established in June 1996, is a privately held company
that produces software for pharmaceutical research.

   It describes itself as a "provider of bioinformatics solutions where
information technology helps life sciences companies convert raw data into
information useful in the development of drugs, gene therapies and agricultural
products."

   The new stock is to be offered at $11 to $13 a share, and the public will own
23.5 percent of the 23.45 million shares outstanding after the sale. Largest
shareholders include College Retirement Equities Fund and International
Biotechnology Trust. Each now owns a 7.7 percent share.

   Underwriters will include Chase H&Q and Warburg Dillon Read. The company
hopes to have its shares trade on the NASDAQ Stock Market under the symbol NTGC.

   Manuel J. Glynias, 44, is president and chief executive. He came from MG
Softwares Inc., where he was chief executive, according to the SEC documents.

   Headquartered in Cleveland, the company also has offices in Columbus, San
Diego and London. If successful, the IPO would be the first in Cleveland since
the Indians went public in 1998.

   The company reported revenue rose from $57,000 in 1997 to $1.8 million last
year while losses from operations went from $4.4 million to $11.4 million in
that time. The company said it expects to continue to incur losses.

   It noted that a significant part of its revenue came from a small number of
customers. Abbott Laboratories accounted for approximately 83 percent of total
revenues in 1997 and 91 percent of total revenues in 1999.

   In the past, American Home Products Corp. had a collaborative agreement with
Net Genics for an enterprise-wide infrastructure for drug discovery.

   Last year, there was an agreement with Hoechst Schering AgroEvo in Berlin,
Germany, to provide software and services to Plant Genetic Systems, an AgrEvo
subsidiary in Gent, Belgium. Another collaborative research agreement last year
was to deliver integration solutions to Pfizer Central Research.

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000


                             687 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 21, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. E8

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: BIOTECH STOCKS FALL SECOND TIME IN A WEEK

BYLINE: By Ronald Rosenberg, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Shares of biotechnology companies tumbled yesterday for the second time in
the past week as concern over lawsuits and a new wave of stock financing put a
chill into investors.

   "After a tremendous run-up in biotech and genomic stocks, we are starting to
see a correction," said Jonas Alsenas, biotechnology analyst for ING Barings
Ltd.   Biotech shares had soared for most of this year until last Tuesday, when
President Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair said their countries
would share gene-research data. That sent biotech stocks plunging in an overall
market retreat.

   Alsenas and other analysts said yesterday's decline could be attributed in
part to anxiety over the upcoming April 1 patent trial in Boston between Amgen
Corp., the world's largest biotechnology company, and Transkaryotic Therapies
Inc. of Cambridge over Epogen, the best-selling biotech drug.

   Amgen shares fell $5.125 to $58 yesterday; Transkaryotic Therapies Inc. fell
$4.125 to $63.875.

   Their declines were reflected in the Nasdaq Biotechnology Index, which fell
129.28, or 11 percent, to 1087.49, led by Abgenix Inc., of Fremont, Calif.,
which sank $112.50 to $199.50.

   The company said there were no developments to explain the 36 percent drop,
the biggest in its history.

   Of the 203 stocks in the biotech index, 174 fell and 25 rose, while four were
unchanged.

   So far this month, the index has fallen 26 percent, much of it after Clinton
and Blair made their statement.

   Clinton reiterated the US government's long-standing policy that scientists
working under the federally funded genomics project must release gene data
immediately after it is discovered. Some investors reacted negatively, fearing
new restrictions on gene-based products.

   Alsenas said small investors and day traders are reassessing the run-up in
the biotech sector. The high prices have led to a flood of new stock offerings
and proposed refinancings, including plans by Roche Holding AG to sell about $3
billion worth of shares in Genentech Inc., the nation's second-largest biotech
company.

   Yesterday, some New England genomics companies saw sizable dips in their
stock prices.

   Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Cambridge dropped $32.75 to $141.9375,
while New Haven-based Curagen Inc. lost $22.875 to close at $109.125.

   Decliners also included some of the region's largest biotechnology companies,
such as Biogen Inc., whose shares closed at $79.25, down $5.625, and Genzyme
General, which fell $3.1875 to $46.0625.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000


                             688 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                             March 21, 2000 Tuesday
                                  CITY Edition

SECTION: METRO SOUTH; Pg. S3

LENGTH: 761 words

HEADLINE: Father wastes no time leading battle against son's disease

BYLINE: By, JEFF ZOGG

BODY:

   Phil Milto is in the dry cleaning business.

   He's also in the fund-raising business. And the lifesaving business. And the
medical research business.

   That brings him into the mouse engineering business.

   The most important hat he wears, the one that brings all his businesses
together, is that of a father.

   Milto's 5-year-old son, Nathan, has Batten Disease -- a malady that now is
incurable. Phil Milto has engaged Batten Disease in battle.

   Every general needs money, and Milto has raised more than $100,000 in the
past year or so. Now, he's trying to find the trained soldiers to do the work
that must be done.

   "We believe we have the necessary science," he says. "We have some money now,
and that gives us some leverage."

   Batten Disease is inherited, degenerative and neurological. While it may
strike people of any age, it primarily affects infants, toddlers and school-age
children. It begins unexpectedly and leads to a progressive loss of brain
function that later destroys bodily functions, eventually leaving the victim
helpless.

   Young Nathan Milto's sight is gone; his balance is starting to go.

   "But he's still happy. That's what keeps me going," his dad said.

   Batten Disease strikes two to four children of every 100,000.

   Last year, Nathan was grand marshal of the Fourth of July parade in
Greenwood. His father was busy raising money and raising the consciousness of
scientists, government officials and pharmaceutical companies.

   A certain momentum has begun.

   The Milto family had joined families of other children with Batten Disease
around the world to push for a cure. They've made progress, and the gene that
doesn't trigger an enzyme as it should has been identified. Gene therapy, it is
believed, can trigger production of the enzyme, stop the disease and save the
life of Nathan and others.

   Much work is to be done, Phil Milto said.

   First, the gene therapy must be tried on mice. To do that, he said, a group
of mice must be engineered to have Batten Disease. Then the gene therapy can be
tried on them.

   If the treatment works on the mice, a clinical trial can be set up to try the
therapy on humans, including Nathan Milto.

   That time could be less than 18 months away -- if everything goes perfectly.

   That is what Phil Milto means when he says he believes the necessary science
exists to treat children with Batten.

   Now, Milto must persuade a pharmaceutical company to sponsor the clinical
trial, a university to act as host and a bio-technical company to develop the
therapy.

   Pharmaceutical companies are eager to help if there is money to be made. The
problem is that treating Batten Disease, most believe now, is not a big
moneymaker.

   "To them, he's just one kid. To me, he's my whole world," Milto said.

   So, the owner of Milto Cleaners & Laundry did what he knows how to do -- he
created a business plan that he hopes will convince a pharmaceutical company
that treating Batten Disease can be profitable.

   His plan shows that by developing the gene therapy to treat Batten Disease,
42 other diseases will be treatable as well, and that will make the research
profitable.

   In May, he will be host of a meeting with researchers, businessmen and others
interested in the issue to try to convince someone -- anyone -- of the viability
of his business plan. He's invited pharmaceutical companies to attend and
convince him they would use the money he's gathered to develop the gene therapy,
move the clinical trials along and get to the point where Nathan and other
children could be treated.

   He's contacted more than 50 companies: 10 are interested; five have committed
to showing up.

   The entire process usually takes five to 10 years. Milto wants to cut that to
12 to 24 months. He needs to because Nathan has about a half-dozen years left,
doctors say.

   With finding a cure as his goal, Milto continues his work at fund-raising.

   Each treatment for each child would cost $100,000 or more.

   "To get it produced, to get a clinical trial, 10 kids are needed. If we can
come up with the money for that, it would be hard for a company to say no,"
Milto says. That means he needs $1 million.

   A group of supporters, family, friends and parishioners from St. Barnabas
Catholic Church is working to raise awareness about Batten Disease and raise
funds for Nathan.

   More information can be found about their efforts at www.milto.com/nathan .
Look it up. Add your efforts to the cause.

   Jeff Zogg is chief of the Metro South Bureau. He may be reached at (317)
865-4901, or you may write him at 3115 Meridian Parke Drive, Suite O, Greenwood,
Ind. 46142. Or you may e-mail him at: jzogg.starnews.com

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             689 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 21, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 404 words

HEADLINE: Biotech buoyed by test results; Shares of Collateral rise on
early-stage success of heart drug

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper; STAFF WRITER | Bloomberg News contributed to this report.

BODY:
 Collateral Therapeutics shares soared yesterday after the San Diego biotech
said its gene therapy drug for heart pain appeared safe and effective enough to
move into advanced trials.

   The drug's success in an early-stage trial was especially welcome news for
the company, as the field of gene therapy has become controversial since the
death of a patient in an unrelated gene therapy study last year.

   Collateral said its Generx drug appeared to be safe at all doses in a study
of 67 patients with stable exertional angina, chest pain that results from a
lack of blood in the heart muscle.

   At the dose Collateral will continue studying, the company said more than
half the patients were able to exercise longer on a treadmill after receiving
the treatment, which delivers a human growth factor to the heart through a
catheter.

   "It could be the first meaningful gene therapy product to come to the
market," said David Molowa, an analyst at Bear Stearns & Co.

   Collateral shares soared $14.43 3/4 , or 56 percent, to close at $40.18 3/4 .
The large jump came even though other biotech stocks were hammered yesterday as
the sector continued to stumble after a strong run the past few months.

   Collateral said patients who did well on Generx compared favorably with
patients who underwent surgery.  The company said it would begin a large-scale
trial of Generx with its development partners, Schering and Berlex Laboratories.

   Other gene therapy projects have not done as well.  Just last week, Chiron
said data from its gene-based heart drug didn't show a benefit that was
statistically significant.  Chiron's drug, like Generx, was designed to use
proteins called growth factors.

   Collateral said its results were statistically significant in one of five
test groups, each of which received a different dosage.  The company plans to
use the dosage from the successful test group in its next clinical trial.

   "This was a very small trial designed to give only the indications of
efficacy," said Robert Engler, a professor of medicine at University of
California San Diego and a co-founder of the company.  Engler, who helped design
the study, said "We were surprised" by the results.

   Generx uses human growth factor that has been inserted into a virus.  The
drug is designed to prompt the body to produce new blood vessels -- a process
known as angiogenesis -- increasing the supply of blood to the heart.


LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000


                             690 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        March 21, 2000 Tuesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: METRO; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 774 words

HEADLINE: TULANE HIRES EXPERT FOR GENE-THERAPY WORK

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   Tulane University and the company that owns most of Tulane's hospital are
investing $15 million in the university's program to fight illnesses such as
cancer and Alzheimer's disease with retooled versions of defective genes.

   The money from Tulane and Columbia/HCA Corp. will hire Dr. Darwin J. Prockop,
a noted gene-therapy researcher from Philadelphia, and create a
12,000-square-foot headquarters for him and about a dozen colleagues he will
bring with him to establish the Tulane Gene Therapy Center.

   Though it will be at Tulane University Medical Center, this organization is
designed to involve the entire university, including scientists at the Uptown
campus and the primate center near Covington, said Dr. Paul Whelton, Tulane's
senior vice president for health sciences.

   "It's important for the region to have cutting-edge science," he said. "It's
very exciting."

   Prockop, director of gene therapy at MCP Hahnemann University School of
Medicine, is credited with pioneering work in the field for developing a method
to introduce corrected genes into a patient's bloodstream.

   Instead of the conventional approach of putting retooled genes into partially
deactivated viruses, which carry the risk of infection, Prockop employs
genetically altered stem cells. These unspecialized cells, which are taken from
the patient's bone marrow, develop into bone, cartilage, fat, muscle and other
body components.

   Because they come from the patient who receives them, the risk of rejection
is virtually eliminated, he said, and the thorny issue of using fetal tissue is
avoided.

   "It makes so much sense to go for them," Prockop said. "If you can correct
the gene in the stem cell, it's there forever."

   Prockop and three colleagues discuss this approach in the latest issue of
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, a peer-reviewed journal
published by the National Academy of Sciences. It is available online today and
will be in print March 28.

   Even though the notion of using stem cells in gene therapy was first broached
in 1986, Prockop said it has been slow to develop because scientists had a hard
time cultivating the cells.

   Prockop and his team succeeded, he said, because they discovered that stem
cells behave like people: They don't like crowding, and they don't like
solitude.

   They do best, the scientists wrote, when about 1,000 are put in a Petri dish,
far fewer than the usual million-cell load. Prockop and his colleagues found
that reduced quantities of stem cells grew much faster and reproduce about 100
times more than million-cell batches.

   Prockop's accomplishments include the discovery of the gene that causes
osteogenesis imperfecta, an often-fatal disorder that produces extremely brittle
bones. Working with St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital in Memphis, Tenn.,
Prockop's team has used stem-cell treatment on five children with the
affliction.

   A stem-cell treatment for Parkinson's disease may be ready for clinical
trials in 18 months, he said.

   Prockop's journey to New Orleans started when his name appeared in a national
search Tulane launched to find a director for its gene-therapy center, Whelton
said.

   Once Tulane officials decided they liked him, the courtship began, Whelton
said. The wooing took nine months.

   Because Prockop will be leaving the directorship of Hahnemann's gene-therapy
center and bringing colleagues - and their grants - with him, his departure from
Philadelphia probably "leaves a very big hole," Whelton said.

   To help launch the Tulane center, Columbia/HCA gave $8 million. The company,
which has an 80 percent share in Tulane's hospital, will not share in profits
from any treatment Prockop and his colleagues develop, said Mel Lagarde,
Columbia's president and chief executive officer for this part of the United
States.

   "We think it is going to yield outstanding dividends for medical research,"
he said.

   The gene-therapy center's headquarters will be in the J. Bennett Johnston
Health and Environmental Research Building, 1324 Tulane Ave. Prockop said he and
his colleagues expect to start work there by September.

   This has no impact on the gene-therapy initiative Tulane has been pursuing
since 1998 with Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, Whelton said.
That program is designed to focus public and private resources on developing
research and technology to advance medical science and, through the creation of
companies based on these developments, create an economic asset.

   "Each place is doing something in and of itself," he said. "This is our
center."

   The National Academy of Sciences' Web site address is www.pnas.org.

GRAPHIC: Dr. Darwin J. Prockop Bringing a staff with him PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000


                             691 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 20, 2000, Monday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: METRO/REGION; Pg. B1

LENGTH: 1139 words

HEADLINE: POLICE GIRD FOR BIOTECH PROTESTS ORGANIZERS SAY RALLY INTENDED TO BE
LOW-KEY

BYLINE: By Jamal E. Watson, and Raphael Lewis, Globe Staff

BODY:

   Next to the Hynes Veterans Memorial Convention Center on Boylston Street
stands a 5-ton bronze statue called "Quest Eternal," a depiction of humanity's
noble pursuit of knowledge.

   To the thousands of scientists who will gather at the Hynes next weekend for
Bio2000, a major conference on biotechnology, "Quest Eternal" may seem a fitting
metaphor for their life's work.   But to another segment of American society,
the research being conducted by those attending the conference, which will focus
on topics such as genetically engineered food and gene therapy, is nothing short
of monstrous.

   Judging by the feverish preparations conducted by the Boston Police
Department in recent weeks, city officials are concerned that those strong
emotions could erupt into violence.

   Mayor Thomas M. Menino said the city is girding for the possibility that
thousands of demonstrators may converge on the streets outside the Hynes and at
other locations in the city to protest the conference, which will run through
March 30.

   "The police department has been training for several weeks," Menino said.
"We're ready and we're being vigilant, but we're not too concerned."

   City officials have been closely following plans for a protest rally and
march to be staged Sunday in Copley Square. Authorities do not want to see
clashes similar to those between protesters and police in Seattle, whose streets
were turned into chaotic, impassable battle zones during a World Trade
Organization conference last December.

   "I've talked to the mayor of Seattle a couple of times, so we're aware and
alert about what went on there," Menino said.

   Seattle's leaders were criticized for failing to protect local merchants and
maintain order at the conference, during which several businesses were damaged
and looted.

   Local protest organizers planning to demonstrate outside the Hynes, where
7,000 delegates will be in attendance, say Boston has nothing to fear.

   They say their agenda consists of little more than a peaceful rally and a
counter-conference at Northeastern University called "BioDevastation 2000."

   "There has been no call to shut this convention down," said Mark Pelletier,
president of the Boston Center for Nonviolent Change. "We're just trying to
educate the public and apply some ethics to the biotech industry."

   City Councilor Maura A. Hennigan (Jamaica Plain), who sponsored a recent
resolution that called on the federal government to label bio-engineered foods,
has spoken in support of the protesters, and has criticized city officials for
"overreacting."

   "If the city readies for violence, it's like ringing a dinner bell and saying
'Come one, come all,' " said Hennigan, whose resolution also proclaimed Sunday
as "You Are What You Eat Day." "The police may have raised the ante on this. I
understand that they have to prepare, but it should be done in a much more
quiet, inconspicuous way."

   Hennigan said that the protesters she is acquainted with have no intention of
creating trouble, and that many plan to bring their children to events.

   Judging by what occurred in Seattle, however, officials fear that sanctioned,
non-violent protests could easily be infiltrated by groups with other
objectives. Boston police officials say their intelligence indicates that some
fringe groups may attempt to provoke violence at Bio2000.

   "At this point there is no reason to be alarmed," said Sergeant Margot Hill,
a Boston police spokeswoman.  "But we're going to monitor the situation and make
sure that what the organizers are saying publicly about this being a nonviolent
rally actually turns out to be that."

   Last week, Pelletier received a permit from City Hall to stage a rally of
roughly 1,000 people. The permit calls for portions of Boylston Street to be
closed on Sunday to allow protesters to march to the convention center.

   The marchers will protest the "effects of genetic engineering on our health,
the environment, farms, and society," Pelletier said. He said the biotech
industry has been irresponsible in its treatment of genetic engineering and
corporate globalization.

   News of the planned demonstration has done little to deter companies that had
registered to attend the conference.

   "I think that any time there is a threat of protest we should be concerned,
but there's a lot of great reasons why we should be there," said Lara
VandeWalle, who will set up a booth encouraging biotech firms to move to
Rockville, Md. "It's important that I attend this convention, because it's the
one time that you get a chance to meet with the decision-makers."

   Similarly, businesses in the shadow of the convention center appear content
with promises of protection from city officials.

   "I don't know if they're downplaying the danger to be politically correct,
but the police assured us they would be in full force and there won't be a
problem," said Becky Caloggero, general manager of Whiskey's Smokehouse, a
restaurant across Boylston Street from the Hynes.

   William Black, maintenance manager of 855 Boylston St., an 11-story office
building in front of the convention center, said a pair of police officers
dropped by recently to make sure that the building's roof would be inaccessible
to protesters.

   "They were concerned about people throwing things," Black said. "They didn't
make a big deal of it or anything."

   Police officials have declined to say how many police officers will be
deployed during the convention. Rally organizers have expressed concerns that an
oversized police presence could give observers the mistaken impression that
their cause is a violent one.

   "The police will do what the police will do," Pelletier said. "How they
prepare is their business. If they have an excessive force, it's the taxpayers'
dollars."

   This month, two Seattle police officers who were deployed during the WTO
protests spent five days in Boston meeting with police to share cautionary
tales. Hill said the lessons they shared - about strategies used by police and
protesters - reflected a new era of not-so-civil disobedience.

   Pelletier said his organization has nothing to do with what happened in
Seattle, and that they are using the rally's official Web site to urge
participants to refrain from violence, as well as from using alcohol and drugs.

   "We encourage that you participate in nonviolent actions that do not endanger
the viability of the rally or the health and safety of the public," the Web site
states.

   But Pelletier said he could not guarantee that everyone attending the rally
would practice restraint.

   "If there is an incident, we hope that the police will not overreact," he
said, adding that he hopes officers would treat any outbursts as isolated. "I
don't expect that there will be any violence, certainly no more than any large
gathering at a Red Sox game or 'Disney on Ice.' "

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2000


                             692 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     March 20, 2000, Monday, Valley Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 1; Zones Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

HEADLINE: HEADING FOR HARVARD;
 EDUCATION: PIERCE COLLEGE GRADUATE DEDICATES HIS LIFE TO MEDICINE TO UNLOCK THE
SECRET OF HIS DAUGHTER'S RARE GENETIC DISORDER.

BYLINE: SOLOMON MOORE, TIMES STAFF WRITER

BODY:


   They had planned to trek across the world, a couple of newlyweds from
Southern California and their infant daughter. The Greek isle of Mykonos was as
good a starting place as any. They didn't need much money. He taught scuba
diving; she was a manicurist.

   But by their daughter's first birthday, she hadn't said a word--not even baby
talk. She hadn't taken a step, either. Her rattles held no interest. Six months
later, nothing had changed.

   Actually, everything had changed.

   Joaquim Havens moved his family back to the United States, where they
eventually learned that their daughter, Madison, has a rare genetic disorder
that doctors have not been able to identify.

   Madison's condition soon became the driving force in Havens' life,
redirecting him from the life of a nomad to that of a scholar--a now single
father who last week gained admission to Harvard University Medical School. He
plans to study gene therapy in the hope of helping children like his daughter,
who at age 9 has the mind of a toddler.

   Recalling those first days back in California, Havens' eyes redden. "It was
devastating," he said.

   Daughter Diagnosed With Gene Disorder

   Havens and his wife began a dizzying tour of Southern California doctors,
often finding a gap between science and compassion.

   "One doctor told us, 'I can't find anything wrong. You may not have an answer
until the autopsy,' " he recalled.

   Eventually, a geneticist concluded that Madison had a previously unknown
genetic disorder and that she would never be able to take care of herself.

   Havens had no college education, no insurance and few job prospects. For a
while, he scrubbed barnacles off boat hulls for $ 150 a day. But runoff from El
Nino storms polluted coastal waters, making it impossible for him to scrub boats
safely.

   Bills were mounting, along with marital tensions. So Havens joined the Navy
reserve and then the SEALs to train as a medic, for steady income and benefits.
But the rigors of the program took their toll, and Havens eventually dropped
out. His marriage faltered shortly thereafter.

   "That was the absolute rock bottom," he said. His ex-wife now lives in
Greece.

   Eventually, Havens took a job as a patient-care assistant at Mattel-UCLA
Children's Hospital, where he worked 12 hours a day, four days a week with
terminally ill children. The work was hard, but it made him feel useful, he
said.

   Working around so many medical professionals also inspired Havens to go back
to school.

   He enrolled full time at Pierce College, because he heard it had a good
science department.

   Worked Nights, Studied Days

   He worked the night shift at the hospital and attended school during the day,
sleeping only every other day. He quickly impressed his teachers.

   "He was interested in a physician's assistantship," said Pierce biology
professor Paul Meyers. "I flat-out told him he should be a physician. He was
thinking about supporting his daughter, but I encouraged him to try for medical
school.

   "I consider him to be brilliant," added Meyers, who has taught for 26 years
and calls Havens his best student.

   Pierce does not track students who leave California's public colleges and
universities, but several professors said they could not recall a graduate going
on to an Ivy League school.

   "We have a classroom full of students who want to go to medical school, and
to have a student that many of them know get into the No. 1 medical school in
the country is an inspiration," said Martin Ikkanda, a Pierce biology professor.

   Doctor Encouraged Interest in Genetics

   At the hospital, Havens, 31, met Dr. Mirela Popa, a 33-year-old medical
resident. They now live together in Marina del Rey and she will follow him to
Massachusetts this summer.

   One night, they went to a party at the home of Dr. Edward McCabe,
physician-in-chief at Children's Hospital and a nationally known gene therapy
researcher. Havens recalls feeling self-conscious about his relative lack of
education in a roomful of doctors, until McCabe started talking to him.

   "We spoke about Madison; we spoke about my education and my goals," Havens
said. "He really took me in. I came away knowing that he was somehow going to
play a factor in my life."

   A few months later, Havens graduated from Pierce and met with McCabe at UCLA,
asking to be a lab assistant.

   "We went through a series of projects," McCabe said. "When I mentioned gene
therapy, he brightened up. He lives with a disabled child, and I think he is
driven, in part, by that."

   About that time, his daughter came to live with him full time. She goes to a
special education school and day-care while he is at work.

   Career in Gene Therapy Planned

   Havens is working on a project that could lead to a method of repairing
genetic disorders with mutated viruses--research on the cutting edge of a new
and promising field, McCabe said.

   He called Havens one of his finest students.

   Next month, Havens plans to go to Washington, D.C., to lobby Congress on
behalf of the Council on Undergraduate Research and present some of the
potential benefits of gene therapy.

   Gene therapy research has come under fire after revelations that some
researchers violated National Institutes of Health reporting rules and the death
last fall of an Arizona man who was participating in an experiment.

   Then Havens will fly to Boston for an orientation program at Harvard. He will
also look into special education programs for his daughter.

   "When I look at Madison, I think she is so beautiful, so perfect, and I know
she could have done so much," he said. "Then I think of other parents in my
situation, and I want them to have answers. I want them to have someone who will
listen, who will understand."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Former scuba instructor Joaquim Havens, 31, at his UCLA lab,
plans a medical career in gene therapy.  PHOTOGRAPHER: PAUL MORSE / Los Angeles
Times PHOTO: Havens is a single father to his daughter, Madison, 9.
PHOTOGRAPHER: RICK MEYER / Los Angeles Times PHOTO: Joaquim Havens and his
daughter, Madison, 9, spend a few minutes near their Marina del Rey home looking
for ducks. Madison, who has a rare, unidentified genetic disorder, attends a
special education school while her father works.  PHOTOGRAPHER: RICK MEYER / Los
Angeles Times PHOTO: Havens brushes daughter Madison's teeth. She is unable to
care for herself.  PHOTOGRAPHER: RICK MEYER / Los Angeles Times

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2000


                             693 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Arizona Republic
                             All Rights Reserved
                         The Arizona Republic (Phoenix)

                   March 19, 2000 Sunday Final chaser Edition

SECTION: BUSINESS & MONEY; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 783 words

HEADLINE: SOARING TECH STOCKS PROFITABLE FOR INSIDERS 'HIGH AMOUNT OF SELLING,'
ANALYST SAYS

BYLINE: By Dawn Gilbertson, The Arizona Republic

BODY:

   An old saw says investors should take some money off the table after astock
soars.

   Insiders at high-flying tech companies are taking it to heart, shovelingmoney
off the table through major stock sales.

   In Arizona alone consider:

   * The CEO of International FiberCom, a telecommunications cable-laying
firmwhose stock is up more than 200 percent this year, this month filed plans
tosell $10 million in stock. Among the colleagues joining him: an executive
vicepresident ($4.5 million), the chief operating officer (about $3 million)
andthe chief financial officer (about $2.5 million).

   * The vice chairman of SpeedFam/IPEC, which makes semiconductor
polishingequipment, filed plans to sell more than $6 million in stock last
month. Thestock has doubled this year after declining 25 percent last year.

   * The CEO of Burr-Brown Corp., an integrated circuits company whose stockshot
to $65 from $35 in the first two months of the year, sold $4.5 million instock
last month.

   The scene is being played out in corporate offices across the
country.Insiders at Minnesota-based Ancor Communications, a network switchmaker
thatranked among the top 10 Nasdaq stocks last year, with a 1,600 percent
gain,have filed plans to collectively sell more than $7 million in stock.

   "There is just an extraordinarily high amount of selling going on rightnow in
highly appreciated Nasdaq stocks," said Craig Columbus, chiefexecutive officer
of the Scottsdale-based Insiderscores.com, which tracks andanalyzes insider
activity.

   At many companies, he said, there has been more selling this year than inall
of 1999 and 1998.

   That's because many of the big gainers recently are smaller companies
whosestocks had largely been left behind in the market's great run-up.

   International FiberCom, for example, gained less than 10 percent last
yearwhile the Russell 2000 technology index more than doubled. It has caught
upthis year, zooming to $38 from $7 in a matter of weeks.

   "Insiders were languishing in these stocks for three or four or five
yearsbefore they got their first opportunity to cash in," Columbus said.

   Given that backdrop, insider selling is to be expected, he said. Add in
theoverall market froth and a traditionally rough patch for Nasdaq stocks in
thespring, and "you can't find fault in executives who are taking profits."

   Indeed, their timing looks prescient given Nasdaq's plunge last week,
whicherased a big chunk of gains for many companies.

   Still, Columbus said, it would have been nice to see some patience
byinsiders.

   "There was really very little reluctance (to sell)," he said.

   Executives with International FiberCom, SpeedFam and Burr-Brown did notreturn
calls seeking comment.

   Although there has been heavy selling in certain areas, buying is
stilloutpacing selling overall, thanks to bargain-hunting by insiders at
batteredblue-chip stocks.

   In the week ended March 10, 463 insiders had filed forms indicatingpurchases,
while 352 companies had insiders indicating purchases, according
toInsiderTrader.com.

   "This was a heavy filing week and another bullish one," the Web sitesays.

   Although the widespread selling among hot Nasdaq stocks makes it difficultfor
investors to read much into individual executives' trades, investors mighttake
some clues from executives who didn't sell despite a big run-up, expertssay.

   Companies such as Targeted Genetics Corp., a Seattle-based gene
therapybusiness whose major investors include Microsoft founder Bill Gates.
FromNovember to February, the stock zoomed to $28 from $1.25, but insiders
haven'tsold or filed plans to do so.

   In such cases, "I think a reluctance to sell (after a big run-up) speaksto
the power of the underlying technology," Columbus said.

   Locally, executives at Osage Systems Group and OrthoLogic Corp., two of
theyear's top gainers with gains of 485 percent and 150 percent,
respectively,have not yet personally cashed in.

   "We obviously think that it might be wise to hold," said Phil Carter,chairman
and CEO of Osage. "Things are going to get better."

   Osage, a Phoenix computer networking company, lost money last year
andunderwent a major restructuring.

   OrthoLogic Corp., a Tempe-based orthopedic products company, is also in
themidst of a turnaround.

   Company officer Tom Trotter said the thought of selling "never evencrossed my
mind" as the long dormant stock moved from $2 to $8 the past threemonths. (A
company president sold shares but Trotter said it was due toexpiring options.)
Trotter bought shares as recently as February.

   "I'm a patient guy," he said. "We're building some real value, and Iexpect to
do real well long- term with it."

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2005


                             694 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         March 19, 2000, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: EDITORIAL ,3C

LENGTH: 652 words

HEADLINE: Into the sci-tech fold

BYLINE: Julia A. Moore

BODY:

   WHILE AMERICANS are very supportive of federally funded scientific research,
when it comes to placing a premium on science-capable presidential candidates or
discussing science and technology cogently, many of us are lost in space.

    In the decades since Sputnik in 1957, the country's lack of science literacy
was a source of some concern but not fatal. The United States made a substantial
investment in training -- and importing from other countries -- the world's top
scientists.

    Federal and industry research dollars were reasonably plentiful, especially
in the biomedical field. And throughout most of the Cold War, the same small
clique of wise -- and some not so wise -- men and women from the nation's elite
universities and laboratories served as trusted advisers to America's
decision-makers on science and technology (S&T) matters.

    Scientific progress, while unprecedented and dramatic, largely resulted in
faster, better, cheaper technologies and longer life spans. It didn't jeopardize
fundamental notions of human life and society. And the tremendous prosperity of
the 1990s -- a significant portion of it based on the fruits of earlier federal
educational and S&T research investments -- enabled the United States to become
today what the French call the world's only "hyper-power."

    But the times, they are fast and dramatically changing. In this new
millennium, we must weigh benefits and risks of such developments as cloning,
gene therapy and xenotransplantation (the transfer of organs from nonhuman
species into humans) . The ethical and public policy questions are enormous.

    The country's economy is not so much driven by natural resources and
production of heavy manufactured goods like steel and automobiles, but by new
scientific knowledge and technologies. The number of American political leaders
who comprehend and know how to navigate in the new Information Age are few.

    Countries like India and China, with a strategic investment in human capital
and science, have the potential to challenge America economically and
technologically in ways the former Soviet Union was never capable of.

    As a nation, we can no longer afford to have only one in five Americans able
to provide a minimally acceptable definition of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid). The
United States cannot remain competitive globally when elected officials
responsible for federal research investments fight against government- sponsored
ATM research because they erroneously think it's directed at improving automatic
teller machines. Instead, it's asynchronous transfer modes, which today is the
most modern and rapid method of transmitting information over the Internet or
between computers.

    The country doesn't need every citizen or elected official to have a science
Ph.D. But we do need leaders and an electorate able to comprehend some basic
chemistry, biology, computer science and the laws of physics.

    Familiarity with the scientific method, and a knowledge of math and
elementary statistics are critical for any lawmaker and useful for most informed
voters. These basic skills also are vital for most U.S. workers to remain
competitive in a high-tech global economy.

    As it is, every two years the National Science Foundation surveys public
knowledge of science. It finds large numbers of Americans struggling over simple
questions like whether the earth moves around the sun or the sun travels around
the earth.

    Twenty-first century America needs to smarten up about its leaders and about
the importance of greater public science literacy and understanding. If we
don't, at best we may lose the unprecedented opportunities and benefits this era
of relative prosperity and peace affords us. At worst, this country may become
the first hyper-power who runs out of gas.

    Julia A. Moore is a public policy scholar at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars in Washington.


GRAPHIC: ILLUSTRATION(S)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000


                             695 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                       March 19, 2000 Sunday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 007

LENGTH: 565 words

HEADLINE: Biotechies, activists gear up for Hub events

BYLINE: By Jose Martinez

BODY:

   With a week to go before the heavy-hitters of the biotechnology industry and
their well-organized opposition converge on Boston for dueling conventions, all
sides appear to have worked out a polite set of rules for engagement.

   The scions of biotechnology will meet at the John B. Hynes Veterans Memorial
Convention Center starting next Sunday to discuss developments on everything
from genetically engineered foods to gene therapy and new medicines at Bio 2000.

   "We're looking forward to probably the best conference we have ever had,"
said Dan Eremian, spokesman for the Washington, D.C.-based Biotechnology
Industry Organization behind the Hynes conference. "Thousands of people are
coming in to talk about things like finding a cure for cancer and other
diseases. If people want to protest, they can."

   And protest they will - but peacefully, said Jessica Hayes, spokeswoman for
grassroots-oriented Biodevastation 2000.

   The opponents will meet at Northeastern University to discuss concerns about
everything from genetically altered foods to gene therapy and new medicines
starting Friday.

   The coalition of activists from the People's Earth Network and Northeast
Resistance Against Genetic Engineering plan to hold a rally at Copley Square
Sunday followed by a parade up Boylston Street to the Hynes. The point of the
rally is to educate the public about the genetically altered foods being forced
on them by huge corporations, not to endanger the public, organizers have said.

   "Biotechnology is taking science into a realm it has never been before. They
are changing organisms at a cellular level. I don't think people realize how
profound this is," Hayes said.

   However low-key the Boston protests will be, the recent memory demonstrations
in Seattle that left behind $ 30 million in damages spurred Boston police to
begin training in updated crowd-control tactics last month.

   While Police Commissioner Paul F. Evans has said he and police chiefs
nationwide have viewed what happened in Seattle as a "wakeup call," he also said
he has no reason to believe the biotech protests will get out of hand - or
attract anywhere near the 50,000 demonstrators who descended on the World Trade
Organization.

   "We have a track record of working with protesters in this city and we will
continue to do so," he said. "We have no alarming communications at this point."

   However, police officials last week asked several newspapers, including the
Boston Herald, to temporarily pull their vendor boxes from the Back Bay and
several streets along the waterfront near the New England Aquarium as a security
precaution during the biotech confab.

   According to police spokeswoman Sgt. Detective Margot Hill, the news boxes
could not only get in the way of officers trying to keep the crowds moving
during protests but also could be used as weapons.

   The removal is a costly proposition for newspapers, which are being asked to
remove the boxes from heavily traveled areas downtown for a week starting this
Wednesday.

   "We've never done this for any other convention," Herald vice president of
circulation John Hoarty said.

   Herald executives plan to discuss the unusual request with police and
officials from other publications with news boxes downtown - including USA
Today, the Boston Phoenix and the Boston Globe - before deciding whether to
comply with the request, Hoarty said.


LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2000


                             696 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 19, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 7; Page 2; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 334 words

HEADLINE: Genetic Codes

BODY:

   To the Editor:

   In his review of Matt Ridley's "Genome" (Feb. 27), Lee M. Silver, embracing
an assertion of the author's, writes that "eugenics laws were examples not of
unrestrained science but of unrestrained government." But science of the eugenic
era does not merit any such blanket absolution. Eugenic measures were the
product of a collaboration between governments and scientists. In the United
States, for example, passage of eugenic sterilization laws was promoted by
various biologists who proclaimed that the "racial" stock of the country was
degenerating as a result of excessive reproduction by the lower classes,
including immigrants from eastern and southern Europe. Many states declined to
pass sterilization laws despite the biologists, because of objections from
religious groups and civil libertarians.

    Silver invokes government responsibility for the enactment of eugenic
cruelties in the past in service of warning against governmental interference
with reproductive freedom now and in the future. People should have the right to
"use the messages in their own DNA as they see fit," he writes. Of course they
should, and without governmental coercion. But consumers don't necessarily
possess completely neutral, unbiased knowledge about those messages. Their
notions of what they can do with their DNA -- or have done to it, as in the case
of Jesse Gelsinger, the 18-year-old who died last September in a gene therapy
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania -- are colored by delineations of
risks, costs and benefits that are supplied by, among others, biomedical
scientists, many of them with professional or economic interests in the matter.
The contemporary state of gene therapy should suffice to spotlight the need for
effective government regulation over interventions in the human genome. Consumer
protection is no less warranted in human genetic manipulation than it is in the
introduction of new therapeutic drugs.

Daniel J. Kevles
Pasadena, Calif.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2000


                             697 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 19, 2000, Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. I-9

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: Women First stock is risky but attractive

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:
 Revenues at Women First Healthcare are growing but so are losses, reports David
N. Allen of Granite Financial Group.

   Fourth quarter revenues for the producer of female health products were $7.1
million, up from $3.3 million a year earlier, but the loss widened to $8.2
million from $4.4 million.  The 1999 result excludes an asset write-down, among
other things.

   Women First is co-promoting an oral contraceptive with one company and a
cholesterol-lowering drug with another.  In the second quarter, the company will
launch a line of nutritional supplements.

   The company also offers health care and educational programs for women
between the ages of 35 and 69.

   The company went public in June of last year at $11 and has been trading
around half that level.

   Allen points out that the company at year-end 1999 had $32.7 million in cash,
which he says is "sufficient to support quarterly losses through this year." He
thinks the company can start breaking even in the fourth quarter.

   The stock is more risky than most, but is attractive long term.  The stock
"hasn't participated in the biotech binge on Wall Street, although activity may
not be far away," says Bud Leedom of San Diego Stock Report.

   Collateral Therapeutics

   "This is a pivotal year for Collateral Therapeutics," says Peter F. Drake of
Prudential Securities.  The biotech lost 18 cents in the fourth quarter, which
is eight cents more than Drake had expected.

   Generx, the company's potential heart product, is in middle development
stages,and Drake is impressed by animal data he has seen.

   If the next round of data is positive, "the company could enter a pivotal
trial by the end of 2000," he says.  "If this happens, we foresee considerable
price appreciation in Collateral Therapeutics shares."

   He says that would be "a major achievement in the field of gene therapy and
cardiovascular medicine."

   WD-40 debt

   WD-40 has diversified into other well-known products, such as 3-In-One Oil
and Lava soap.

   "Almost from the outset, this company maintained a sparkling balance sheet,
with plenty of cash and little or no debt," says Charles Allmon of Growth Stock
Outlook.

   However, WD-40 paid $19 million to buy the Lava brand and debt is 25 percent
of equity.

   That, the analyst says, is "the highest that I have seen since WD-40 became a
public company.  Another big acquisition might burden WD-40 with an inordinate
amount of debt.  WD-40 may rue the day they took on such a debt burden."

   The stock is yielding about 7 percent and the dividend is fairly well
protected, he says.  Return on equity remains a high 39 percent.


LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000


                             698 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 19, 2000 Sunday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. I-9

LENGTH: 427 words

HEADLINE: Women First stock is risky but attractive

BYLINE: DON BAUDER

BODY:

   Revenues at Women First Healthcare are growing but so are losses, reports
David N. Allen of Granite Financial Group. Fourth quarter revenues for the
producer of female health products were $7.1 million, up from $3.3 million a
year earlier, but the loss widened to $8.2 million from $4.4 million.

   The 1999 result excludes an asset write-down, among other things. Women First
is co-promoting an oral contraceptive with one company and a
cholesterol-lowering drug with another.

   In the second quarter, the company will launch a line of nutritional
supplements. The company also offers health care and educational programs for
women between the ages of 35 and 69. The company went public in June of last
year at $11 and has been trading around half that level. Allen points out that
the company at year-end 1999 had $32.7 million in cash, which he says is
"sufficient to support quarterly losses through this year."

   He thinks the company can start breaking even in the fourth quarter. The
stock is more risky than most, but is attractive long term.

   The stock "hasn't participated in the biotech binge on Wall Street, although
activity may not be far away," says Bud Leedom of San Diego Stock Report.
Collateral Therapeutics "This is a pivotal year for Collateral Therapeutics,"
says Peter F. Drake of Prudential Securities.

   The biotech lost 18 cents in the fourth quarter, which is eight cents more
than Drake had expected. Generx, the company's potential heart product, is in
middle development stages,and Drake is impressed by animal data he has seen. If
the next round of data is positive, "the company could enter a pivotal trial by
the end of 2000," he says.

   "If this happens, we foresee considerable price appreciation in Collateral
Therapeutics shares." He says that would be "a major achievement in the field of
gene therapy and cardiovascular medicine." WD-40 debt WD-40 has diversified into
other well-known products, such as 3-In-One Oil and Lava soap. "Almost from the
outset, this company maintained a sparkling balance sheet, with plenty of cash
and little or no debt," says Charles Allmon of Growth Stock Outlook. However,
WD-40 paid $19 million to buy the Lava brand and debt is 25 percent of equity.
That, the analyst says, is "the highest that I have seen since WD-40 became a
public company.

   Another big acquisition might burden WD-40 with an inordinate amount of debt.

   WD-40 may rue the day they took on such a debt burden." The stock is yielding
about 7 percent and the dividend is fairly well protected, he says.

   Return on equity remains a high 39 percent.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             699 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                March 19, 2000, Sunday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 1A

LENGTH: 4526 words

HEADLINE: Questions raised over AIDS research on inmates

BYLINE: SYDNEY P. FREEDBERG

DATELINE: ORLANDO

BODY:


   In a prison in the shadow of Disney, inmates are getting the AIDS drugs of
tomorrow. But are they informed of the risks, and is the study under oversight?

   It was once strictly taboo, evocative of the Nazis and Nuremberg: doing
medical experiments on prisoners, often without their full knowledge.

   Yet today, about 35 miles from Walt Disney World's Tomorrowland, dozens of
inmates are being treated for HIV and AIDS with combinations of medications that
could have unknown dangers.

   The prisoners - murderers, rapists, burglars and drug dealers - are human lab
rats.

   Inmate advocates worry that prisoners may be pressured to become research
subjects or don't fully understand the risks.

   The top scientist on the project, a University of Miami professor with a
world-renowned reputation and financial support from several drug companies,
says she is careful and plays it straight with inmates. Her studies, she says,
could help find a cure for AIDS.

   The prisoners? Most think they've been blessed with everything from
comfortable shoes to a chance to take anti-HIV drug combinations, not yet
available to the public, that may improve and prolong their lives.

   "I'm a living, breathing, walking miracle," said Yakab Dennis, a 33-year-old
convicted rapist who readily volunteered for the research, then saw his health
rebound dramatically. "I thank God for the study."

   The potential for abuse is still there, however. It has been only two years
since Florida finished changing its rules to allow research on some of its 3,250
HIV-positive inmates.

   Within a year, questions had begun. And then last July, a state prison
official wrote a letter assuring an oversight board that the research would
easily comply with the Nuremberg Code, adopted after 16 Nazi doctors were found
guilty of torturing concentration camp prisoners deemed "unworthy of life."

   Recognizing the potential for exploitation, the Florida prison system says it
agreed to the testing only after putting in place a system of oversight and
creating a watchdog group to protect the inmates.

   Yet the watchdog group has been disbanded.

   Critics say the Department of Corrections has failed to adequately monitor
the studies.

   The University of Miami, citing federal confidentiality requirements,
declines to release records about the research or safety reports it compiles if
an inmate gets a bad reaction to a medication.

   And the person originally selected to look after inmates' interests is a
state prison official who has championed the research project - a dual role that
ethicists find troubling.

   What's more, two pharmaceutical companies involved in AIDS research say they
have given that official, Dr. David L. Thomas, honoraria for his work with the
companies. Thomas did not respond to questions about those honoraria. But in an
interview in December, he stressed that he follows Florida's
financial-disclosure requirements.

   The Department of Corrections, which has been under fire in recent months
amid reports of inmate abuse and inadequate medical care, defends Thomas and the
state's oversight of the research project.

   "I'm sure you will find someone, whether it's a prisoner rights advocate or a
so-called expert on medical ethics, to criticize us, especially on the issue of
informed consent," spokesman C.J. Drake said, adding that the research is
ethical, proper and voluntary.

   Drake hailed the research site, located in an AIDS prison, as a national
model. He said the St. Petersburg Times, in asking questions, is "nitpicking
issues of secondary importance."

   After questions from the Times, however, federal regulators began an inquiry
into whether Florida's prison studies, which are run by the University of Miami
and financed by drugmakers and the National Institutes of Health, comply with
rules to protect human subjects.

   Dr. Norman Altman, the University of Miami's vice provost for research, says
the university is cooperating with the Office for Protection from Research
Risks, a tiny arm of the NIH that oversees human subjects at hundreds of
institutions.

   "It's our intention to do this right," Altman said, adding that the
university would look into complaints about informed-consent procedures. "And if
things aren't being done right, it's our intention to correct them."


   Two or three times a day, several dozen inmates in freshly starched white
uniforms line up outside nurse Ernestine Forbes' cubicle at the South Unit of
the Central Florida Reception Center, 10 miles east of Orlando International
Airport.

   One by one, they swallow a raft of capsules and tablets that Forbes puts into
their outstretched hands. One inmate gulps 53 pills a day: 17 in the morning, 19
in the afternoon and 17 in the evening.

   For years, the Florida prison system did not use inmates as subjects in
medical experiments. Many states, including Florida, banned the practice after
revelations in the 1970s that researchers working for drug companies exploited
inmates in the name of science or profit.

   Prison reformers likened some of the studies, which included tests of cancer
and hepatitis drugs, to inhumane experiments conducted by German doctors during
World War II. Some ethicists contended that even though the research might hold
great promise for society, inmates could never give truly informed consent
because they live in a closed environment that can never be free of coercion.

   Then came the AIDS epidemic. When it struck in the 1980s, the stakes for
medical science suddenly rose dramatically. Gravely ill people, including
Florida inmates, began demanding access to experimental therapies that might
save their lives.

   Enter Dr. Margaret Fischl, a pioneering AIDS researcher. She says she
received letters from HIV-positive prisoners who clamored to enter drug studies.

   As a young doctor at the University of Miami, Fischl was among the first to
report that AIDS was not exclusively a gay disease. She also played a key role
in the creation of AZT, America's first anti-AIDS drug.

   A hero to some, Fischl was vilified by others who questioned her AZT
research. As the epidemic intensified and AZT didn't live up to early hopes,
some AIDS activists accused Fischl of jiggering study results to make AZT's
manufacturer, Glaxo Wellcome plc, look good.

   Fischl, now 50, denies fudging scientific data to get positive results, and
federal regulators never found evidence of wrongdoing. "There was never any
truth whatsoever to any of it," Fischl said. "I remain proud of that work."

   Like many AIDS researchers, Fischl receives financial support for her
experiments from pharmaceutical companies, including Glaxo. She says grant money
would never sway her objectivity about a new drug, and besides, the University
of Miami says, the money goes to a restricted university account, not to Fischl.

   Even so, critics contend that such financial relationships, especially over
time, can exert a seductive pressure on some scientists.

   Fischl's studies made her one of the most powerful members of the AIDS
research establishment in Washington. She brings prestige and millions in
federal grants to the University of Miami, and Glaxo reaped a fortune off its
global AZT sales.

   By 1995, however, Glaxo competitors had begun to introduce new classes of
AIDS drugs that patients seemed to tolerate better than AZT. The new drugs,
given in combinations known as drug cocktails, sent AIDS deaths plummeting.

   Even with HIV-positive patients living longer, the second generation of AIDS
drugs had a host of problems. Drug companies remained eager to develop
medications that were cheaper, less toxic and had less complex dosing schedules.
A month's supply can cost $ 15,000.

   In the race to get new drug cocktails on pharmacy shelves, the NIH and drug
firms spend billions on testing. Typically, companies provide the medication
used in a study at no charge. NIH or drug company grants, given to research
institutions, cover the costs of test subjects' clinical visits, blood draws,
lab tests and X-rays.

   But drug experiments need patients, and some drugmakers, working with
researchers like Fischl, soon learned where to find a ready supply: prisons.

   For the researchers, inmates are ideal test subjects: a constant,
controllable group, eating the same food, following the same routine, always
taking the medication. Making them even more attractive commodities, some
inmates have never taken HIV drugs. Such "drug naive" patients, or "treatment
virgins," tend to do better on new drug therapies, experts say.

   Only a handful of the nation's prisons now allow such research, but the
benefits are obvious. They get free drugs and health exams for prisoners whose
care would otherwise cost the state thousands of dollars per inmate per year.
They also gain reputations as penal pacesetters.


   And so it happened that a small group of Florida prison officials quietly
lifted the research ban on prisoners.

   Fischl agreed to donate her services, and without advertising for research
proposals, the Department of Corrections let her set up a screening and testing
site at the South Unit in December 1997.

   The prison system told her that inmates had to receive good treatment and
couldn't take part in initial experiments to determine whether a drug is toxic.

   Corrections officials say Fischl enrolled 64 inmates in nine studies. Six are
ongoing. Four of the research trials were funded by the NIH, three by Glaxo
Wellcome, one by Merck & Co. and one by Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc.

   Under the study rules, the Corrections Department says, HIV-positive
inmate-volunteers get combinations of more than a dozen powerful drugs from nine
drug companies. The aim is to see which drugs work best in which doses for which
kinds of patients.

   With her research team, Fischl began showing up at the South Unit, sitting
with inmates and sometimes, she says, going over consent forms line by line,
again and again. On some of the forms, inmates are told, "We cannot assure you
of any benefits."

   Many prisoners liked it when a famous doctor showed up in the Florida prison
system, where they often complain about bad doctors and bad care. Some inmates
saw Fischl as a sort of goddess and took what she said as gospel.

   One of them is 44-year-old Julius Samuel, a burglar with HIV. Before becoming
a research subject, Samuel was losing weight and spiraling downward. He says he
joined a study because he wanted access to new drug combinations that weren't
available at his other prison.

   "They have more drugs at the South Unit than where I was at," Samuel said,
adding that he feels as if he has come back from the dead. "I don't have a trace
of the virus."

   Prisoners do not earn money for joining research trials, which can last up to
three years. But, like Samuel, several inmates told the Times they were partly
attracted by other inducements, including the prospect of quality drugs and good
care that they couldn't get at other Florida prisons. One inmate's mother says
her son enrolled in a South Unit study after she complained to politicians about
his mistreatment at a North Florida prison.

   And some inmates mention the nice amenities at the South Unit, such as air
conditioning and comfortable sneakers.

   "All you got to do is say, "Look, my feet hurt,' and you get brand new, soft
shoes," said Raymond McGee, a 31-year-old former inmate who jumped at the chance
to lend his body to medical science. "Compared to other prisons, the way they
take care of you at the South Unit is like a newborn child."

   In interviews, many prisoners played down the drugs' side effects, which can
include muscle pain, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, sleep disorders, ingrown
toenails, tingling legs and numb feet. That's why they get the sneakers.

   At the South Unit, where all but a handful of the 124 inmates are
HIV-positive, prisoners say they don't feel like outcasts. The nurses are kind.
The doctors know what they're doing. And the guards are under strict orders not
to block access to medical care.

   Dave Whiters, a convicted cocaine dealer with a cross tattoo on one arm and
"Demon Dave" on the other, was a "treatment virgin" before joining a three-year
study last year. "If you want yourself taken care of, you go to the South Unit,"

 he said.

   But when pressed about the study, Whiters, 36, doesn't seem particularly
well-informed.

   He's not sure what questions researchers hope to answer. And, unlike HIV
patients in the community, Whiters isn't in a position to get a second opinion
about his treatment options.

   He shows a reporter a medication sheet indicating he gets an anti-HIV drug
combination that includes at least one placebo, or dummy medication. Asked if he
knows what a placebo is, Whiters replied: "No, ma'am."

   Former inmate McGee, now living in an Orlando halfway house, claimed to
understand key safety information when he signed up for a potent drug combo that
includes Glaxo Wellcome's controversial abacavir (Ziagen). But McGee also says
he never asked, nor was he told, about details of what the consent form calls a
"potentially life-threatening" hypersensitivity reaction that abacavir sometimes
causes.

   Nationwide, scientists have investigated eight deaths associated with
abacavir, though there was no way to prove if the drug was the cause, according
to the Associated Press.

   After abacavir came on the market in December 1998, the FDA mandated that
every patient receive a detailed notice explaining the hypersensitivity
reaction, plus a wallet-sized card to carry that describes symptoms. These can
include fever, fatigue and skin rash.

   McGee says he's not concerned. "I never had a reaction to it," he said. "If I
didn't think it was working, I'd stop taking it."


   Questions about the research at the South Unit are not isolated. As more
vulnerable patients, including children, prisoners and people without medical
insurance, enroll in research studies, reports of lax oversight and dubious
ethics in medical experiments have sparked investigations by Congress.

   The Food and Drug Administration and the federal Office for Protection from
Research Risks have cited research institutions for problems ranging from faulty
informed-consent procedures to fraudulent practices in recruiting test subjects.
Just last month, the NIH revealed that researchers under-reported adverse events
in gene therapy studies.

   In Florida, Dr. Fischl says the drug combinations she gives inmates have
successfully reduced the virus without negative impacts. In fact, she says, she
thinks she sees fewer adverse reactions among prisoners than non-prisoners in
clinical trials.

   Fischl and Department of Corrections officials say emphatically that inmates
are under no pressure to volunteer.

   "There is no coercion," said Dr. Thomas, the prison system's director of
health services. "There are no promises of better treatment or easier life" at
the South Unit.

   Thomas, a lawyer, ophthalmologist and former Republican whip in the Florida
House of Representatives, has become Fischl's chief advocate. After joining the
Department of Corrections in 1994, he became known as a compassionate
conservative who cut costs creatively. He earns $ 132,251 a year.

   But Thomas, 54, says he did not promote the research to save the state money.
Rather, he wanted to "bring inmates opportunities for the best care possible,"
and he says if there are savings, they are "minuscule."

   In a letter to the University of Miami last July, Thomas wrote to Fischl's
colleagues that prisoners felt no pressure, not even subtle pressure, to enroll.
"We always attempt to exceed the guidelines of the Nuremberg Code," he said.

   Thomas' role as a disinterested observer is debatable, however. In April
1999, a Brown University newsletter listed him as a consultant and speaker for
Agouron Pharmaceuticals and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Spokesmen for the firms, which
make anti-HIV drugs used in the prison research, say they gave Thomas honoraria
for his advice on AIDS in prisons.

   After the two drug companies told the Times about the honoraria, Thomas did
not return telephone calls or e-mails seeking comment about the honoraria. In an
interview in December, he said he owns no drug-company stock and always follows
the state's financial disclosure laws. He told corrections spokesman Drake that
he is not a drug-company consultant and that "his primary source of income"
comes from the Corrections Department.

   "Dr. Thomas is required to report any such things that might be covered by
the law in his annual financial disclosure form, if he did in fact receive any,"

 said John Burke, the prison system's health care administrator.

   "Dr. Thomas has a medical degree, a law degree and is a former member of the
Legislature," added department spokesman Drake. "If anyone knows what a conflict
of interest is, he does. He is not involved in any conflict of interest."


   It was Thomas and his predecessor who created a watchdog committee, with no
association to Dr. Fischl or the University of Miami, to make sure the research
complied with federal patient-protection rules.

   But soon after the committee began meeting in 1998, it ran into problems. It
had trouble finding members who could attend regularly, so Thomas suggested that
his wife, Chris, join the group.

   That raised some eyebrows, but the committee went along and voted to include
her, according to Karol Lucken, a University of Central Florida criminal-justice
professor who was chairwoman of the committee.

   "I knew if we'd ask somebody like my wife, we'd have a quorum," Thomas said.

   The committee, also composed of ministers, an AIDS activist and a former
inmate, among others, had one setback after another. Lucken says its members
lacked the expertise to weigh the scientific merits of the studies. They also
had trouble getting answers to questions that went to the heart of informed
consent:

   How were inmates recruited and screened? Who was on which drugs and why? Was
there enough staff at the South Unit, and were they trained to notice possible
adverse reactions?

   "We went around and around on some of these things," Lucken said, "but the
procedures seemed nebulous."

   When the group examined informed-consent forms signed by the inmates, some
members felt they might as well have been written in Greek.

   One form is titled: "A phase II, randomized trial of AMPRENAVIR as part of
dual protease inhibitor regimens (placebo controlled) in combination with
ABACAVIR, EFAVIRENZ and ADEFOVIR DIPIVOXIL versus AMPRENAVIR alone in HIV
infected subjects with prior exposure to approved protease inhibitors and loss
of virologic suppression as reflected by a plasma HIV-1 RNA concentration > 1000
copies/ml."

   At the request of the Times, Education Programs Associates, a California
company that writes easy-to-read documents, examined a consent form for a
nationwide study that enrolled both prisoners and non-prisoners; in Florida,
only non-prisoners took part.

   "The format was very difficult to read," the company wrote in a three-page
report, concluding the form is written at a 15th-grade level, well above the
average inmate's education. "Important information was buried in densely written
paragraphs. . . . Clinical jargon was rarely explained. The typical reader, even
if well-educated, would have no way of comprehending the content of the consent
form."

   Problems understanding consent forms are common in and outside prisons, and
Dr. Jay Sosenko, a member of the University of Miami's institutional review
board, says the forms are "made as understandable as possible."

   Miami's review board, he adds, rigorously reviews and tracks Dr. Fischl's
research.

   But in March 1998, Lucken wrote a letter to the Department of Corrections,
saying that without more information, the watchdog committee couldn't give its
assurance that inmate rights were protected.

   Other potential problems turned up when members of the committee interviewed
the inmates.

   While some committee members thought the prisoners looked healthy and clearly
understood what was going on, other members suspected some inmates had been
pressured into the trials. They were told if they didn't sign up that day, the
study might be closed to them, according to minutes of a committee meeting.

   No one responsible for enrolling inmates in studies said that, corrections
officials replied.

   They promised to look into an allegation that an inmate was taken off his
medication for a week and given other drugs without being told why. (Changing
regimens or skipping anti-HIV drugs even for a few days can allow the virus to
re-emerge.)

   And correction officials said inmates enrolled in studies would continue to
receive HIV drugs after they were released from prison. Despite their good
intentions, however, they inadvertently lost track of two former inmates
enrolled in studies: One was transferred out of state, and the Immigration and
Naturalization Service deported another.

   AIDS activist Peter Uitdenbosch, a member of the watchdog committee,
discovered other problems. He said that one prisoner, a "treatment virgin," had
been placed on a potent, mega-drug cocktail and didn't know he had other, less
risky treatment options. And several prisoners weren't fully informed about the
dangerous reaction that Glaxo's abacavir sometimes causes, according to
Uitdenbosch, who is HIV positive and takes abacavir himself.

   He says that when he informed one inmate, he "went into a panic" and
complained to the administration.

   Thomas accused Uitdenbosch of dispensing "invalid medical information" and
threatened to "close down" the research if the committee felt it didn't comply
with the Nuremberg Code.

   Nobody wanted that. "It's the process that's bad, not the studies,"
Uitdenbosch said.

   Last fall, the process took another hit when the Department of Corrections
suddenly disbanded the watchdog committee. Thomas said he intended to name a new
oversight panel, but for months, none was appointed.

   Finally, a few weeks ago, the Corrections Department released the names of 10
new committee members. Seven are Corrections Department employees.

   The selections promptly drew more criticism. "That panel should contain no
state officials at all," Lucken said. "Evidently, the Department of Corrections
thinks it is immune from oversight."

   Federal rules require that the University of Miami appoint an inmate or
inmate advocate to represent the prisoners' interests. When the university
picked Thomas, critics charged that the selection was fraught with potential
conflicts of interest.

   "It smacked of cronyism," said Uitdenbosch, noting that Thomas is not only
the man in charge of inmate medical care but is also a University of Miami
alumnus. "Who represents the prisoners?" Uitdenbosch asked.

   Ruth Macklin, a bioethicist at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New
York City, says any prison official serving as an inmate advocate creates a
conflict of interest. "Even in the most humane and enlightened prison, it's
utterly preposterous to claim that any individual who is either from a
corrections facility or the state is an advocate," she said. "They are
adversaries."

   Dr. Altman says the university picked Thomas because of his extensive
knowledge of prison health care.

   "I thought I was an appropriate person," Thomas said. "I've got a background
in ethics."

   - Times researchers Kitty Bennett and Caryn Baird contributed to this report.

   University of Miami studies with inmate enrollment:

   ACTG 384

   Participants: 15 active.

   Length of study: Three years maximum.

   The aim: Study of protease inhibitor and/or non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitor with dual nucleosides in initial therapy of HIV
infection.

   Drugs involved: Combivir; efavirenz; Nelfinavir; Didanosine/Stavudine.

   NZTA 4007

   Participants: Four active; 13 have completed studies in the penal system.

   Length of study: 54 weeks.

   The aim: A phase IIIB, open label, pilot study to evaluate the efficacy,
tolerability and health care resource use in HIV-infected incarcerated subjects
treated twice daily for 24 weeks.

   Drugs involved: Ziagen (abacavir); Combivir (lamivudine and zidovudine).

   MK-094

   Participants: Four active.

   Length of study: 24 weeks.

   The aim: A multicenter, open label 24-week pilot study to evaluate the safety
and efficacy of indinavir Sulfate in combination with Ritonavir in HIV-infected
individuals.

   Drugs involved: indinavir; Ritonavir; Stavudine; Lamivudine.

   ACTG 398

   Participants: Three active.

   Length of study: Approximately 1 1/2 years.

   The aim: A phase II, randomized study of amprenavir as part of dual protease
inhibitor regimens (placebo controlled) in combination with abacavir, efavirenz
and adefovir dipivoxil versus amprenavir alone in HIV infected subjects with
prior exposure to approved protease inhibitors and loss of virologic suppression
as reflected by a plasma HIV-1 RNA concentration > 1000 copies/ml.

   Drugs involved: amprenavir; abacavir; efavirenz; L-Carnitine; saquinavir.

   ACTG 388

   Participants: 15 active; one has completed the study in the penal system.

   Length of study: 96 weeks.

   The aim: A phase III, randomized, controlled study of efavirenz or Nelfinavir
in combination with fixed dose combination Lamivudine/Zidovudine and indinavir
in HIV-infected subjects with < 200 cells/mm3or > 100,000 HIV RNA copies/ml in
plasma.

   Drugs involved: Combivir; indinavir; efavirenz; Nelfinavir.

   PROAB 3006

   Participants: One active; two have completed studies in the penal system.

   Length of study: 48 weeks.

   The aim: A phase III trial to compare the safety and anti-viral efficacy of
amprenavir with indinavir in combination with nucleoside reverse transcriptase
inhibitor therapy in NRTI experienced, protease inhibitor naive, infected
patients.

   Drugs involved: amprenavir; indinavir; abacavir.

   ACTG 359

   Participants: None active; three inmates had been active participants in the
penal system.

   Length of study: 24 to 48 weeks; trial has closed.

   The aim: To study the activity of the soft gelatin capsule saquinavir in
combination with Ritonavir or Nelfinavir and combinations of delavirdine and/or
adefovir in HIV-infected subjects with prior indinavir use and viral loads of
>2000 and <200,000 copies of HIV RNA/ml.

   Drugs involved: saquinavir; Ritonavir; Nelfinavir; delavirdine; adefovir.

   NZTA 4002

   Participants: None active; two inmates had been active participants in the
penal system.

   Length of study: 96 weeks from the time first subject enrolled; trial has
closed.

   The aim: A comparison of a four-drug regimen with a three-drug regimen in
antiretroviral-naive HIV-infected subjects.

   Drugs involved: 141W94 (amprenavir); abacavir (1592U89); Combivir;
Nelfinavir.

   M/3331/0074

   Participants: None active; one inmates had been an active participant but he
was lost to the study when he transferred out of state.

   Length of study: 24 to 96 weeks.

   The aim: An open-label randomized study of delavirdine in triple- and
four-drug combinations with Zidovudine, Lamivudine and indinavir in HIV-infected
individuals.

   Drugs involved: delavirdine; Zidovudine; Lamivudine; and indinavir.

   Source: Florida Department of Corrections


GRAPHIC: COLOR PHOTO; COLOR PHOTO, PAM ROYAL, (3); COLOR PHOTO, Associated Press
file photo; COLOR MAP; BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO, PAM ROYAL, (3); Dr. David L.
Thomas; Several times a day, inmates at the South Unit line up at a window to
receive their medications from nurse Ernestine Forbes.; Yakab Dennis; Julius
Samuel joined a study because he wanted access to drug combinations not
available at his other prison.; (1990) Dr. Margaret Fischl a pioneering AIDS
researcher shown speaking at the Sixth International Conference on AIDS in San
Francisco.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2000


                             700 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 19, 2000, Sunday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. B06; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 325 words

HEADLINE: A Code for Gene Research

BODY:


   As a person with Becker's muscular dystrophy, I am depending on successful
gene therapy for my survival ["Caution Over Gene Therapy Puts Hopes on Hold,"
front page, March 7]. Scientists who study gene therapy approaches to muscular
dystrophy have made substantial progress in the past few years.

   The Food and Drug Administration has acted too harshly in shutting down all
gene therapy programs at the University of Pennsylvania. While the death of a
patient should be taken seriously, it is no reason to shut down trials that are
unrelated to that trial. Because of the FDA's action, a muscular dystrophy trial
is being delayed. In addition, trials involving cancer, AIDS, cystic fibrosis
and heart therapy have been shut down or delayed.

   Two children with Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (the worst type) die every
day. I urge Congress to take appropriate action to make sure these trials begin
again as soon as possible. They are our only hope.

   BRAD STEPHENSON

   Irving, Tex.


   Justin Gillis uncovered an important issue in his March 7 Business story on
the gene-mapping controversy.

   Private vs. public patent rights--not credit, or even accuracy of the gene
maps, as Tony White and Celera Genomics Corp. would have us believe--is the
bottom line.

   The issue is not only how much Mr. White and Celera Genomics Corp. plan to
charge the public for the use of patents they hold and expect to acquire.
Awarding patents for this process defies logic--a fundamental business
assessment Celera should have made before investing millions in the undertaking.

   Unlike a Microsoft product, a human gene is not the product of anyone's idea.
In defense of the public right to health care, government investigators also
began patenting genomic discoveries to keep the genome in the public domain.

   If this matter has to be resolved by the courts, once again public health
care will pay the price.

   NORMA S. HOLMES

   Falls Church



LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2000


                             701 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 The Cincinnati Enquirer
                             All Rights Reserved
                            The Cincinnati Enquirer

                      March 18, 2000 Saturday Edt Edition

SECTION: ALL; Pg. 11A

LENGTH: 1123 words

HEADLINE: READERS' VIEWS

BODY:

   Census replies very important

   TO THE EDIT

   Within the next week, every household in the United States, including those
in our community, will receive a 2000 Census questionnaire. Representatives from
the U.S. Census Bureau and numerous local organizations have been working for
months to stress the importance of this activity.

   The Census is used to annually distribute over $185 billion in state and
federal funds, determine representation and boundaries for the U.S. House of
Representatives, and for government and business planning activities. Simply
stated, an accurate Census count is important to ensuring our region's share of
scarce resources and determining the most effective strategies to improve the
quality of life in Greater Cincinnati.

   As chairpersons of the Cincinnati - Hamilton County Census 2000 Complete
County Committee, an organization representing more than 110 businesses, local
governments, neighborhoods, educational institutions, non-profit organizations
and the media, we are asking for your help. About 84 percent of you will receive
a short form consisting of eight questions; the remaining 16 percent of you will
receive a longer form that asks more detailed questions. Both forms ask fewer
questions than in 1990, and the short form is the smallest in 150 years. All the
questions you will be asked on the Census form are required to administer
federal programs. Please be aware and reassured that your answers are completely
confidential. Your responses will not be shared with any other agency or
business. The Census Bureau has an exemplary record in this area.

   Completing the Census will take about 10 minutes for the average household.
By fully completing this form, you will eliminate the need for Census workers to
visit your household. Returning this form will also help minimize potential
inaccuracies in the count and save thousands of taxpayer dollars.

   Please consider Census 2000 as an investment in your future. Returning the
form is critical to our region's growth, and we strongly urge you to take part
in this important activity. After all, the Census only comes around once every
10 years. Hamilton County and the City of Cincinnati are working hard to build a
community of which everyone can be proud. By participating in Census 2000, you
can help us build our community and better plan for its future. Please don't
leave it blank. Everyone counts.  CHARLIE LUKEN, Mayor City of Cincinnati TOM
NEYER, JR., Hamilton County Commissioner

   Reasons why FDA delays approval

   In reference to the guest column by William K. Lewis, "FDA stalls drug that
saves lives" [March 11]: As a practicing dentist, I perform surgery and
prescribe drugs. Having done research for new medical devices, I am again
subject to FDA regulations. As chairperson for the Ohio Consumer Health
Information Network, I take exception to Mr. Lewis' guest article.

   Jim and Donna Navarro desperately seek help for their son's brain tumor. He
has already had surgery and the follow-up treatment that they seek is
experimental, not standard practice. Put aside Dr. Kildare, Dr. Welby and Star
Trek's Dr. McCoy, all of whom can cure anything within one hour, give or take a
pause for commercial messages. The reality is that an experimenter's interest is
not the treatment of the patient but the experimental proof that maybe his
treatment works. The patient may be part of a control group taking a placebo to
track the disease's progress without treatment.

   Desperate people seeking experimental cures do so to avoid the sometimes
harsh side-effects that standard therapy has. But Jim and Donna Navarro are
denying their son, Thomas, standard treatment in order to partake in an
experiment. Seventy percent of all experimental drugs do not pass the FDA Phase
2 trials that Thomas' parents want for their son. This is why the FDA has rules.

   We criticize the FDA for approving drugs too swiftly when a diabetes drug,
Rezulin, causes liver failure, and for not overseeing consumer safety when
experimental gene therapy kills its human subjects. The FDA is enforcing the
rules for consumer safety. Let's not experiment on our children.  LOUIS J. MAYO
Evendale

   Dr. Dobson is not a reverend

   Howard Wilkinson's article "Bauer: McCain went too far in criticizing
religious leaders" [March 1] inaccurately labels Focus on the Family President
James C. Dobson, Ph.D., as a reverend.

   Dr. Dobson is not a reverend. He is a best-selling author, child
psychologist, national radio broadcaster and founder of an international
nonprofit Christian ministry that helps families. He has a Ph.D. from the
University of Southern California in the field of child development. For 14
years, he served an an associate clinical professor of pediatrics at the
University of Southern California School of Medicine, and for 17 years served on
the attending staff of the Children's Hospital of Los Angeles in the division of
Child Development and Medical Genetics.  PAUL HETRICK Vice President Focus on
the Family

   Children can make up their own minds

   Krista Ramsey's column on Feb. 19 is so true ["Let children learn what they
love to do"]. After 50-plus years of the No. 1 speciality of medical practice --
pediatrics -- I have often told parents, friends and medical associations that
children can be potential geniuses, but can also be contaminated by adulthood.

   The various levels, situations and decisions all children experience go into
today's personal computer -- the brain -- and is present for each to use as
Krista did.  JULES KLEIN, M.D. East Walnut Hills

   Jogger's plea: Leash your dogs

   Picture this: You're training for the Cincinnati Flying Pig Marathon, so you
run five days a week at 5:30 a.m. You bring your dog since she, too, likes to
run. You're jogging through a quiet residential neighborhood when, without
warning, a large, untethered dog comes out of its yard and attacks the two of
you. It's still dark and many people are asleep so they don't hear your screams.
You continue fighting and yelling, but the menace that won't stop biting is
three times the size of your puppy, who is now bleeding and yelping. Five
minutes later, the two of you are able to outrun the dog, but you're shaken and
seething with anger.

   This scenario has happened to me not only once, but three times in the past
four months, including just this morning. I live in Mount Washington, and I'm
more than frustrated with dog owners who refuse to obey the City of Cincinnati's
leash law. My roommate and I are responsible owners who use a leash when
exercising our pet, and others need to as well. Dogs that cause attacks like
these aren't the cause of the problem -- their owners are.  CONNIE KOLITA Mount
Washington

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2003


                             702 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 16, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A12

LENGTH: 727 words

HEADLINE: CHARGES DELIGHT MANY AT ALLEGHENY SOME ARE ANGRY THAT "THESE CRIMINAL
CHARGES DON'T EXTEND DOWN FAR ENOUGH." MANY "PARTICIPATED IN THE ORGY."

BYLINE: Andrea Gerlin, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:
"Did they haul them off in handcuffs?"

   That's what Jerrold Schwaber wanted to know. A former associate professor of
pathology at Allegheny's medical school, Schwaber was reacting to news that
criminal charges were brought yesterday against the top three former officials
of the Allegheny health system.

   Schwaber was among the faculty members who lost tenured jobs in the health
system's collapse in 1998. He now holds a similar, but non-tenured, post at
Thomas Jefferson University, and yesterday he was delighted.

   That justice might be meted out to the three officials in charge when the
Allegheny system imploded satisfied people still bearing scars from the
experience.

   Joseph Brezin, president of the medical staff at Hahnemann University
Hospital, said he considers former Allegheny chief executive Sherif Abdelhak,
one of those charged, an "evil person" who deserves severe punishment.

   "He never showed remorse," Brezin said. "He never took personal
responsibility for bringing the system down and the reputation of the doctors,
hospitals and institutions."

   Howard Ozer, director of the cancer center at MCP-Hahnemann University, as
the university is now known, said the conduct of the arrested executives -
Abdelhak, former general counsel Nancy Wynstra and former chief financial
officer David McConnell - was repugnant. The three are accused of taking
restricted endowment funds and using them for general corporate expenses and
other purposes.

   "If indeed funds were taken from restricted endowments," Ozer said, "that's
the moral equivalent of a lawyer who uses a trust fund for his own purposes."

   Ozer was recruited to Allegheny from Emory University in 1996, and has had to
scale back his work as a result of Allegheny's problems. "I still have a
contract in my desk drawer one-hundredth of which was not even met," he said.

   Health system employees and former employees were not the only ones to
express bitterness yesterday. They were joined by people to whom the health
system still owes large amounts of money, part of Allegheny's $1.5 billion debt.

   James McMenamin of Drexel Hill and his wife, Jane, bought $135,000 of
Graduate Health System bonds in the early 1990s. Allegheny acquired the Graduate
system in 1997 and assumed its debt. When Allegheny declared bankruptcy,
bondholders such as the McMenamins were left with nearly worthless investments
and a place in a very long line of thousands of creditors.

   "I'm glad that they were charged," James McMenamin, 77 and a retired U.S.
Navy officer, said yesterday. "They should be held accountable."

   The arrests also opened old wounds for some survivors of the chaos within
Allegheny throughout 1997 and 1998. Tenet Healthcare Corp., a California
hospital company, bought Allegheny's eight Philadelphia facilities in November
1998 and has made an effort to stabilize them.

   Marla Gold, a specialist in infectious diseases at MCP-Hahnemann University,
said: "As much as I want justice to be done, there's also a sense of 'When will
this end?' "

   The executives' removal of restricted endowment money reduced a diabetes fund
used by Darwin Prockop, director of the Center for Gene Therapy, to $50,000 from
$350,000. Prockop has sued Abdelhak, McConnell and former Allegheny foundation
chairman William Penn Snyder III, who was not charged yesterday.

   Prockop said that his research is going well and that he cannot dwell on the
past disruptions. "I'm sort of numb to the whole thing," he said.

   Schwaber and others were rankled by the immunity grant to Donald Kaye, a
physician and former chief executive of Allegheny's eastern Pennsylvania region.

   "My regret is these criminal charges don't extend down far enough," Schwaber
said. "There were a lot of people at lower levels who participated in the orgy
that went on and that was provided to them."

   Kaye could not be reached for comment.

   Schwaber also said he is concerned that the three former Allegheny executives
will be allowed to plead to lesser charges or, if convicted, will get the
kid-glove treatment frequently reserved for white-collar criminals.

   "I hope these crimes are not punished the usual way . . . and that they don't
get off with just a slap on the wrist," Schwaber said.

   * Inquirer staff writers Josh Goldstein, Stacey Burling and Huntly Collins
contributed to this article.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             703 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 16, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A06

LENGTH: 576 words

HEADLINE: HOUSE PROBES GENE EXPERIMENTS A PENN SCIENTIST COULD BE CALLED TO
TESTIFY BEFORE THE COMMERCE COMMITTEE, A GOVERNMENT SPOKESMAN SAID.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   A congressional committee has opened a wide-ranging inquiry into federal
oversight of human gene-therapy experiments, including a controversial
experiment at the University of Pennsylvania.

   As part of the probe, there is a possibility that James M. Wilson, the Penn
scientist who oversaw the experiment, will be asked to testify, a spokesman for
the House Commerce Committee said yesterday.

   The committee, led by Rep. Thomas J. Bliley Jr. (R., Va.), made its
intentions known in a March 7 letter to Ruth Kirschstein, acting director of the
National Institutes of Health.

   In the letter, Bliley and three other ranking committee members asked the NIH
for a long list of documents, including all records related to NIH financing for
the Penn experiment that led to the death of an Arizona teenager.

   Jesse Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, died on Sept. 17, four days after getting an
experimental gene drug to correct an inherited liver disorder. He was the 18th
patient to be treated in the Penn trial.

   Gelsinger's death has triggered widespread concern about the safety of human
gene-therapy experiments and the adequacy of federal oversight of the fledgling
field.

   In their letter, the legislators demanded all records relating to more than
650 other "adverse events" in human gene-therapy experiments nationwide that
have been reported to the NIH since Oct. 1.

   Such events can range from relatively mild illness to death.

   Gelsinger is the only person whose death has been directly attributed to gene
therapy. Others in gene-therapy trials are believed to have died from their
underlying illness.

   But the congressional leaders said in their letter that the adverse events
"raise significant concerns with respect to the safety of the clinical trials
and the adequacy of NIH's oversight."

   Besides the adverse-event reports, the committee is also seeking NIH
correspondence with the Food and Drug Administration and conflict-of-interest
documents for members of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which oversees
gene-therapy experiments for the NIH.

   The letter also requested that NIH employees be made available for interviews
by committee staff.

   In addition to Bliley, the letter was signed by Reps. Fred Upton (R., Mich.),
John D. Dingell (D., Mich.) and Ron Klink (D., Pa.). They represent both the
Commerce Committee and its subcommittee on oversight and investigations.

   Penn spokesman Ken Wildes said the university was cooperating with the
committee's investigation and would continue to do so. "The president [Judith
Rodin] has said repeatedly that the university will cooperate with all
regulatory agencies and members of Congress," he said.

   He declined to comment on the possibility that Wilson would be asked to
testify under oath, saying that was an issue for Wilson and his attorney.

   A spokesman for Kirschstein declined comment yesterday, saying the NIH chief
had not had a chance to review the letter.

   The Commerce Committee spokesman said the probe would home in on the Penn
trial to identify "systemic problems" that may plague the regulation of other
gene-therapy experiments.

   "Unfortunately, we have a perfect case study with the situation in
Philadelphia," said the spokesman, who asked not to be named.

   A Senate committee is also investigating federal oversight of gene-therapy
experiments, but its focus is more on what needs to be done to improve the
system rather than what went wrong at Penn.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             704 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                March 15, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1829 words

HEADLINE: THE MARKETS: STOCKS & BONDS;
A Call for Sharing of Research Causes Gene Stocks to Plunge

BYLINE: By ALEX BERENSON and NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   President Clinton and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said yesterday
that the sequence of the human genome should be made freely available to all
researchers. The statement led to a sharp sell-off in the stocks of
biotechnology companies, which hope to profit by creating drugs based on genetic
data.

   The White House quickly said it did not intend to hurt the fledgling
biotechnology industry, but investors who have made biotechnology stocks the
darlings of the market were unconvinced. In frantic selling, they wiped away
tens of billions of dollars in market value from the industry. Genomics
companies, which are racing to produce a database of human DNA, were hit
hardest, with some off more than 20 percent.

    The drop was not confined to the biotechnology sector. After briefly passing
5,000 in morning trading, the Nasdaq composite index, which is heavily weighted
in technology stocks, fell steadily. The index closed at 4,706.63, down 200.61
points, its second-largest point loss ever.

   For investors, the drop is noteworthy, because biotechnology and Internet
companies have led the stock market so far this year, while most other stocks
have languished. Despite falling almost 13 percent yesterday, the Nasdaq biotech
index remains up almost 30 percent this year, thanks to investors' belief that a
new wave of drug discovery and gene therapy is imminent.

   Because of the rapid run-up, the stocks are expensive by all traditional
valuations. The joint statement from Mr. Clinton and Mr. Blair, which said the
genome data "should be made freely available to scientists everywhere," served
as a spark for excitable investors.

   Dr. Roy Whitfield, chief executive of Incyte Pharmaceuticals, which shed 28
percent of its market value during the day, said investors failed to distinguish
between genome sequences and gene sequences. The genome, referring to the total
human DNA, has no commercial value and cannot be patented. The genes, which
occupy only 3 percent of the genome, can be. Researchers can work on the
sequences of patented genes in academic work and have to pay license fees only
if they wish to sell an invention based on the sequence.

   The two leaders' statement, which was eight months in the making, is an
outgrowth of the longstanding rivalry between a public consortium of American
and British academic centers and the Celera Corporation of Rockville, Md., to
complete the sequence of the human genome.

   The consortium, largely financed by the National Institutes of Health and the
Wellcome Trust of London, is posting its findings daily on a Web site open to
all. Celera, a unit of the PE Corporation, promises to make its version of the
human genome freely available when it is finished, probably this summer. Celera
plans to patent some genes, but its principal business plan is to operate a
database of the human and other genomes, charging fees for use of the programs
that search and analyze the genetic data.

   The statement was intended to codify the government position in the rivalry,
that the human genome sequence should be made publicly available to all
researchers, but it appears to have been interpreted as a challenge both to
Celera's intellectual property rights and to those of other genome and biotech
companies. A White House official said neither challenge was intended, noting
the statement explicitly endorsed intellectual property protection for patents
based on genes.

   The statement cuts across a complicated two-way rivalry between the public
consortium and Celera, and between Celera and its two chief rivals, Incyte
Pharmaceuticals and Human Genome Sciences. Both the consortium and Celera aim to
sequence the human genome, which means determining the order of the three
billion chemical units in the DNA, the genetic information possessed by each
human cell.

   The strategy of Incyte and Human Genome Sciences is to focus on the genes
themselves, patenting as many as possible. The genes, the programming
instructions that operate the cell, are hidden in the DNA, with no obvious
signposts, and are hard to find even when the genome sequence is known.

   Incyte's stock fell $53.50, to $143.50, while Human Genome's stock fell
$29.04875, to $123.51625. Meanwhile, Celera fell $39.75, to $149.25.

   The government statement adds to the tension between the public consortium
and Celera, which last week announced that it had effectively broken off merger
negotiations.

   Celera and its president, Dr. J. Craig Venter, have long been at odds with
the leading scientists of the public consortium, chiefly Dr. John Sulston of the
Sanger Center in Britain and Dr. Robert Waterston of Washington University in
St. Louis.

   Before merger talks broke off, the public consortium proposed that both sides
abandon what it called "the current antagonism and excessive competition."

   The initiative for the statement issued today is believed to have come from
the Wellcome Trust, a medical-research charity, in London. Dr. Michael Dexter,
Wellcome's director, said the trust's concern was over the general ownership of
the genome, which in his view "is mankind's, and should not be owned by any one
company, individual or country."

   Denying that the statement was aimed at any person or company, he said the
raw sequence -- the string of chemical units making up the genome -- was not
patentable and that the trust "would fight any patents based on sequence if they
obstruct academic work and progress."

   Dr. Venter, however, indicated that he thought Celera was a target of the
statement, but unfairly so.

   "We are puzzled by the statement and we think it represents the lack of
insight and the confusion that has been generated out there," he said. "Our
business is not in patenting the genome or tying it up."

   Dr. Venter reiterated his previous position that Celera would make available
the sequence of the human genome when it was finished, and said the onus was on
the rivals Incyte and Human Genome Sciences to make their data public. "I agree
with the President and Tony Blair that Incyte and H.G.S. should publish their
data," he said.

   Both Dr. Dexter and Rachel E. Levinson, a senior official at the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy, said the joint statement acknowledged
intellectual property rights.

   Ms. Levinson said nothing in the statement challenged existing patent law.
She said she was "very concerned and upset" about the reactions on Wall Street.
She said that Dr. Neal Lane, the White House science adviser, believed the
statement would not affect Celera because of Celera's known intent to publish
the human genome sequence.

   Dr. William Haseltine, the chief executive of Human Genome Sciences, said he
agreed with today's statement because raw genomic data "has no practical use,"
an observation that he termed "the biggest untold secret of the human genome
project." When researchers with the public consortium published the first DNA
sequence of a human chromosome in December last year, he said, "No new medical
discoveries were made and no new genes were found."

   The reason, he added, was that the computer programs for finding genes were
still far less efficient than the method pursued by his company, one based on
short DNA sequences called "expressed sequence tags" or E.S.T.'s.

   The E.S.T. approach exploits the fact that humans may not be able to spot the
genes in the genome but human cells surely can. They regularly make transcripts
of the genes whose information is needed to synthesize the cell's various
proteins. Researchers can capture and analyze these transcripts, known as
messenger RNA, and from just a small portion of their sequence can identify the
corresponding part of the gene from which they come. These little snippets of
genes -- the E.S.T.'s -- are the basis of gene-searching approaches used by
Human Genome Sciences and Incyte.

   The Patent and Trademark Office has issued some patents based on E.S.T.'s
alone, but any such patents seem likely to be weaker than patents based on
full-length genes.

   According to figures released by Human Genome Sciences, Incyte leads in the
human gene patent race with 353 United States patents issued, followed by Human
Genome Sciences (114 patents), SmithKline Beecham (60), the United States
government (49), the University of California (46) and Massachusetts General
Hospital in Boston (45).

   The biotechnology companies have yet to prove their ability to translate
their research into revenues, much less profits. Yet these stocks helped drive
the Nasdaq composite to an 86 percent gain last year, the best performance by a
major index ever in the United States.

   By traditional valuation standards, the Nasdaq is extraordinarily expensive,
leaving some analysts worried that it is overdue for a sharp drop. The average
Nasdaq stock trades at well over 100 times expected 2000 earnings, and some
large Internet and computer stocks trade at unheard-of price-earnings multiples
of 500 or more.

   A drop in the biotech and computer high-fliers could shake the broader stock
market, analysts said, which has already been rattled by the Federal Reserve's
recent increases in short-term interest rates, analysts said. For the year, the
Dow Jones industrial average is down more than 14 percent, and the Standard &
Poor's 500 index is off 7.5 percent, while the Nasdaq is up 16 percent.

   Douglas Cliggott, United States equities analyst at J. P. Morgan, called the
market "very fragile" because the stocks that are driving it higher are already
so expensive. "We see the kinds of price-earnings multiples that the Nasdaq's
trading at as being absolutely, positively unsustainable," said Mr. Cliggott,
who turned cautious in January.

   Yesterday, broader indexes followed the Nasdaq down. After spending most of
the day up, the S.& P. slipped 24.47 points to 1,359.15, a 1.8 percent drop. The
Dow industrials fell 135.89 points, or 1.4 percent, to 9,811.24.

   Analysts who have dared to be bearish have been wrong for the last five
years. Byron Wien, chief United States investment strategist for Morgan Stanley
Dean Witter, said the Nasdaq was very volatile and that investors might shrug
off this decline as simply a buying opportunity.

   "We've had bad days in the Nasdaq before, and they've snapped right back,"
Mr. Wien said. "What we have to see is whether the 'buy the dips' mentality is
broken."


                             --------------------


Treasuries Up Sharply
By Bloomberg News

   United States government bonds registered their biggest gains in almost five
weeks after the Treasury Department said it would buy back $1 billion of bonds
maturing from 2018 to 2021 on Thursday.

   Treasuries also got a boost when stocks erased gains and fell in afternoon
trading, led down by a 4 percent plunge in the Nasdaq.

   The price of the 30-year Treasury bond rose 12/32, to 10 27/32. The bond's
yield, which moves in the opposite direction from the price, fell to 6.09
percent from 6.16 percent.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Graph tracks the Dow Jones industrial average over the past year.
(Sources: Associated Press; Bloomberg Financial Markets)(pg. C16)

Tables: "Hot & Cold" provides a look at stocks with large percentage gains and
losses; "The Favorites" lists stocks held by largest number of accounts at
Merrill Lynch. (Compiled from staff reports, The Associated Press, Bloomberg
News, Bridge News, Dow Jones, Reuters)(pg. C16)


LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2000


                             705 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 13, 2000, Monday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 464 words

HEADLINE: Experts can't say why, but laser holes in heart ease pain

BYLINE: Daniel Q. Haney; ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 ANAHEIM -- Burning holes in the heart with a laser threaded into the main
pumping chamber appears to dramatically relieve chest pain, although doctors
cannot explain why it works.

   Two studies presented yesterday show that the catheter-tipped lasers may
offer relief for people with such bad heart disease that they often can barely
walk.  The question is why.

   "We are absolutely sure that we don't know what the mechanism of action is,"
said Dr. Emerson Perin of the Texas Heart Institute.

   Perin and others presented their findings at a conference of the American
College of Cardiology.  The laser is among several kinds of technology intended
to help the sickest heart patients.

   Among other examples discussed at the meeting are gene therapy and
radioactive probes to make angioplasty work better.

   The only laser approach in routine use requires an incision in the chest to
expose the heart.  The new method should make the treatment less demanding by
delivering the laser without an operation.

   Instead, doctors thread the laser into an artery in the leg and up through
the circulatory system to the left ventricle, the main pumping chamber.  Inside
the heart, the laser burns a dozen or more tiny holes into the muscle.

   Perin reported experimental use of a laser developed by Eclipse Surgical
Technologies of Sunnyvale.  The study involved 325 patients who were randomly
assigned to get the laser or dummy treatments.  One of those receiving the laser
died, and six others had significant side effects.

   One year later, 55 percent of the patients getting the laser treatment had
substantially less chest pain, compared to 31 percent in the comparison group.
The laser patients also could walk about 1 1/2 minutes longer on a treadmill,
while the comparison group had a 16-second decline in treadmill time.

   Dr. Ran Kornowski of Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D.C., reported
encouraging results of a competing laser device, produced by Biosense-Webster of
Diamond Bar. Doctors tested it on 77 patients, and although there was no
comparison group, patients reported significant easing of pain.

   People suffer chest pain because clogged arteries fail to deliver enough
blood to their heart muscle.  Doctors once speculated that the laser works by
creating new blood vessels.  New research shows that the holes heal quickly,
leaving only scarring.

   Some think the holes may spur the body to sprout new blood vessels.  However,
a study by Dr. Robert Hendel of Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in
New York City found no sign that blood flow to patients' heart muscle improves
substantially after the treatment.

   Others speculate that the treatment may kill nerves in the heart, reducing
patients' sensation of pain without improving circulation.


LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2000


                             706 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                         March 13, 2000, Monday , METRO

SECTION: A SECTION; Medicine; Pg. 9A

LENGTH: 453 words

HEADLINE: Laser holes in heart leave a mystery




SOURCE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY: ANAHEIM, Calif.- Burning holes in the heart with a laser threaded into the
mainpumping chamber appears to relieve chest pain dramatically,although doctors
can't explain why it works.

    Two studies presented Sunday show that the catheter-tipped lasersmay offer
relief for people with such bad heart disease that theyoften can barely walk.
The question is why.

    "We are absolutely sure that we don't know what the mechanism ofaction is,"
said Dr. Emerson Perin of the Texas Heart Institute.

    Perin and others presented their latest findings at a conference ofthe
American College of Cardiology. The laser is among several newkinds of
technology intended to help the sickest heart patients.

    Among other examples discussed at the meeting are gene therapy
andradioactive probes to make angioplasty work better.

    The only laser approach in routine use requires an incision in thechest to
expose the heart. The new method should make the treatmentmuch less demanding by
delivering the laser without an operation.

    Instead, doctors thread the laser into an artery in the leg and upthrough
the circulatory system to the left ventricle, the mainpumping chamber. Inside
the heart, the laser burns a dozen or moretiny holes into the muscle.

    Perin reported experimental use of a laser developed by EclipseSurgical
Technologies of Sunnyvale, Calif. The study involved 325patients who were
randomly assigned to get the laser or dummytreatments. One of those receiving
the laser died, and six othershad significant side effects.

    One year later, 55 percent of the patients getting the laser
hadsubstantially less chest pain, compared to 31 percent in thecomparison group.
The laser patients could also walk about 11/2minutes longer on a treadmill,
while the comparison group had a16-second decline in treadmill time.

    Dr. Ran Kornowski of Washington (D.C.) Hospital Center reportedencouraging
results of a competing laser device, produced byBiosense-Webster of Diamond Bar,
Calif. Doctors tested it on 77patients, and although there was no comparison
group, patientsreported significant easing of pain.

    People suffer chest pain because clogged arteries fail to deliverenough
blood to their heart muscle. Doctors once speculated thatthe laser works by
creating new blood vessels.

    But now they know that the holes heal quickly, leaving only scars.

    A study by Dr. Robert Hendel of Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke'sMedical Center
in New York City found no sign that blood flow topatients' heart muscle improves
substantially after the treatment.

    Others speculate that the treatment may kill nerves in the heart,reducing
patients' sensation of pain without actually improvingcirculation.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             707 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                         Copyright 2000 Star Tribune
                         Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)

                     March 13, 2000, Monday, Metro Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D

LENGTH: 2029 words

HEADLINE: Anatomy of a stock boom;
A sampling of recent equity offerings in the health care sector indicates that
biotechnology once again is inspiring the investment community.

BYLINE: Jill J. Barshay; Staff Writer

BODY:

        Move over dot-com. Biotech was the backwater of Wall Street for most of
the 1990s, but investors can't get enough of the stocks now.

        Dozens of biotech companies are soaring, pushing biotech indexes to
record highs. The Nasdaq biotechnology index already is up 60 percent this year
and 186 percent for the past 52 weeks. In contrast, the Dow Jones Internet index
is up 26 percent so far this year and 128 percent for the past 52 weeks.

        Two highfliers show the extremes: Incyte Pharmeceuticals Inc. has gained
1,100 percent in the past five months. Celera Genomics is up 28-fold since last
June. Its market value exceeds $10 billion, more than General Mills. Neither
company turns a profit.

        "It's fairly insane," said Karen Bernstein, who has been tracking the
biotech industry since 1990 as editor in chief of BioCentury Publications.

        The hearts of biotech firms are laboratories where scientists slice
cells and play with genetic structures, looking for cures for cancer, AIDS and
other fatal or chronic diseases. More broadly, the sector includes companies
that produce advanced tools for genetic analysis, such as "gene chips" and "lab
chips" that rid labs of the need for test tubes and beakers.

        About 20 of these companies have products to sell and make money. Most
do not. Many don't plan for their drugs to hit the market for another five or 10
years. In the meantime, they must survive by selling stock and otherwise raising
money while they burn through their cash on hand.

        All of which is familiar to observers of the Internet companies, where
it's been a badge of honor to lose piles of money in pursuit of a dream to
fundamentally change the way people buy books/pet food/your product here.

        And just as the boom in Internet shares has been fueled by the belief
that the companies will change commerce as we know it, the biotech surge carries
the same enthusiasm that it will remake medicine.

        Rather than the traditional method of developing drugs through trial and
error, testing chemical compounds against diseases, biotech companies seek to
turn diseases off like a light switch by blocking the genes that cause them to
spread. Thanks to technological advances, scientists are isolating
disease-triggering genes faster than ever.

        "Five years ago, people thought it would take 10 to 20 more years to map
the human genome. Now it's almost completed," said Alexander Cheung, a biotech
fund manager at Monument Funds in Bethesda, Md. "The recent advances in medical
science are nothing short of astounding."

        According to Cheung, there are now 350 biotech drugs in clinical trials
and 500 more drugs have been targeted from recent gene isolation. Cheung expects
the number to multiply into the thousands in coming years.

        Couple those developments with the prospect of an aging and increasingly
affluent U.S. population eager for ways to cheat disease, and it's easy to see
the potential.

        But in other corners, the enthusiasm is restrained.

        "There have been some real advances in biotechnology. But sequencing the
human genome doesn't give you a drug to sell," said Bernstein. "There's a lot of
naivete about what it means."

        It typically takes 10 to 12 years for a biotech company to develop a
marketable drug. The drug must be developed, go through three stages of clinical
trials, win FDA approval and become accepted by the medical community.

        Among the companies that recently have sold or announced plans to sell
stock to the public, just one _ Intermune Pharmaceuticals _ has an FDA-approved
drug. More typical are companies such as Vaxgen Inc. and Tularik Inc. Both went
public last year but are still years away from receiving federal approval for
their drugs.

   .

   Payoff is enormous

             For those that succeed, the payoff is enormous. Amgen, one of the
more established success stories among biotech stocks, has a multimillion-dollar
drug called Epogen that counters the side-effects of kidney dialysis. The drug
won FDA approval in 1989 and Amgen stock more than doubled soon after. It now
trades for 60 times its 1989 price.

        The home runs come amid dozens of strikeouts. Xoma, for example, had a
hot prospect with a drug meant to treat internal bacterial infections associated
with gunshot wounds. But the FDA rejected it last September and Xoma's stock
collapsed.

        The risks and lengthy waits aren't curbing the appetite of the
investment community, though. Investors have pumped more than $8.5 billion into
biotech companies in the first two months of this year _ enough to set a record
for the year. In the past five months 11 biotech companies have gone public,
raising almost $900 million, double the amount raised in the first nine months
of last year.

        Minnesota is home to just two publicly traded biotech firms. MGI Pharma
is developing cancer drugs in Bloomington and already sells a drug to treat
dry-mouth syndrome in cancer patients. Its stock has soared 265 percent since
Jan. 1. Minneapolis-based Techne makes research tools for biotech labs. Its
shares are up 41 percent this year.

        The industry isn't big in Minnesota, but biotech is driving deals inside
Minneapolis investment houses.

        U.S. Bancorp Piper Jaffray started its biotech group with one person in
1997. Now there are 25. Piper has completed seven equity offerings this year and
has six more in registration, making biotech the hottest sector at Piper at the
moment.

        Sam Murphy, health-care analyst at American Express Financial Advisors
in Minneapolis, jokes that the trend has "saved his career."

        "It's the only place in health-care that's working." he said.

        Murphy jolted several American Express growth funds with the stocks last
spring and is now basking in the high returns. One of them, the American
Express' Strategic Aggressive Growth Fund, soared 73 percent last year, 52
percent better than the S&P 500, according Morningstar, thanks partly to its
investments in Idec Pharmaceuticals Corp. and Medimmune Inc.

   .

   Can go cold quickly

        But students of stock market history know that biotech investing can go
cold just as quickly. The sector is notorious for boom-bust cycles. Biotech
shares rose in the mid-80s, then crashed, climbed again in 1991, and crashed.
The stocks went nowhere from 1994 to 1998.

        "People have lost a lot of money," Murphy said. "At first there's a lot
of emotional hype for these stocks. And then reality sets in. A clinical trial
fails. It takes too long to get a drug to market."

        But biotech believers such as Piper Jaffray analyst Peter Ginsberg say
this time it's different.

        "Today the industry is based more on products rather than promise. More
are becoming profitable. It's a stronger industry," he said.

        Some of the stronger companies helped ignite the enthusiasm last year
when they brought several biotech drugs to market. Those successes attracted the
attention of restless investors who'd seen the market for Internet shares start
to cool. As new money flowed into the sector, it allowed far less mature
companies to go public with their stock and see it surge solely on the promise
of new drugs.

        Conventional wisdom says the sector's bubble has to burst. Already, many
stocks have trimmed back from recent highs.

        But investors such as Murphy aren't about to pull back, though he
insists he's sticking with the more conservative companies.

        "It's emotional. Do you believe that genomics will revolutionize
medicine? . . . I fundamentally believe in biotech. I think there will be huge
advances in cancer in the next five to 10 years."

   .

   WHAT'S NOT HOT

   - Laser eye surgery. Last year's investment fad has faded as stiff
competition among laser-equipment makers has lowered prices and profit margins.
The same goes for other laser-based therapies, from hair removal to skin care.

   Other industries have been out for a long time:

   - HMOs

   - Doctor-owned health care practices (PPMs)

   - Medical devices (though they may be staging a comeback)

   .

   .

   BIOTECH FEVER

   .

   The graphic on Page D1 illustrates the range of health care companies that
have gone public recently or plan to issue stock. The list is dominated by
biotech. Most of the companies have not received FDA approval for their
products, often a lengthy process that requires three stages of clinical trials.
Phase 1 drug trials are intended to establish that a drug is safe for humans.
Phase 2 is for determining whether the drug is effective. In phase 3 tests, it
is given to a large group of patients.

   - Tularik Inc., South San Francisco, Calif., is just beginning phase 1 trials
to see if its drug to treat cancerous brain tumors is safe. The stock went
public in December at $14 a share. Friday close: $79.88.

   - Biopure Inc., Cambridge, Mass., is in final phase 3 clinical trials for its
bovine-derived blood alternative for blood transfusions. The stock went public
in July at $12 share. Friday close: $35.50.

   - BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, Calif., has completed phase 3 trials
and is seeking FDA approval for a drug to treat a rare genetic disease, Hurler
Syndrome, which causes deformities and mental retardation in children. Its stock
went public in July at $13. Friday close: $27.75.

   - Vaxgen Inc., Brisbane, Calif., is conducting large-scale phase 3 clinical
trials for its AIDS vaccine in North America and Thailand. The stock went public
in June at $13. Friday close: $20.

   - United Therapeutics Corp., Silver Spring, Md., is in phase 3 clinical
trials with a drug to treat pulmonary hypertension. The stock went public in
June at $12. Friday close: $92.87 1/2.

   - Antigenics Inc., New York City, is in phase 2 clinical trials of its drug
to treat kidney cancer. The stock went public in February at $18. Friday close:
$50.25.

   - Vical Inc., San Diego, is in phase 3 clinical trials for its gene therapy
drug to treat skin cancer. The stock went public in January at $36.50. The
shares tumbled from $73 to less than $49 last week after a patient died and one
university suspended testing.

   - Aspect Medical Systems Inc., Natick, Mass., sells FDA-approved digital
monitors that track a patient's consciousness during surgery. The stock went
public in January at $15. Friday close: $53.

   - Genzyme Transgenics Corp., Framingham, Mass., is in phase 3 clinical trials
on its drug that slows the clotting of blood during heart surgery. The company
gained publicity last year for cloning goats. The company raised money in an
additional equity offering last month at $20 a share. Friday close: $33.38.

   - Orapharma Inc., Warminster, Pa., just completed phase 3 clinical trials of
its gum disease drug and is seeking final FDA approval. The stock came public
last week at $18. Friday close: $32.13.

   - Allos Therapeutics Inc., Denver, is in phase 3 clinical trials for its drug
that boosts radiation therapy for cancerous brain tumors. Its stock offering is
pending.

   - IntraBiotics Pharmaceuticals Inc., Mountain View, Calif., is about to start
phase 3 clinical trials of its drug to treat mouth ulcers, a common side effect
of cancer therapy. Its stock offering is pending.

   - Oratec Interventions Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., sells an FDA-approved device
to treat lower back pain. Its stock offering is pending.

   - Intermune Pharmaceuticals Inc., Palo Alto, Calif., received FDA approval
last month for a drug to treat osteopetrosis, a bone disease that affects
children and leads to blindness. Its stock offering is pending.

   - DrugAbuse Sciences Inc., Menlo Park, Calif., is developing drugs to treat
alcohol and heroin addictions. Only one of the drugs has entered the first stage
of human testing. Its stock offering is pending.

   .

   Sources: SEC filings and company statements

   .

   .

   Backing biotech

   .

   The Nasdaq Biotech Index, a capitalization-weighted index made up of Nasdaq's
199 biotechnology stocks, has doubled in value since October.

   (See microfilm for chart.)


CORRECTION:
A graphic that appeared with this article should have said that the stock
offering made by Vical Inc. in January was a secondary offering.

GRAPHIC: CHART; ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2000


                             708 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                     March 13, 2000, Monday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: LIFE; Pg. 13D

LENGTH: 496 words

HEADLINE: No clear picture on bypass alternative In tests, new blood vessels
help pain, not exercise tolerance

BYLINE: Steve Sternberg

DATELINE: ANAHEIM, Calif.

BODY:

   ANAHEIM, Calif. -- The first major study of the effectiveness
of bypassing blocked arteries by provoking the growth of new blood
vessels, a process known as angiogenesis, has yielded mixed results,
researchers reported Sunday.

   Like an earlier unsuccessful trial of a similar treatment approach,
the study fell short of its primary aim -- markedly improving
the exercise tolerance of people whose hearts have a moderate
to poor blood supply. Yet unlike the earlier trial, this procedure
provided significant relief from chest pain, as measured by the
patients and their doctors.


   And the study is still in the early stages, researchers told the
American College of Cardiology meeting here. No one knows how
long it will take for the treatment, which uses growth factors,
to generate a thicket of microscopic blood vessels.

   This report comes just 90 days after doctors infused either the
genetically engineered blood-vessel growth factor FGF-2 or a placebo
into 337 volunteers.

   Six-month data are now being analyzed and will be reported during
the second half of the year.

   The patients were randomly split into four groups. One group got
the placebo; three others were given growth factor doses that
differed in size by 100-fold. Most patients were men; their median
age was 63. All had severe to moderate chest pain that did not
yield to other treatments.

   The only apparent side effect was a transient drop in blood pressure
that could be remedied simply by giving additional fluid. Careful
analysis of the data suggests that a moderate dose of the growth
factor works best, though this did not reach the level of proof.

   "Perhaps the most important result of the trial is that we've
identified a group of patients who did particularly well -- patients
with the most severe disease," says lead researcher Michael Simons
of Beth Israel Deaconness Medical Center in Boston.

   "This is a really young field," says Bruce Scharschmidt of Chiron
Corp. in Emeryville, Calif., which sponsored the trial. "There's
a lot of animal data to suggest this will work. We've seen a signal
here to indicate it will, and it's a signal that wasn't seen in
the (earlier) Genentech trial."

   That study, a smaller controlled trial, used the growth factor
VEGF, which was developed by Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco.
The study generated only negative results. Company officials say
they've yanked the growth factor back into the lab for further
study.

   An effort to use gene therapy to provoke blood-vessel growth was
halted this month by the Food and Drug Administration as part
of a larger investigation of gene therapy problems.

   The lead investigator in that trial, Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University
in Boston, reported Sunday that 21 of 30 patients also reported
a reduction in chest pain. But this project, unlike that of Chiron,
lacked a placebo group and its results are difficult to interpret,
doctors say.

GRAPHIC: GRAPHIC, B/W, Gary Visgaitis, USA TODAY, Source: The Angiogenesis
Foundation, Cambridge, Mass.; Steven Moskowitz, Advanced Medical Graphics
(Diagram)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             709 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 13, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A16; LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

LENGTH: 138 words

HEADLINE: Our Son's Gene Therapy

BODY:



   We are the parents of a 5-year-old with Canavan disease who participated in
gene therapy [front page, March 7]. We know that there are risks involved and
that the initial studies have been more for safety than efficacy. We spoke to
many physicians and our rabbi, all of whom felt that if there was a chance that
our son could improve or not lose his motor skills as quickly, it would be worth
the risk.

   We love our son, but he cannot walk, crawl, talk or feed himself. He weighs
30 pounds and eats well, but he works so hard in therapy that he doesn't gain
weight. After his first gene therapy, he gained two pounds in a month.

   We have no illusions that gene therapy will cure our son. But perhaps it will
cure a child born this year or next.

   DEBORAH DUITCH

   AVRAM BRICKNER

   Newton Centre, Mass.



LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             710 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 12, 2000 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1323 words

HEADLINE: Buyotech?

BYLINE: Edward R. Silverman, Star-ledger staff

BODY:

   They don't have earnings. In many cases, they don't even have products.

    But for now, they're Wall Street darlings.

    Dot-coms? No: Biotechnology companies.

    year ago, Cytogen Corp. was left for dead. The Princeton biotechnology
company had never made a profit. Its stock

    traded for less than a dollar. And regulators had uncovered quality-control
problems in its plant.

    Last summer, things started looking up. Cytogen struck two deals that
bolstered its work in diagnosing and treating prostate cancer. It formed a sales
force and profitability seemed possible. By January, its stock hit $5, a
threshold for being taken seriously on Wall Street.

   But nothing could have prepared Joseph Reiser, Cytogen's chief executive, for
the heartwarming reception he got last month at a prestigious and closely
watched biotechnology conference at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan.

    "Our little room was full," Reiser said. "There were even people standing. A
year ago, we probably wouldn't have even been invited to that conference.
Obviously, we're doing better. But really, there's so much interest in biotech
now. It's incredible."

    Indeed, since the start of the year, the Nasdaq biotechnology stock index
has jumped an astounding 56.7 percent, to an all-time high. Similarly, the
American Stock Exchange's biotech index has gained 74.1 percent, another
unprecedented increase.

    So much money has poured into biotechnology stocks that the total value of
these shares - referred to as market capitalization - recently crossed $350
billion, up from just $98 billion at the end of 1998, according to Ernst &
Young, the consulting firm.

    As a result, another 35 to 40 biotech companies, including Orchid
BioSciences Inc., which is also based in Princeton, have plans to make their
first public stock offerings, according to Scott Morrison, who heads Ernst &
Young's life sciences practice.

    Others, such as Medarex Inc., which is headquartered in Annandale, took
advantage of the huge run-up in stock prices to announce plans to sell still
more shares to the public. Since January, the company's shares increased more
than four times, closing at 143 on Friday.

    Among local biotech stocks that have soared this year are Enzon Inc., whose
shares jumped 52 percent; Celgene Inc., which has seen a 149 percent gain; and
ImClone Systems Inc., a New York firm with a Somerville plant, which saw a 135
percent jump in its stock price.

    "A lot of people think the market has gotten ahead of these companies,"
which use cutting-edge technology to engineer new medicines, said Morrison. "But
I'm convinced we're in the middle of a revolution. Rather than being boutique
research businesses, these companies will become real businesses.

    "Will we see products overnight? Absolutely not. But what's different this
time from the bubbles we saw in the past is that there's real science and real
progress. People really misunderstood this industry. The volatility was on Wall
Street, not in the lab."

    That certainly seemed true last week, when the stock market stumbled for a
couple of days over earnings surprises, persistently high oil prices and
anticipation over still more interest-rate increases. Nonetheless, the biotech
sector continues to perform as never before.

    Still more astonishing is that biotech stocks have done well despite
negative press over gene therapy. The experimental technique, which is being
used by some biotech companies to develop new medicines, was linked to the death
of an 18-year-old last fall.

    Several factors have contributed to this extraordinary run-up. High on the
list: a bit of anxiety over some Internet stocks, an unexpected development that
late last year prompted investors to scramble for the next hot sector in which
to park their money.

    Nearly all of the biggest drug makers, meanwhile, are forming alliances with
biotech companies to round out their product portfolios and increase the odds of
coming up with a blockbuster medicine.

    In some cases, biotech companies are being bought entirely. Last year, for
instance, Johnson & Johnson acquired Centocor Inc., while Warner-Lambert Co.
bought Agouron Pharmaceutical Inc. The trend has only focused still more
attention on biotech companies.

    Perhaps the most significant driver, though, is anticipation over the human
genome project, which will provide scientists with the genetic code -
essentially, the human blueprints - needed to develop novel medicines.

    The excitement was triggered by Celera Genomics Corp., which recently said
it expects a preliminary draft of the human genome sometime this summer. The
news sent stocks in this subset of the biotech sector into orbit.

    For instance, Millennium Pharmaceuticals Inc., which has deals with several
of the biggest drug makers to use genomics to develop medicines for targeting
specific diseases, has jumped 68.3 percent this year.

    "We're very much at the tip of an iceberg here," said John Schroer,
portfolio manager for Invesco's health-sciences fund, which has loaded up on
biotech stocks. "There's so much information contained in the genome, and we
don't even know how it will be used.

    "You also have to remember that there's no milestone here to trip us up -
right now, we're all conditioned to look for, or react to, phases of drug
development and regulatory approval. But the genome is new. So it creates a new
type of valuation umbrella."

    Another reason most biotech companies can't easily be evaluated is simply
that they don't have profits to report. In some cases, there aren't any
revenues, either. It all comes down to companies with products - even if those
products won't be on the market for a few years yet.

    "We're really at the early stages of biotech fever," said Manny Tzavlakis, a
former Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp. market analyst who writes a biotech column
for RagingBull.com, a Web site frequented by investors.

    "But there's really no way to tell right now who will actually have a real
product, or which products will be successful. A lot of these smaller companies
are soaring right now, but some of them are going to get crushed."

    One company that seems to have investors convinced otherwise is Medarex.
Besides developing its own products, known as monoclonal antibodies, the company
also owns the intellectual property that others would use to develop these
medicines.

    Monoclonal antibodies are proteins that search for sick cells and neutralize
them. They have the potential to treat a wide variety of diseases, but with
fewer side effects. Today, there are only eight products on the market, but
another two dozen are being tested in humans.

    Medarex is one of two companies - the other is Abgenix Inc. - that came up
with a new way to make antibodies that are entirely human. It engineered mice to
grow them.

    "If you want to make a monoclonal antibody, you need to deal with them,"
said Invesco's Schroer. "So besides developing their own drugs, Medarex will be
clipping coupons."

    Such progress constitutes a dramatic reversal from just a few years ago,
according to Viren Mehta, who runs Mehta Partners, an investment firm that
specializes in tracking the pharmaceutical industry.

    As he noted, the value of the outstanding shares of Amgen Inc., one of the
best-known and most successful biotech companies, recently exceeded $69.5
billion, surpassing the market cap of Eli Lilly & Co. and ranking it among the
10 largest drug makers, by market capitalization.

    "The success rate of new small molecules under development has been about 10
percent, but the projected rate for monoclonal antibodies is 35 percent," said
Lisa Drakeman, Medarex's senior vice president of business development.

    "And there'll be a tremendous number of products in the pipeline. You can
see this whole area is going to be very large. So the big pharmaceutical
companies should be looking over their shoulders."

    Ed Silverman covers the drug industry and can be reached at (973) 877-1542
or esilverman@starledger.com

GRAPHIC: 1--Senior research associate Sowmya Govinda conducts an experiment at a
Celgene lab in Warren.

 INFO GRAPHIC: Hot streak

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             711 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 11, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 449 words

HEADLINE: GENE TESTS GET FEDERAL PANEL'S OK TO PROCEED THE NIH ADVISORY GROUP
SUPPORTED THE CONTINUATION OF MORE THAN 300 HUMAN GENE-THERAPY TRIALS.

BYLINE: Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Gene-therapy scientists got a green light to move forward yesterday, despite
concerns about the experimental field of research after the death of an
18-year-old at the University of Pennsylvania in September.

   A federal advisory panel recommended continuing the more than 300 existing
human gene-therapy trials, including those that use the same methods involved in
the death of Jesse Gelsinger.

   The Penn scientists gave Gelsinger a massive dose of a virus, called
adenovirus, which had been specially modified to deliver a therapeutic gene to
his liver. About a quarter of all gene-therapy experiments use the adenovirus as
a means of getting genes into a patient's cells.

   Concerned about unknown dangers in this highly experimental form of medicine,
some members of the committee yesterday recommended that doctors improve the way
they inform patients of the risks. Several suggested requiring that a third
party, such as an ombudsman, help patients understand the risks and potential
benefits of gene experiments.

   Others expressed concern that labs around the country use different methods
of measuring the concentration of viral doses delivered in these experiments.

   "We need to develop a standard," said Claudia Mickelson, who heads the
Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), an arm of the National Institutes of
Health.

   As in any experimental trial, patients must sign consent forms, but more
information may be warranted for something as complex and technical as gene
therapy, committee members said.

   In addressing the group, Gelsinger's father, Paul, said that neither he nor
his son was told of the full extent of the risk. In investigating Jesse
Gelsinger's death, Penn scientists concluded that the adenovirus appears to have
killed him by triggering his immune system to attack his internal organs.

   "I needed someone who knew about gene therapy and about the dangers of
adenovirus," Paul Gelsinger said.

   Philip Noguchi, who heads gene-therapy research for the FDA, backed the need
for a third party to explain the risks. "Whether you call it a patient advocate
or a speaker for the patient, I think this is a necessary function," he said.

   Noguchi said patients needed to understand how much was still unknown about
these viruses.

   Panel members expressed dismay that they cannot fully explain what went wrong
in the Penn experiment. "People ask me what happened, and I'm still not sure,"
said panel member Xandra Breakefield of Massachusetts General Hospital.

   That makes it hard to know how to prevent deaths. "No one saw that coming,"
said Louise Markert, a Duke University pediatrician on the panel. "I don't think
anyone could see it coming."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             712 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                March 11, 2000, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1450 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

PHILADELPHIA

Pope OKs sainthood for socialite who lifted poor

   Pope John Paul II approved sainthood Friday for Katharine Drexel, a
Philadelphia socialite who took a vow of poverty and devoted her fortune to
helping poor blacks and American Indians.

   Drexel died in 1955. She will be canonized Oct. 1 in St. Peter's Square at
the Vatican, said Philadelphia Archbishop Anthony Bevilacqua.

   Drexel will be only the second American-born saint; the other is Sisters of
Charity founder Elizabeth Ann Seton, canonized in 1975.

   The Vatican confirmed Drexel's first miracle in 1998 - curing Robert
Gutherman of deafness. On Jan. 28, the pope credited Drexel with a second
miracle - curing the deafness of 7-year-old Amanda "Amy" Wall.

WASHINGTON

Advisory panel doesn't vote on gene therapy ban

   An advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health debated a proposal
calling for a ban on human gene therapy experiments, but then adjourned without
taking a vote.

   The proposal, formally presented to the committee Friday by a Washington
activist group, called for a halt to gene therapy experiments except as a "last
resort for life-threatening illness."

   The motion by the Foundation of Economic Trends cited the death last fall of
a teen from Tucson, Ariz., along with hundreds of reported adverse reactions
among patients enrolled in gene therapy as reasons to "impose an immediate
moratorium" on gene therapy experiments.

   Committee member Nancy King of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill said the idea was flatly rejected by a subcommittee that studied the
proposal. The full committee adjourned without ever presenting the proposal for
a vote. The committee has no power to block gene therapy, but its
recommendations are closely monitored by the Food and Drug Administration.

TRENTON, Fla.

Mother of abducted girl is grateful she's alive

   The mother of a 10-year-old girl who was snatched from her driveway and held
for three days thanked the child's captor Friday for releasing her alive.

   Investigators continued to hunt for the kidnapper and released no details of
what happened to Jessica Rodriguez in her captivity. She was abducted by a man
Monday after getting off her school bus outside her rural home in Trenton. On
Thursday, she walked into a Wal-Mart 25 miles away from home, asking for help.
Investigators said they believe the child was dropped off by her captor.

   "I want to tell the man who had Jessica, 'Thank you very much for dropping
her off safely,' " said her mother, Jennifer Graham, mixing laughter and tears.
"And she's doing great. She's playing. She's so happy. She's wonderful."

   Investigators are focusing their search for the kidnapper in the area around
where Jessica lives, based on information from the girl.

DALHART, Texas

Copter carrying sick baby crashes; 4 are killed

   A medical helicopter carrying a 4-month-old girl in respiratory distress from
a remote Oklahoma town crashed Friday, killing the baby and the three-person
crew.

   National Transportation Safety Board investigators were on their way to the
scene about 20 miles north of this Texas Panhandle town. "We don't know whether
he hit power lines or had a mechanical failure," said board spokesman Doug
Wigington. "We are also looking to see if weather might be a possible cause."

   The Life Star helicopter left Northwest Texas Healthcare System in Amarillo
to pick up the girl in Boise City, Okla., about 100 miles to the north, and was
returning at the time of the crash. The craft, which was leased to the small
Amarillo hospital, had landed about 15 miles south of Boise City because of fog
and was met by a ground ambulance carrying baby Kathy Esparza, authorities said.


HURLBURT FIELD, Fla.

Honored helicopter pilot is guilty of molesting girls

   An Air Force helicopter pilot honored for leading a daring rescue off Iceland
was found guilty at a court-martial Friday of repeatedly molesting two girls.

   Col. James A. Sills, 48, was also found guilty of assaulting his estranged
wife, having an unprofessional relationship with his secretary and lying during
a security interview.

   He was sentenced to eight years in prison and dismissal from service. He
faced more than 30 years.

   Sills was acclaimed for leading two helicopters through stormy weather to
rescue six seamen who had abandoned their ship off Iceland in 1994.

==========

WORLD

GUATEMALA

Ex-aide to slain bishop is charged again

   After nearly two years of investigation, Guatemalan authorities on Friday
again levied murder charges against the Rev. Mario Orantes, the former assistant
of slain human rights leader Bishop Juan Gerardi.

   State prosecutors had been looking into whether the army was involved, but
Orantes' arrest suggests they have shifted their attention back toward suspects
in the church.

   Gerardi, 75, was bludgeoned to death on April 26 in the garage of the n
orthern Guatemala City seminary where he and Orantes lived and worked. Gerardi
was killed just two days after he had delivered the Catholic Church's human
rights report, which implicated Guatemala's military in an overwhelming majority
of the 200,000 deaths resulting from the country's 36-year civil war.

   Orantes spent seven months in jail on murder charges, but was released in
February 1999, when human rights groups began protesting that authorities were
overlooking the military's potential role in the killing.

NEPAL

Police get tough with protesters against China

   Police in the capital of Katmandu on Friday swung batons to disperse about
1,000 Tibetan protesters demanding an end to Chinese rule in Tibet, leaving at
least 25 demonstrators seriously injured, witnesses said.

   The protesters first hurled stones at the police, who were preventing them
from leaving the Buddhist Boudhanath Temple and heading to the Chinese Embassy,
said Shanker Kharel, a local reporter. Police then beat the protesters with
batons and detained some people.

   Nepalese authorities are mindful of their relations with neighbor China and
are wary of anti-China demonstrations by refugees who stay in transit camps
after fleeing Tibet.

CONGO

Exodus of refugees continues, U.N. reports

   An exodus of refugees fleeing clashes in northwest Congo shows no sign of
stopping, with about 25,000 now in neighboring Republic of Congo, the U.N.
refugee agency said Friday.

   The refugees have been crossing the Ubangui River that forms the border
between the central African nations. They are taking shelter in villages along a
310-mile stretch of land, said Ron Redmond, spokesman for the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees.

   Efforts to provide limited aid have been hampered by the area's remoteness
and insecurity, Redmond said. But the refugees, many of them fishermen, are
largely able to feed themselves.

INDONESIA

Government seeks to halt fires for land clearing

   With hundreds of blazes on the Indonesian island of Sumatra casting haze
across much of Southeast Asia, the government on Friday said it would crack down
on farmers and loggers using fire to clear land.

   The government said it will confiscate the licenses of any plantation owner
or logger caught using fire as a cheap - but illegal - method of clearing land
for planting.

   "Anyone involved in the burning should be punished," Indonesian Foreign
Minister Alwi Shihab said. In 1997, fires across the Indonesian archipelago
produced a huge cloud of smog that paralyzed the region for months, harming
tourism and threatening the health of millions of people in Southeast Asia.

RAMALLAH, West Bank

Israeli withdrawal will start soon under new pact

   Israel will soon carry out an overdue withdrawal from the West Bank as part
of a pact reached this week to resume peace talks, a Palestinian negotiator said
Friday.

   Israel will also release some Palestinian prisoners and start talks on an
additional withdrawal from the West Bank, Yasser Abed Rabbo said after a meeting
of the Palestinian Cabinet.

   Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat told the Cabinet the upcoming withdrawal
from 6.1 percent of the West Bank would take place "within 10 days," but Abed
Rabbo would not say if the pullout would be before or after a four-day Muslim
holiday beginning on March 16.

   Friday evening was the start of the Jewish Sabbath and government offic ials
were not available for comment.

   Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak agreed this week to resume peace
talks and reaffirmed their commitment to reach a final accord by Sept. 13. The
two sides missed a Feb. 13 target date for achieving a fram ework for the pact.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A family is evacuated Friday
from Lamadrid, Argentina. Heavy rain has caused severe flooding in northwestern
Argentina. At least seven people have died, and more than 10,000 have been
forced from their homes, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2000


                             713 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                  March 11, 2000, Saturday, THREE STAR EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 18

LENGTH: 1449 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

PHILADELPHIA

Pope OKs sainthood for socialite who lifted poor

   Pope John Paul II approved sainthood Friday for Katharine Drexel, a
Philadelphia socialite who took a vow of poverty and devoted her fortune to
helping poor blacks and American Indians.

   Drexel died in 1955. She will be canonized Oct. 1 in St. Peter's Square at
the Vatican, said Philadelphia Archbishop Anthony Bevilacqua.

   Drexel will be only the second American-born saint; the other is Sisters of
Charity founder Elizabeth Ann Seton, canonized in 1975.

   The Vatican confirmed Drexel's first miracle in 1998 - curing Robert
Gutherman of deafness. On Jan. 28, the pope credited Drexel with a second
miracle - curing the deafness of 7-year-old Amanda "Amy" Wall.

WASHINGTON

Advisory panel doesn't vote on gene therapy ban

   An advisory committee to the National Institutes of Health debated a proposal
calling for a ban on human gene therapy experiments, but then adjourned without
taking a vote.

   The proposal, formally presented to the committee Friday by a Washington
activist group, called for a halt to gene therapy experiments except as a "last
resort for life-threatening illness."

   The motion by the Foundation of Economic Trends cited the death last fall of
a teen from Tucson, Ariz., along with hundreds of reported adverse reactions
among patients enrolled in gene therapy as reasons to "impose an immediate
moratorium" on gene therapy experiments.

   Committee member Nancy King of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill said the idea was flatly rejected by a subcommittee that studied the
proposal. The full committee adjourned without ever presenting the proposal for
a vote. The committee has no power to block gene therapy, but its
recommendations are closely monitored by the Food and Drug Administration.

TRENTON, Fla.

Mother of abducted girl is grateful she's alive

   The mother of a 10-year-old girl who was snatched from her driveway and held
for three days thanked the child's captor Friday for releasing her alive.

   Investigators continued to hunt for the kidnapper and released no details of
what happened to Jessica Rodriguez in her captivity. She was abducted by a man
Monday after getting off her school bus outside her rural home in Trenton. On
Thursday, she walked into a Wal-Mart 25 miles away from home, asking for help.
Investigators said they believe the child was dropped off by her captor.

   "I want to tell the man who had Jessica, 'Thank you very much for dropping
her off safely,' " said her mother, Jennifer Graham, mixing laughter and tears.
"And she's doing great. She's playing. She's so happy. She's wonderful."

   Investigators are focusing their search for the kidnapper in the area around
where the Jessica lives, based on information from the girl.

DALHART, Texas

Copter carrying sick baby crashes; 4 are killed

   A medical helicopter carrying a 4-month-old girl in respiratory distress from
a remote Oklahoma town crashed Friday, killing the baby and the three-person
crew.

   National Transportation Safety Board investigators were on their way to the
scene about 20 miles north of this Texas Panhandle town. "We don't know whether
he hit power lines or had a mechanical failure," said board spokesman Doug
Wigington. "We are also looking to see if weather might be a possible cause."

   The Life Star helicopter left Northwest Texas Healthcare System in Amarillo
to pick up the girl in Boise City, Okla., about 100 miles to the north, and was
returning at the time of the crash. The craft, which was leased to the small
Amarillo hospital, had landed about 15 miles south of Boise City because of fog
and was met by a ground ambulance carrying baby Kathy Esparza, authorities said.


TAMPA, Fla.

Alleged militia leader is guilty in blast plot

   An alleged militia leader pleaded guilty Friday to a federal charge that he
plotted to blow up power lines in Florida and Georgia.

   Donald Beauregard made his guilty plea at a hearing in U.S. District Court in
Tampa to one federal count of conspiracy to use explosives to destroy energy
facilities. In return for his plea, federal prosecutors dropped five other
charges against him.

   Beauregard, 32, was arrested in December at his home in St. Petersburg by
agents of the FBI Joint Terrorism Task Force. Federal prosecutors said
Beauregard was a leader of the Southeastern States Alliance, a militia with
members in several southern states. Prosecutors said Beauregard was planning
with others to steal explosives from a National Guard armory in Florida to use
in blowing up power lines.

==========

WORLD

GUATEMALA

Ex-aide to slain bishop is charged again

   After nearly two years of investigation, Guatemalan authorities on Friday
again levied murder charges against the Rev. Mario Orantes, the former assistant
of slain human rights leader Bishop Juan Gerardi.

   State prosecutors had been looking into whether the military was involved,
but Orantes' arrest suggests they have shifted their attention back toward
suspects in the church.

   Gerardi, 75, was bludgeoned to death on April 26 in the garage of the
northern Guatemala City seminary where he and Orantes lived and worked. Gerardi
was killed just two days after he had delivered the Catholic Church's human
rights report, which implicated Guatemala's military in an overwhelming majority
of the 200,000 deaths resulting from the country's 36-year civil war.

   Orantes spent seven months in jail on murder charges, but was released in
February 1999, when human rights groups began protesting that authorities were
overlooking the military's potential role in the killing.

NEPAL

Police get tough with protesters against China

   Police in the capital of Katmandu on Friday swung batons to disperse about
1,000 Tibetan protesters demanding an end to Chinese rule in Tibet, leaving at
least 25 demonstrators seriously injured, witnesses said.

   The protesters first hurled stones at the police, who were preventing them
from leaving the Buddhist Boudhanath Temple and heading to the Chinese Embassy,
said Shanker Kharel, a local reporter. Police then beat the protesters with
batons and detained some people.

   Nepalese authorities are mindful of their relations with neighbor China and
are wary of anti-China demonstrations by refugees who stay in transit camps
after fleeing Tibet. Most of the refugees make their way to India, but several
thousand have remained in Nepal.

CONGO

Exodus of refugees continues, U.N. reports

   An exodus of refugees fleeing clashes in northwest Congo shows no sign of
stopping, with about 25,000 now in neighboring Republic of Congo, the U.N.
refugee agency said Friday.

   The refugees have been crossing the Ubangui River that forms the border
between the central African nations. They are taking shelter in villages along a
310-mile stretch of land, said Ron Redmond, spokesman for the U.N. High
Commissioner for Refugees.

   Efforts to provide limited aid have been hampered by the area's remoteness
and insecurity, Redmond said. But the refugees, many of them fishermen, are
largely able to feed themselves.

INDONESIA

Government seeks to halt fires for land clearing

   With hundreds of blazes on the Indonesian island of Sumatra casting haze
across much of Southeast Asia, the government on Friday said it would crack down
on farmers and loggers using fire to clear land.

   The government said it will confiscate the licenses of any plantation owner
or logger caught using fire as a cheap - but illegal - method of clearing land
for planting.

   "Anyone involved in the burning should be punished," Indonesian Foreign
Minister Alwi Shihab said. In 1997, fires across the Indonesian archipelago
produced a huge cloud of smog that paralyzed the region for months, harming
tourism and threatening the health of millions of people in much of Southeast
Asia.

BRITAIN

Ex-Prime Minister Major won't run for Parliament

   Former Tory Prime Minister John Major, who led Britain's government from 1990
to 1997, said Friday that he has decided not to run for Parliament in the next
general election.

   In a letter to the Huntingdon Conservative Association, Major, 56, said he
had made his decision after "a great deal of soul-searching and sadness."

   "I would rather go while I am being urged to stay, rather than stay beyond
the time when I should go," he said.

   Major succeeded Margaret Thatcher as prime minister and led Britain's
conservatives to victory in the 1992 general election. But following allegations
of Tory financial corruption, he also led the party to its defeat in May 1997.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo from THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - A family is evacuated Friday
from Lamadrid, Argentina. Heavy rain has caused severe flooding in northwestern
Argentina. At least seven people have died, and more than 10,000 have been
forced from their homes, officials said.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2000


                             714 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                      March 10, 2000, Friday, Home Edition

SECTION: News; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 750 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF

BYLINE: From news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Infection scare halts research on child cancer
After finding children may have been injected with cells contaminated with HIV
or with the hepatitis C virus, researchers at St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital in Memphis voluntarily shut down two gene therapy experiments. That
means the Tennessee hospital's entire program testing new treatments for
neuroblastoma, a cancer in children, have been stopped.

   A lead researcher said the trials will continue if the vaccines using the
cells show no sign of infection.

   "The chances that they could have been exposed to anything in this vaccine is
as close to absolute zero as it gets," Dr. Laura Bowman, the doctor overseeing
all the projects, said Thursday. "Having said that, we still felt that they
hadn't been in compliance (with federal guidelines) and we wanted to be in
compliance."

   The contamination scares have not discouraged parents from taking part in the
experiments, she said. Patients newly diagnosed with neuroblastoma have a
survival rate of 20 percent to 25 percent, she said. If the cancer goes into
remission and comes back, chances of survival fall to zero.

Coverdell bill would honor MLK
Sen. Paul Coverdell (R-Ga.) introduced legislation Thursday directing that a
plaque commemorating the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech
be placed at the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, the site of the
1963 speech. A similar bill has been introduced in the House by Rep. Anne
Northup (R-Ky.).

Police manhunt seeks killer of four
Schoolchildren in Baltimore were kept indoors and residents locked their homes
in a neighborhood outside the city Thursday as police hunted for a man accused
of killing four people in a two-day rampage. Joseph C. Palczynski, 31, was
believed to be on foot. Earlier, police recovered guns they said were used in
the shootings and a stolen car the man was thought to have driven.

N.C. man gets 40 years for Lowe's bombings
An electronics repairman who detonated bombs at two Lowe's Home Improvement
Stores in North Carolina and tried to extort $ 250,000 from the chain was
sentenced Thursday to more than 40 years in prison. George Matos Rocha, 51,
pleaded guilty in December to explosives charges and extortion. He could have
faced life in prison. Two bombs exploded minutes apart Sept. 22 at Lowe's stores
in Asheboro and Salisbury. One person was injured. Six days later, a third,
unexploded bomb was found at a store in Concord. Prosecutors said Rocha was
seeking revenge for a 1998 arrest for switching labels on merchandise at a
Greensboro Lowe's store in an effort to get the goods for less money.

Driver fell asleep in van crash tragedy
The driver of a van that tumbled down a steep median, killing eight people and
injuring five, fell asleep at the wheel, the Nevada Highway Patrol said
Thursday. The Clark County coroner's office said three men and five women, ages
41 to 67, were killed in the crash Wednesday. The survivors, including the van's
driver, all were in fair condition Thursday. Alcohol did not contribute to the
crash on I-15 about 30 miles south of Las Vegas, Highway Patrol Trooper Michael
Cooke said.

D.A. in Ramsey case won't seek re-election
District Attorney Alex Hunter of Boulder County, Colo., often criticized for his
handling of the unsolved JonBenet Ramsey slaying, announced Thursday he will
leave office at the end of the year. Hunter, 63, said the Ramsey investigation
influenced his decision not to seek an eighth term. Hunter's office and the
Boulder police came under intense criticism for their handling of the
investigation into the death of 6-year-old JonBenet, whose beaten and strangled
body was found in the basement of her parents' upscale home on Dec. 26, 1996. No
suspects have been named, although Boulder County authorities have maintained
that the girl's parents, Patsy and John Ramsey, who now live in metro Atlanta
are under "the umbrella of suspicion."

U.S. Catholic leaders offer Inquisition apology
Roman Catholic leaders around the country are following Pope John Paul II's lead
and offering apologies for Catholics' sins against various minority groups,
other Christians and alienated members of their own church. Church leaders in
Boston and Santa Fe, N.M., plan to offer apologies this weekend, and leaders in
Los Angeles and Denver already have done so. On Sunday, the pope plans to
express regret for the Crusades, the Inquisition and other " faults of the
past."

GRAPHIC: Photo
A commercial airliner comes in for a landing Thursday at Sarasota Bradenton
International Airport in Florida, near the wreckage of one of two private
aircraft that collided on a runway Thursday morning, killing four people in a
fiery explosion. Officials were investigating the cause of the crash. / MIKE
LANG / Sarasota Herald-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             715 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 10, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

HEADLINE: National News Briefs;
Gene Therapy Halted

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: MEMPHIS, March 9

BODY:

   St. Jude Children's Research Hospital has shut down two gene therapy
experiments because of concerns that cells being injected into children with
cancer might be contaminated with H.I.V. or the hepatitis C virus.

    Dr. Laura Bowman, who oversees the hospital's gene therapy projects, said on
Wednesday that the experiments were testing new treatments for neuroblastoma.
Dr. Bowman said a master batch of cells had not been tested for contamination.
The cells given to patients were the offspring of that batch.




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             716 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                   MARCH 10, 2000 Friday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 391 words

HEADLINE: PARENTS PLEAD FOR GENE THERAPY FOR DAUGHTER

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   A desperate, emotional plea yesterday from the parents of a brain-damaged
daughter who say gene therapy is her only hope illustrated the dilemmas facing
government advisers.

   Lindsay Karlin, now 5, suffers from a genetic disorder known as Canavan
disease. She has been a patient in several experimental gene therapy trials and
her parents, Dr. Roger Karlin and his wife, Helene, of New Fairfield, Conn.,
believe the experiments have helped her.

   Given a chance to speak at a meeting of National Institutes of Health (NIH)
advisers who were meeting to discuss a proposed new gene therapy experiment for
Canavan disease, they pleaded for speedy approval.

   "Our children have an ethical right to this treatment as long as it is safe,"
Helene Karlin, a child psychologist, told the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee
[RAC]. "If you do not pass this protocol, you are giving them a death sentence."

   Scientists are used to hearing such pleas from desperate parents. But the
Karlins say they are different from many of the families of volunteers in
experimental trials. Karlin is himself a doctor, a specialist in internal
medicine. He and his wife say they are entirely familiar with the scientific
method and understand why research often proceeds so slowly and carefully.

   But that very deliberation, they say, could cost their daughter her life.
Canavan disease, also known as Canavan's leukodystropy, is relatively rare,
affecting about one in 6,000 births. It is caused by a defect in the gene
controlling the enzyme aspartoacyclase.

   This enzyme breaks down N-acetylaspartic acid. When N-acetylaspartic acid
builds up in the brain, it damages brain cells. Children usually die of it by
the age of 5. There was no treatment until researchers tried out gene therapy.
Paola Leone and colleagues at Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia are
applying for permission to start a new trial using a virus to carry new copies
of the aspartoacyclase gene into patients' brains.

   The RAC is one of the groups that advises the government on whether to
approve such trials. At the same time, the RAC is talking about ways to
strengthen government oversight of such trials. Since the death last September
of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, in a gene therapy trial, government regulators have said
they planned to tighten enforcement of safety rules.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             717 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        MARCH 10, 2000 Friday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A05

LENGTH: 937 words

HEADLINE: PHILA. GENE-THERAPY SCIENTISTS CAUTIONED AN NIH ADVISORY PANEL SAID
TWO EXPERIMENTS NEEDED MORE ANIMAL STUDIES BEFORE BEING TESTED ON HUMANS.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins and Faye Flam, INQUIRER STAFF WRITERS

DATELINE: BETHESDA, Md.

BODY:

   Scientists at Philadelphia's Thomas Jefferson University were asked yesterday
to do more animal studies before they proceed with a pioneering gene-therapy
experiment aimed at curing children of an inherited neurological disorder.

   The tough stance taken by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC), an
advisory group to the National Institutes of Health, came despite an impassioned
plea from the mother of a child suffering from the rare disorder, known as
Canavan disease.

   "Our children have an ethical right to this treatment as long as it is safe,"
said Helene Karlin of New Fairfield, Conn., who urged the RAC to let the
Jefferson team move ahead more rapidly. "If you do not pass this protocol, you
are giving them a death sentence."

   But the 15-member panel, made up of scientists and bioethicists, criticized
the Jefferson researchers for letting their hope for a cure substitute for hard
scientific data indicating the experiment would be safe and provide some benefit
to the children.

   "Hopes can be self-deceiving," said RAC member Theodore Friedmann, a
pediatrician at the University of California at San Diego.

   The RAC also asked researchers from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and
Stanford University to slow their plans for a gene-therapy experiment involving
adults who suffer from hemophilia B until the approach - involving injection
into the liver - can be tested in nonhuman primates.

   Last week, the scientists reported preliminary but encouraging results on a
different hemophilia B trial, involving injecting needed genes into muscles.

   Both Philadelphia-area research teams said after the meeting that they would
heed the RAC's advice.

   The RAC's recommendations, which came during the second day of a three-day
meeting here, were a clear signal that the advisory panel is sharpening its
oversight of novel human gene-therapy experiments in the wake of growing safety
concerns.

   Those concerns began in September with the death of an Arizona teenager
enrolled in a gene-therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.

   In recent months, hundreds of other illnesses and deaths among volunteers in
gene-therapy trials have come to light. All, however, are believed to stem from
patients' underlying illnesses, not the gene-therapy itself.

   Nonetheless, the controversy stirred by the Penn death has put federal
officials under pressure to step up their oversight of human gene-therapy
experiments.

   While the RAC is only advisory and has no regulatory authority, it was clear
yesterday that scientists themselves and the Food and Drug Administration value
the committee's advice in the wake of the Penn death and the controversy that
has stirred.

   In commenting on the hemophilia proposal from Children's Hospital and
Stanford, Dr. Philip Noguchi, who oversees gene-therapy experiments at the Food
and Drug Administration, yesterday told the RAC that the group's request for
additional primate data would be important in addressing the public perception
that gene-therapy experiments were safe.

   Matthew During, a neurosurgery professor at Jefferson Medical College, said
after yesterday's meeting that the RAC's advice would slow his experiment down
by several months, but that he expected to launch it before year's end, as he
had planned.

   "We had expected this type of review," During said. "We had wanted them [the
RAC members] to guide us."

   Based on the RAC's review, During said his team would test the proposed gene
therapy on baby monkeys to make sure the approach doesn't have any toxic
effects. Earlier, the approach had been tested in rats, with no adverse effects,
he said.

   The Jefferson team wants to use a disabled virus to deliver a corrective gene
for Canavan disease directly into the brain cells of children.

   During said that the scientists had not tested the approach in monkeys
because they were expensive and raised ethical issues since an earlier
experiment had already been done in humans.

   That earlier experiment, however, made use of a synthetic virus - chemicals
known as polymers covered with globs of fat or liposomes. The scientists now
want to deliver the needed gene into children's brains using a naturally
occurring virus, known as adeno-associated virus.

   Canavan disease, which is caused by a single genetic defect, affects about 1
in 6,000 babies. It involves progressive degeneration of the brain and spinal
cord. Typically, children do not learn to speak, become blind and die before
their 10th birthday.

   While RAC members expressed empathy with the plight of these children and
their parents, they said Jefferson's proposed trial involved too many potential
safety risks and held out the prospect of too few benefits to proceed
immediately into human tests.

   "It would be ludicrous to consider the risks minimal," said Dr. Ruth Macklin,
a RAC member and bioethics professor at Albert Einstein College of Medicine in
the Bronx. She and others said they were concerned that shunts would be put
directly into the children's brains, a procedure they said had never before been
done in a gene-therapy trial.

   In the hemophilia trial discussed yesterday, scientists proposed targeting
the liver, rather than muscle cells, to increase the efficiency of making the
protein that is missing in hemophilia B. The liver is where the body naturally
makes that blood-clotting protein.

   The approach has been proven safe in dogs suffering from hemophilia, but the
RAC urged the scientists to test it in nonhuman primates before trying it on
humans.

   Such a study is now being conducted by the National Institutes of Health.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             718 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Plain Dealer Publishing Co.
                         Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio)

                       March 10, 2000 Friday, FINAL / ALL

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 10A

LENGTH: 656 words

HEADLINE: NATION

BODY:

   BRADENTON, FLA.

   Small planes collide, killing four people

   Two small planes collided on a runway in a huge fireball yesterday, killing
all four people on board. The cause of the accident was under investigation. The
single-engine planes, a Cessna 152 and a Cessna 172, carried two people each. An
air traffic controller had cleared one of the planes for takeoff from Sarasota
Bradenton International Airport, said Pat Cariseo, a spokesman for the National
Transportation Safety Board in Washington. At the same time, the pilot of the
other plane was granted permission to position his aircraft and hold on the same
runway. What happened next was not immediately clear, Cariseo said. The agency
has asked for a specialist in air traffic control to look at the role of the
control tower in the accident.

   MIAMI

    Judge opens hearing on Elian ruling

   For the first time, 6-year-old Elian Gonzalez had his day in federal court
yesterday, as lawyers for his Miami relatives argued the boy is entitled to a
political asylum hearing and federal government lawyers argued the case does not
belong in court. U.S. District Judge K. Michael Moore did not issue a ruling,
recessing after three hours of largely technical arguments without indicating
when he will decide whether his court has jurisdiction over the case. He can
choose either to intervene and order a full political asylum hearing, or to let
stand the decision by the Immigration and Naturalization Service that the boy
belongs with his father in Cuba. In November, the boy was found off Florida's
coast, clinging to an inner tube after a sea crossing that claimed his mother
and stepfather.

   WASHINGTON

   Cost-cutting moves may hurt shuttle safety

   Efforts to cut the costs of operating the space shuttle are eroding safety,
and NASA needs to immediately take a more active role in shuttle operations by
private contractors to reduce risks, an independent study group said yesterday.
The study, one of the most significant of shuttle safety since the Challenger
disaster in 1986, was organized by NASA in September to review maintenance
practices for the four-shuttle fleet. Turning shuttle operations over to private
contractors four years ago has streamlined operations and greatly reduced costs,
the panel said in a report. However, it said, these changes may have gone too
far, resulting in systemic problems that threaten safety.

   LOS ANGELES

   Tahiti, U.S. agree launch will proceed

   A rocket carrying a $150 million satellite will be allowed to lift off after
the Air Force and the Tahitian government agreed it will not endanger the people
of a little South Pacific island that the U.S. military had written off as
uninhabited. The launch had been set for Feb. 28 but was postponed after Tahiti
raised concerns that one of the rocket's stages might fall on the island of
Marutea, which is home to about 200 people. After more than a week of talks,
Tahitian and Air Force officials agreed that Marutea is not within the drop zone
of the rocket's third stage - a piece of metal 10 feet long and 4 feet around
that will fall from 300 miles up. The launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in
California is set for Sunday morning. The Energy Department satellite will spend
three years studying light on Earth. The technology could be used to monitor
treaty compliance, vegetation, volcanic activity and chemical spills.

   MEMPHIS, TENN.

   Hospital shuts down gene therapy research

   St. Jude Children's Research Hospital has shut down two gene therapy
experiments after an internal review raised concerns that cells being injected
into children with cancer might be contaminated with HIV or with the hepatitis C
virus. Dr. Laura Bowman, who oversees the hospital's gene therapy projects, said
Wednesday the program that was shut down is testing new treatments for
neuroblastoma, a cancer in children. Bowman said a master batch of cells had not
been tested for contamination.

COLUMN: NATION

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2000


                             719 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 10, 2000, Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 754 words

HEADLINE: Hospital curbs Vical drug use after man dies

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 The death of a patient who received a "naked DNA" drug from the San Diego
biotech Vical has prompted a Florida hospital to stop giving new patients the
experimental drug.

   Vical said it doesn't believe its Allovectin-7 cancer drug killed the
56-year-old man, who had an advanced case of melanoma and who received other
treatments that carry significant risks.

   But a study investigator at the University of Arkansas, where the man died,
has ruled that the treatment was "probably" related to the death -- the
classification for cases where the cause of death is uncertain.

   Investors initially reacted harshly, sending Vical shares down as much as 36
percent after news of the death first was reported in yesterday's Washington
Post. But the stock, which has tripled in recent months amid the boom in biotech
stocks, rebounded quickly and closed at $49.68 3/4 , down $7.37 1/2 .

   Gene-therapy treatments such as Allovectin-7, which use DNA itself as a drug,
have become increasingly controversial since the death of a patient last year in
an unrelated gene-therapy study.

   But Vical uses a different approach than most other companies in the field,
which inject DNA together with a virus, while Vical uses DNA alone.

   Nonetheless, a biosafety committee at the University of South Florida decided
to stop enrolling patients in a trial of Allovectin-7 until it reviews more
information.  More than three dozen other medical centers, including the
University of Arkansas, are continuing in the study, according to Vical.

   "We felt this was a rather severe overreaction," company spokesman Alan
Engbring said.  "What's happening here is that everyone's erring on the side of
caution."

   One analyst, Albert L. Rauch of First Union Securities in Chicago, said he
did not think a setback at just one out of the many centers that are testing
Allovectin-7 would hurt Vical.  Doctors have tried the drug in about 500
patients so far without any other reports that patients died from the drug.

   "This is malignant melanoma.  These patients are very sick, and they die from
the disease all the time," Rauch said.  "This seems to be an isolated incidence
that may or may not be validated."

   The dead patient received Allovectin-7 for the first time in March 1999,
according to Vical, after developing lesions in his lungs from the melanoma, as
well as other complications.  Such patients often survive less than a year, and
their current treatment options carry risks of serious side effects that in some
cases can also lead to death.

   But Vical's Engbring said this patient did well in his first course of
Allovectin-7 therapy: six weeks of injections, then four weeks of observation
and then six more weeks of injections.  He did well enough, in fact, that the
patient and his doctors decided to continue with a second round of treatments.

   After starting this second series of injections, however, the patient
developed a buildup of fluids in his abdomen that doctors thought might be
related to the drug.  He received his last dose of Allovectin-7 in June 1999 and
began a new regimen of chemotherapy and other drugs.

   When the patient died in September, the study investigator initially
concluded that the death was not related to the drug.  But an autopsy report,
which did not emerge for several months, concluded that the melanoma was not the
only cause of death.  The study investigator then reclassified the death as
"probably" resulting from the drug.

   There is no category for deaths "possibly" resulting from the drug, Engbring
said.  Because the investigator couldn't rule out the possibility that the drug
contributed, she ruled that it "probably" did.

   The entire field of gene therapy has faced scrutiny since September, when the
death of a patient at the University of Pennsylvania was attributed to his
participation in a study.  Just this week, the government announced new programs
that added another layer of oversight to gene-therapy research.

   But Vical chief executive Alain Schreiber said he remains confident that
Allovectin-7 is safe.  Still, he said, he worries that adverse publicity about
gene therapy could slow down the research and lead some hospitals and patients
to stay away from the trials.

   "My concern is that this is not going to stimulate further science but rather
spur some hesitation on the part of hospitals and patients," Schreiber said.
"If the hospitals freak out because their local newspaper reports on every
patient who has an adverse event, that's not going to help."


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             720 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 10, 2000 Friday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 743 words

HEADLINE: Hospital curbs Vical drug use after man dies

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The death of a patient who received a "naked DNA" drug from the San Diego
biotech Vical has prompted a Florida hospital to stop giving new patients the
experimental drug. Vical said it doesn't believe its Allovectin-7 cancer drug
killed the 56-year-old man, who had an advanced case of melanoma and who
received other treatments that carry significant risks. But a study investigator
at the University of Arkansas, where the man died, has ruled that the treatment
was "probably" related to the death -- the classification for cases where the
cause of death is uncertain. Investors initially reacted harshly, sending Vical
shares down as much as 36 percent after news of the death first was reported in
yesterday's Washington Post.

   But the stock, which has tripled in recent months amid the boom in biotech
stocks, rebounded quickly and closed at $49.68 3/4 , down $7.37 1/2 .
Gene-therapy treatments such as Allovectin-7, which use DNA itself as a drug,
have become increasingly controversial since the death of a patient last year in
an unrelated gene-therapy study. But Vical uses a different approach than most
other companies in the field, which inject DNA together with a virus, while
Vical uses DNA alone. Nonetheless, a biosafety committee at the University of
South Florida decided to stop enrolling patients in a trial of Allovectin-7
until it reviews more information.

   More than three dozen other medical centers, including the University of
Arkansas, are continuing in the study, according to Vical. "We felt this was a
rather severe overreaction," company spokesman Alan Engbring said.

   "What's happening here is that everyone's erring on the side of caution." One
analyst, Albert L. Rauch of First Union Securities in Chicago, said he did not
think a setback at just one out of the many centers that are testing
Allovectin-7 would hurt Vical.

   Doctors have tried the drug in about 500 patients so far without any other
reports that patients died from the drug. "This is malignant melanoma.

   These patients are very sick, and they die from the disease all the time,"
Rauch said.

   "This seems to be an isolated incidence that may or may not be validated."
The dead patient received Allovectin-7 for the first time in March 1999,
according to Vical, after developing lesions in his lungs from the melanoma, as
well as other complications.

   Such patients often survive less than a year, and their current treatment
options carry risks of serious side effects that in some cases can also lead to
death. But Vical's Engbring said this patient did well in his first course of
Allovectin-7 therapy: six weeks of injections, then four weeks of observation
and then six more weeks of injections.

   He did well enough, in fact, that the patient and his doctors decided to
continue with a second round of treatments. After starting this second series of
injections, however, the patient developed a buildup of fluids in his abdomen
that doctors thought might be related to the drug.

   He received his last dose of Allovectin-7 in June 1999 and began a new
regimen of chemotherapy and other drugs. When the patient died in September, the
study investigator initially concluded that the death was not related to the
drug.

   But an autopsy report, which did not emerge for several months, concluded
that the melanoma was not the only cause of death.

   The study investigator then reclassified the death as "probably" resulting
from the drug. There is no category for deaths "possibly" resulting from the
drug, Engbring said.

   Because the investigator couldn't rule out the possibility that the drug
contributed, she ruled that it "probably" did. The entire field of gene therapy
has faced scrutiny since September, when the death of a patient at the
University of Pennsylvania was attributed to his participation in a study.

   Just this week, the government announced new programs that added another
layer of oversight to gene-therapy research. But Vical chief executive Alain
Schreiber said he remains confident that Allovectin-7 is safe.

   Still, he said, he worries that adverse publicity about gene therapy could
slow down the research and lead some hospitals and patients to stay away from
the trials. "My concern is that this is not going to stimulate further science
but rather spur some hesitation on the part of hospitals and patients,"
Schreiber said.

   "If the hospitals freak out because their local newspaper reports on every
patient who has an adverse event, that's not going to help."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             721 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 Times Publishing Company
                         St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

                March 10, 2000, Friday, 0 South Pinellas Edition

SECTION: CITY & STATE; Pg. 1B

DISTRIBUTION: CITY & STATE; METRO & STATE; TAMPA & STATE

LENGTH: 880 words

HEADLINE: USF shelves experimental gene therapy

BYLINE: WES ALLISON

DATELINE: TAMPA

BODY:


   A patient in Arkansas who underwent the same treatment died last year.
Administrators voted to halt the program, for now.

   The University of South Florida has suspended an experimental gene therapy
for terminally ill cancer patients following the death of a patient in Arkansas
who underwent the same treatment.

   The USF College of Medicine was the only one of about 40 participating cancer
centers and universities to stop the trial after learning last month of the
patient's death, which the lead researcher at the University of Arkansas
indicated was "probably" related to the gene therapy.

   The treatment's developer, Vical Inc. of San Diego, says that USF overreacted
and that the therapy has been used safely in more than 500 patients.

   But experimental gene therapy has come under scrutiny since the death last
fall of teenager at the University of Pennsylvania. Dr. Richard Heller,
associate professor of medicine at USF and chairman of the Institutional
Biosafety Committee, said his colleagues preferred to be safe than sorry.

   "We'd rather put it on hold for a few weeks and make sure we did the right
thing, as opposed to keeping it going and then finding out later we shouldn't
have," he said Thursday.

   Vical has since provided more information about the death, and the committee
plans to consider reopening the study at its March 28 meeting.

   The trial involves a drug called Allovectin-7 and is being tested in patients
with severe forms of skin cancer, called melanoma, when other treatments fail.
It uses altered DNA to help the body's immune system better target the cancer.

   About 10 people have gotten injections of Allovectin at USF's H. Lee Moffitt
Cancer Center and Research Institute in Tampa, and none seem to have suffered
adverse affects, Heller said. The trial's lead researcher at Moffitt, oncologist
Dr. Ronald DeConti, could not be reached for comment.

   Heller said the committee's decision to suspend the trial should not affect
people enrolled in it. Participants already have received the treatments and
doctors continue to monitor them.

   USF's College of Medicine was criticized last year for failing to closely
monitor experimental treatments after eye doctor J. James Rowsey was accused of
operating on patients without giving them enough information about a new
technique he used.

   The federal Office for Protection from Research Risks also questioned whether
some work at USF was properly monitored.

   But Heller and university spokesman Michael Hoad said the biosafety
committee's decision was not affected by the earlier scrutiny.

   Rather, USF was reacting to increasing concerns by doctors and the federal
government about the safety of gene therapy, a lifesaving but potentially deadly
treatment that still is not well understood.

   "This was more of an attempt to be prudent so we didn't give patients a
therapy that might be harmful," Hoad said. "People didn't understand what the
harm might be at this point. The national question is, "do we understand it
enough to proceed?' "

   Last fall, federal regulators halted the gene therapy program at the
University of Pennsylvania after 17-year-old Jesse Gelsinger died on Sept. 17.
Other experiments have come into question as well.

   In the Arkansas case that relates to the USF trial, a patient in the final
stages of melanoma was treated with Allovectin-7 in July. Alan Engbring,
director of investor relations for Vical, said the patient died in September and
the death originally was reported as being unrelated to the treatment.

   But an autopsy showed melanoma wasn't entirely to blame.

   The study's lead investigator at Arkansas changed her report to reflect that
Allovectin-7 "probably" contributed to the death, perhaps by leading to a
buildup of fluids in the patient's abdomen. The choices provided on Vical's form

 were "unlikely," "probably" and "definitely."

   Engbring said the link between the treatment and the death appears "tenuous,"

 and Vical doesn't think its drug is to blame. But as required by law, Vical
notified all the research sites of the Arkansas finding last month.

   Since voting to suspend the trial Feb. 22, Heller said, his committee has
learned that the patient also had another form of cancer and other health
problems, and the treatment was administered nearly two months before the
patient died.

   "I think that's a big point," Heller said. But, he added, "based on the
information that we had at the time, I think it was the correct thing to do. It
could have turned out differently."

   USF notified the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of
Health when it suspended the trial and its decision was made public Wednesday in
Washington during a meeting of a special NIH committee overseeing gene therapy.

   Neither the FDA nor the NIH has taken any action regarding the Allovectin
trials. Engbring said the other sites still are enrolling patients.

   The company hopes to finish the studies by year's end, then apply for FDA
approval. Vical has not released any trial results.

   "Without treatment they will die, absolutely. With treatment, most of them
will still die from the underlying disease," Engbring said. "Our hope is that we
can help enough of them to stay alive longer with a better quality of life."


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             722 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

          Copyright 2000 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune

                            Tampa Tribune (Florida)

                     March 10, 2000, Friday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: FLORIDA/METRO, Pg. 6

LENGTH: 252 words

HEADLINE: USF suspends cancer experiment;

BYLINE: GRACE FRANK, of The Tampa Tribune;

BODY:


   TAMPA - The University of South Florida has suspended a gene therapy
experiment involving cancer  patients after a person died undergoing the
treatment at the University of Arkansas.

   The experiment, sponsored by Vical Inc. of San Diego, involves treating
patients who have  aggressive cancers with a substance of fat molecules and DNA.
It's intended to stimulate the immune  system to attack tumor cells.

   The death in September was attributed initially to advanced cancer, and the
doctor treating the  patient thought it was unrelated. But an autopsy questioned
whether excessive fluid found in the  stomach was caused by the treatment. That
finding caused the death to be reported as "probably"  related to the treatment,
the only choice available.

   The report of a probable link triggered USF's precautionary response, said
Richard Heller, a  surgeon who chairs the school's biosafety board.

   "We didn't want anyone else enrolled until we had a chance to look more
closely at this," Heller  said Thursday.

   USF was the only test site to halt enrollments, and Vical has called the
suspension an  overreaction. The biosafety board was given new information from
Vical to consider when it meets  again March 28.

   Only a small number of patients are involved in the trial in Tampa, Heller
said. No one is  undergoing the therapy currently; responses to past treatments
are being monitored.  The Washington Post contributed to this report. Grace
Frank can be reached at (813) 259-8285.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2000


                             723 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 10, 2000, Friday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 133 words

BODY:



   A March 9 article incorrectly identified Laura Bowman, the doctor overseeing
three gene therapy studies at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.



   A photo caption in the March 9 Metro section incorrectly identified an altar
server at St. Thomas More Catholic Church in Southeast Washington. He is Brandon
Briscoe, 10.


   A March 9 article about the Old Dominion University women's basketball team
incorrectly attributed a quote about ODU's winning streak spurring criticism of
the strength of the conference in which it plays. The quote was from American
University women's basketball coach Jeff Thatcher.


   George Washington University basketball player Jason Smith was incorrectly
listed as a selection to the Atlantic 10 all-rookie team in a March 9 Sports
article.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             724 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              March 09, 2000, THURSDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; THE SAVAGE TRUTH; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 810 words

HEADLINE: Science, demand fuel biotech stock boom

BYLINE: Terry Savage

BODY:


   The biotech sector of the stock market has been hot, hot, hot.

   In February, biotech sector funds averaged an 18.09 percent return --  and
averaged nearly a 30 percent gain for the first two months of the year.  Many
individual stocks soared from the teens to nearly triple digits in price. In
fact, biotech stocks have far outpaced the popular Internet-related shares that
have had such impressive gains.

   And why not?  Biotech companies show as much promise to change our lives as
the Internet does.  Gene therapies, new drugs and new tests have the potential
to cure or prevent dread diseases and prolonging life.

   Surely there's more potential impact in this sector than shopping online or
even cutting costs from a corporate supply chain.

   That's partly what the soaring biotech stock prices are telling us.  Some of
the gains have come on reports of successful Food and Drug Administration trials
or drug approvals.  Last year 50 new drugs and 30 new chemical entities -- the
building blocks for drugs -- were approved by the FDA.

   That's twice the rate of the previous year, and it reflects the long testing
process for many drugs that was started in the early '90s when the last biotech
stock boom took place.

   Another factor in the recent surge in biotech stocks is the anticipation that
the process of mapping the human genetic code will be finished this year. That
could lead to another round of breakthroughs in treating and preventing disease.

   As Alex Cheung, portfolio manager of the Monument Medical Sciences Fund,
points out: "Previously, most medicines were created from a trial and error
process. But the genome project gives us the ability to target diseases more
directly and specifically.  So we should expect the success rate of drug
candidates to improve over time."

   You might be wondering why the larger pharmaceutical company stocks haven't
benefitted from the biotech surge.  As one analyst noted, these large companies
are set up to market highly profitable, blockbuster drugs -- not a variety of
drugs targeted toward a smaller group of potential users. But behind the scenes,
the big companies are busy creating marketing alliances with the biotechs to
profit from the ultimate distribution of new drugs.  Still, large pharmaceutical
stocks carry the burden of concern about government regulations and potential
price controls.

   Even all the good news about drug approvals would not, by itself, be enough
to send biotech stocks soaring.  There's another element to this market: supply
and demand.

   I'm not talking about the demand for the drugs or cures these companies
provide. In this case, it's the imbalance between supply and demand for biotech
stocks. Both individual investors and mutual fund managers are trying to get
positioned in what is, after all, a very small sector.

   Michael Murphy of the California Technology Stock Letter notes that the
entire market cap of the biotech sector is only about $ 280 billion -- just
twice the market valuation of one big pharmaceutical company, Merck.

   Thinly traded markets lead to a lot of volatility.  That's how biotech mutual
funds have posted such big gains.  For example, Monterrey Murphy Biotech Fund
(800-628-94030) soared 64.41 percent through Feb. 29. Fidelity Select Biotech
(800-544-8888) posted an astounding 59.75 percent gain since Jan. 1. Invesco
Health Sciences (800-525-8085) is up 31.48 percent.  And T. Rowe Price Health
Sciences (800-638-5660) gained 37.23 percent.

   It's worth remembering that the same volatility is possible on the downside.

   Michael Cheung's Monument Medical Sciences Fund (888-520-8637) is one of the
big winners with a gain of 74.25 percent through early this week. Cheung also
manages the group's Internet Fund, which has posted "only" a 25 percent gain
year-to-date.

   Cheung points out that biotech stocks have been very faddish in the past.
But this time, he predicts, the cycle will last longer.  His advice to
investors: "Prices may seem outrageous at times, but don't try to time the
market. Just dollar-cost-average (buy at regular intervals no matter what the
price) or buy shares in a fund.  But lock it up for 10 years.  Try not to be too
clever. This overall uptrend is going to last for a long time."

   I'd add that this is a market that will tempt greedy investors in the short
term, and that can be dangerous.

   But you never know about biotech stocks.  They could be big winners for you
in two ways: They could save your retirement portfolio -- or your life.

   And that's the Savage Truth.

   Terry Savage is a registered investment adviser for stocks and commodities
and is on the board of directors of McDonald's Corp. and Devon Energy Corp. Send
questions via e-mail at savage@suntimes.com. Her third book, The Savage Truth on
Money, recently was published by John Wiley & Sons Inc.

LOAD-DATE: March 09, 2000


                             725 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     March 9, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 11; National Desk

LENGTH: 414 words

HEADLINE: GENE THERAPY EXPERIMENTS HALTED AT TENN. HOSPITAL

BYLINE: From The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   Researchers have halted two gene therapy experiments at a hospital in
Memphis, Tenn., because of fears that genetically engineered cells being
injected into children with cancer might be contaminated with the AIDS and
hepatitis viruses.

   The self-imposed shutdown at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital extends
beyond a previous federal research suspension there, imposed by the Food and
Drug Administration last month. That suspension was triggered by similar
concerns about possible contamination of gene therapy infusions, but involved a
different experiment with other children. Ultimately, those cells proved to be
clean.

   Paula Bowman, the doctor overseeing all three St. Jude studies, said
Wednesday that the new concerns arose recently during an internal review of her
program, which is testing novel treatments for a common childhood cancer called
neuroblastoma. The two experiments newly in question call for injections of
laboratory-grown neuroblastoma cells that have been genetically engineered to
make them more visible to the immune system.

   The cells that were given to patients were the offspring of a "master batch"
of cancer cells that had been tested for contamination, Bowman said. But she has
been unable to confirm that subsequent generations of cells given to patients
were also tested as required.

   Bowman, who faced criticism last month for not telling federal officials
about the previous contamination risk for several months, said that this time
she notified the FDA immediately upon discovering the problem last week. "As
soon as we figured it out, we called the FDA," she said.

   Forty-two children have already been treated with the engineered cells that
are now in question, and some additional children have been treated by a
collaborator at Baylor College of Medicine in Texas. Of the 42, Bowman said, 21
are still alive. None is showing indirect evidence of viral infection, such as
elevated liver enzyme levels, but none has been directly tested for infection.

   Bowman said she was in the process of contacting the children's parents to
inform them of the oversight. She said she hopes to have test results back
within two weeks and, if tests show no evidence of contamination, she intends to
resume the treatments.

   The FDA has said it is investigating the string of errors that led to the
first contamination scare, which included several violations of research rules.
Agency officials declined to comment on the new problems.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2000


                             726 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        March 9, 2000 Thursday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A14

LENGTH: 679 words

HEADLINE: HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   *** Lyme vaccination reactions reported ***

   WASHINGTON -- Lyme disease vaccinations led to 298 reports of adverse
reactions to the Food and Drug Administration in the vaccine's first year of
marketing, according to reports obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.
Of those, about 10 percent reported symptoms of chronic arthritis, which some
doctors and scientists fear could be a potential side effect of the vaccine. The
theoretical possibility of the vaccine's prompting such an autoimmune response,
in which the body attacks its own tissue, was known to the scientists, drug
makers and the FDA before the vaccine was approved, although it is not included
in the warning label. "I'm highly concerned by the number of the reactions and
the severity of the reactions," said Karen Vanderhoof-Forschner, chairwoman of
the board of directors of the nonprofit Lyme Disease Foundation in Hartford,
Conn. Vanderhoof-Forschner testified in May 1998 before the FDA advisory panel
urging the vaccine's approval. "This is a voluntary reporting system, so this is
probably the tip of the iceberg. "

   *** Nintendo to provide protective gloves ***

   ALBANY, N.Y.  -- Nintendo of America has agreed to provide protective gloves
to owners of a video game blamed for cuts, blisters and other hand injuries. The
"Mario Party" game on the Nintendo 64 home game system can cause hand injury
because players are encouraged to rapidly rotate a joy stick with a grooved tip,
state Attorney General Eliot Spitzer said Wednesday. Consumers report having to
use the palms of their hands to rotate the joystick, he said. Nintendo agreed to
provide up to four protective gloves to each household of consumers owning the
video game, Spitzer said. The fingerless gloves have padded palms. Nintendo
spokeswoman Beth Llewelyn said the company had sold more than a million of the
games since February 1999 and received about 90 complaints, none serious. She
said it also included instructions on proper use of the joystick. Nintendo is
committing $80 million for the gloves.

   *** Night lights do no harm, studies show ***

   BOSTON -- Two new studies suggest that parents who leave night lights on will
not night make their children nearsighted, contradicting a report in May
indicating an association between night lights and myopia. Two groups of
researchers report in the current journal Nature that they were unable to
duplicate the results of an earlier study suggesting that children who sleep
with a night light until age 2 are three times more likely to develop
nearsightedness. "This night light question has been the biggest question that
some of my colleagues have gotten from parents. It has worried thousands of
parents unnecessarily," said Jane Gwiazda, director of the Children's Vision
Laboratory at the New England College of Optometry in Boston, one of the two
centers that conducted the follow-up studies. The other was done at Ohio State
University. The follow-up studies found no difference between the rate of myopia
for children who slept in the dark or with a light.

   *** FDA strengthening gene therapy rules ***

   WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration is preparing to force better
patient safety monitoring in the nation's 350 gene therapy experiments,
conducting surprise inspections to make sure scientists follow the rules. The
FDA's move comes after an Arizona teen-ager died as a result of a University of
Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment, prompting growing criticism that this
promising but still-unproven field receives little federal oversight to ensure
the research is safe. Federal regulations require researchers to establish a
patient safety monitoring system before testing experimental treatments. But the
FDA has acknowledged it has not enforced those rules for gene therapists.
Indeed, in the Pennsylvania experiment, researchers didn't even have a patient
safety monitoring system, something the FDA uncovered only when it inspected the
research after Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died, FDA gene therapy chief Dr. Kathryn
Zoon said.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2000


                             727 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 9, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 933 words

HEADLINE: 2 Gene Therapy Studies Halted; AIDS, Hepatitis Virus Contamination of
Engineered Cells Feared

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Researchers have halted two gene therapy experiments at a hospital in Memphis
because of fears that genetically engineered cells being injected into children
with cancer might be contaminated with the AIDS and hepatitis viruses.

   The self-imposed shutdown at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital extends
beyond a previous federal research suspension there, imposed by the Food and
Drug Administration last month. That suspension was triggered by similar
concerns about possible contamination of gene therapy infusions, but involved a
different experiment with other children. Ultimately, those cells proved to be
clean.

   Paula Bowman, the doctor overseeing all three St. Jude studies, said
yesterday that the new concerns arose recently during an internal review of her
program, which is testing novel treatments for a common childhood cancer called
neuroblastoma. The two experiments newly in question call for injections of
laboratory-grown neuroblastoma cells that have been genetically engineered to
make them more visible to the immune system.

   The cells that were given to patients were the offspring of a "master batch"
of cancer cells that had been tested for contamination, Bowman said. But she has
been unable to confirm that subsequent generations of cells given to patients
were also tested as required.

   Bowman, who faced criticism last month for not telling federal officials
about the previous contamination risk for several months, said that this time
she notified the FDA immediately upon discovering the problem last week. "As
soon as we figured it out, we called the FDA," she said.

   A total of 42 children have already been treated with the engineered cells
that are now in question, and some additional children have been treated by a
collaborator at Baylor College of Medicine in Texas. Of the 42, Bowman said, 21
are still alive. None is showing indirect evidence of viral infection, such as
elevated liver enzyme levels, but none has been directly tested for infection.

   Bowman said she was in the process of contacting the children's parents to
inform them of the oversight. She said she hopes to have test results back
within two weeks and, if tests show no evidence of contamination, she intends to
resume the treatments.

   The FDA has said it is investigating the string of errors that led to the
first contamination scare, which included several violations of research rules.
Agency officials declined to comment on the new problems.

   Separately, a Florida university has halted a gene therapy experiment on its
campus after a leading researcher in the study declared that a patient had
"probably" died as a result of the gene treatment, instead of from cancer as the
researcher had initially believed.

   The death, the cause of which is still uncertain and may never be fully
known, predates by about two weeks the death of Jesse Gelsinger, the Arizona
teen who died Sept. 17 in a University of Pennsylvania experiment. Gelsinger's
death and other subsequent revelations about gene therapy experiments prompted a
flurry of questions about whether researchers are moving too quickly and need
closer federal oversight.

   The Florida experiment, sponsored by San Diego-based Vical Inc., involves a
product called Allovectin-7, a substance made of DNA and fat molecules that
helps direct a patient's immune system to tumor cells. It is being tested on
patients with an advanced form of skin cancer, called melanoma, or with
persistent or recurrent tumors of the head and neck.

   The death occurred in early September at the University of Arkansas, one of
several sites for the Vical study. The principal investigator there, Laura
Hutchins, initially declared the death unrelated to the treatment, said Alan
Engbring, director of investor relations for Vical.

   But an autopsy report, which took several months to get to Hutchins,
concluded that the patient's melanoma was not completely responsible for the
death. It said one possibility was that a buildup of fluids in the patient's
abdomen that had occurred during the treatment might have been caused by the new
genes and contributed to the death.

   That finding led Hutchins to reclassify the death last month as "probably"
related to the treatment, the only option between "unlikely" and "definitely" on
Vical's report forms. In response, a safety committee at the University of South
Florida--another site for the study--shut down the trial late last month.

   "This is a single center that in our opinion has overreacted," Engbring said,
noting that none of the other sites has halted enrollment. "I do think we have a
treatment that can help a lot of people."

   Engbring said he has no explanation for why the autopsy report did not reach
Hutchins until January. He said the delay had nothing to do with the December
issuance of new stock that raised $ 117 million for the company. A Dec. 21 Vical
news release announced that a company-supported data safety review board (which
Engbring said had seen the autopsy report) "found no safety issues to date" in
the company's Allovectin experiments.

   Richard Heller, chairman of the University of South Florida's biosafety
committee, which suspended the campus's part in the study, said the committee's
action was prudent in the light of recent revelations about scientific and
ethical lapses in the gene therapy field. "Everybody felt that with the
atmosphere right now, we don't want to take any chances."

   Vical recently submitted additional information, Heller said, and the
committee will consider reopening the study at its March meeting.


CORRECTION-DATE: March 10, 2000

CORRECTION:
A March 9 article incorrectly identified Laura Bowman, the doctor overseeing
three gene therapy studies at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital.

LOAD-DATE: March 09, 2000


                             728 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                       March 08, 2000, WEDNESDAY, MIDWEST

SECTION: NEWS; IN BRIEF; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 520 words

BODY:


   Gene therapy crackdown

   The Food and Drug Administration announced Tuesday that it will begin forcing
scientists to better monitor patient safety during gene therapy experiments and
conduct surprise inspections to make sure researchers follow the rules. The FDA
has been criticized for lax oversight of gene therapy experiments, including one
that killed an Arizona teenager last fall in a University of Pennsylvania
experimental treatment.

   Affirmative action ban blasted

   About 10,000 demonstrators chanting "Shame on Bush" jammed the grounds of
Florida's state Capitol in Tallahassee on Tuesday, demanding that Gov. Jeb Bush
back off his plan to ban racial and gender preferences in university admissions
and state contracting. Demonstrators said they feared Bush's plan to end
affirmative action would erase the gains blacks and other minorities have made
since the civil rights movement. Bush has put portions of the plan into effect
through executive order, but other segments still need legislative approval.

   Organic food rules released

   The government Tuesday released new national standards for growing and
processing organic food that will bar the use of genetic engineering or
irradiation. Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman said the standards, which are
expected to go into effect later this year, will be the "most comprehensive,
strictest organic rules in the world." The rules will allow products that meet
the standards to carry a seal of approval that says, "USDA Certified Organic."
The new rules also would prohibit the use of antibiotics in livestock production
and require the use of organic feed.

   Collaborator's plea rejected

   French President Jacques Chirac on Tuesday rejected a plea for a medical
pardon by Maurice Papon, 89, a former Vichy official convicted in April 1998 for
complicity in crimes against humanity. He was convicted for his role in the
arrest and deportation of Jews to Nazi death camps while he was a police
supervisor in southwestern France during World War II. Papon, who underwent
surgery in January to implant a pacemaker and had triple bypass surgery several
years ago, is serving a 10-year prison term. After Gen. Augusto Pinochet's
return to Chile last week, some of Papon's victims feared the former Nazi
collaborator might also walk free, using age and infirmity to evade justice.

   U.S. aids flood victims

   U.S. airplanes flew over flood-stricken areas of Mozambique on Tuesday,
beaming back live video images of marooned people and demolished terrain. The
information gathered by a specially equipped Hercules C-130 will be passed on to
aid agencies in the Mozambican capital of Maputo, Air Force Col. Gary Sadler
said. While the C-130 flew its first missions, five other cargo planes ferried
supplies to Maputo and the central Mozambican city of Beira. The aid supplies
will be stockpiled there until helicopters can transport them to some of the
southeast African nation's most isolated regions. The floodwaters that swept
across Mozambique have ebbed, leaving hundreds confirmed dead and 1 million
people homeless or in desperate need of help.

LOAD-DATE: March 08, 2000


                             729 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

              March 08, 2000, WEDNESDAY, Late Sports Final Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 295 words

HEADLINE: FDA to crack down on gene therapy tests

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration will begin requiring scientists to better
monitor patient safety during gene therapy experiments and will conduct surprise
inspections to make sure researchers follow the rules.

   The FDA made the announcement Tuesday amid growing criticism of lax
government oversight of gene therapy experiments, including one that killed an
Arizona teenager last fall.

   Federal regulations already require that researchers establish patient-safety
monitoring systems before putting experimental treatments to the test. But the
FDA acknowledged Tuesday it has not enforced the rules for gene therapists.

   In the University of Pennsylvania experiment that killed Jesse Gelsinger,
"there were deficiencies in the monitoring," said FDA gene therapy chief Dr.
Kathryn Zoon.

   Pennsylvania researchers didn't have a formal patient monitoring system --
something the FDA said it found out about only when it inspected the hospital's
gene therapy lab after Gelsinger died.

   Under the FDA's new rule, all gene therapy researchers must appoint someone
not directly involved with their experiments to monitor patient safety. The
monitors could comprise contract research organizations or other scientists at a
hospital or university.

   The monitors are not truly independent because the gene therapists hire them.

   But the FDA pledged to ensure that gene therapy monitors are working and know
the law requires them to report patient-safety problems to the government -- and
to conduct random, surprise inspections to make sure.

   Experiments that don't comply can be halted.

   Gelsinger's death is the only one so far blamed directly on gene therapy
among experiments on about 5,000 patients in 10 years.

   This new field has not cured anyone -- yet.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: March 08, 2000


                             730 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                    March 08, 2000, Wednesday 2 STAR EDITION

SECTION: A; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 289 words

HEADLINE: FDA demands routine look at gene plans

SOURCE: Los Angeles Times

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - The two federal agencies that oversee gene-therapy experiments
announced Tuesday that researchers will be required to submit plans for
monitoring patient safety to federal health officials.

   Scientists should have monitoring plans to ensure that patients are fully
informed of the risks and benefits of trials, that research is conducted
according to its design and that the reporting of data to federal agencies is
accurate and complete.

   But this is the first time the Food and Drug Administration has demanded to
see those plans routinely.

   Monitors, chosen by researchers or other trial sponsors, do not have direct
access to patients but nevertheless "provide real-time oversight of the clinical
conduct of the trial," said Dr. Kathryn Zoon, director of the FDA's center for
biologics.

   The agency also will dispatch investigators to conduct unannounced "for
cause" visits to trial sites if it suspects that patient rights are being
violated or if the monitoring plans are deficient.

   The latest action is not expected to be greeted warmly by researchers, many
of whom already feel overburdened by reporting requirements imposed by the two
agencies.

   While investigators must immediately report serious adverse reactions to the
FDA, the National Institutes of Health requires that all side effects be
reported, regardless of how insignificant they might appear.

   Unlike most biomedical research, which is monitored only by the FDA, the
field of gene therapy has been subject to unusual joint oversight by both
agencies: The NIH's mandate is to promote public discussion of safety and other
issues, while the FDA has authority over the conduct of trials, including the
power to halt them if necessary.


LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2000


                             731 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     March 8, 2000, Wednesday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 16; National Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: U.S. ANNOUNCES SAFETY RULES FOR GENE THERAPY TESTS;
 HEALTH: ROUTINE REPORTING ON PATIENT OVERSIGHT WILL BE REQUIRED. MOVE COMES IN
WAKE OF EVIDENCE THAT MONITORING 'HAS BEEN LESS THAN ADEQUATE,' FDA SAYS.

BYLINE: MARLENE CIMONS, TIMES STAFF WRITER

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:


   The two federal agencies that oversee gene therapy experiments announced
Tuesday that researchers will be required to routinely submit plans for
monitoring patient safety to federal health officials.

   Scientists already are supposed to have monitoring plans to ensure that
patients are fully informed of the risks and benefits of trials, that the
research is conducted according to its design and that the reporting of data to
federal agencies is accurate and complete. But this is the first time that the
Food and Drug Administration has demanded to see them.

   Monitors, chosen by the researchers or other trial sponsors, such as drug
companies, do not have direct access to patients but nevertheless "provide
real-time oversight of the clinical conduct of the trial," said Dr. Kathryn C.
Zoon, director of the FDA's center for biologics.

   "We will review the plans, see if they are appropriate and, if modifications
are necessary, we will request them," she added.

   The agency also will dispatch its own investigators to conduct unannounced
"for cause" visits to trial sites if it suspects that patient rights are being
violated or if the monitoring plans are deficient in other ways.

   This move "addresses emerging evidence that the monitoring by study sponsors
of several recent gene therapy trials has been less than adequate," the FDA said
in a statement, calling clinical trial monitoring "a powerful tool in enhancing
the safety and protection of research subjects during a trial."

   The latest action is not expected to be greeted warmly by researchers, many
of whom already feel overburdened by reporting requirements imposed by the two
agencies.

   While investigators must report serious adverse reactions to the FDA
immediately if they are thought to be related to the experimental therapy or are
unexpected, the National Institutes of Health has insisted that all side effects
be reported to its officials, regardless of how important or insignificant they
appear.

   Unlike most biomedical research, which is monitored only by the FDA, the
field of gene therapy has been subject to unusual joint oversight by both
agencies--the NIH's mandate is to promote public discussion of safety and other
issues, while the FDA has regulatory authority over the conduct of the trials,
including the power to halt them if necessary.

   In a second action, the NIH, which provides funding for the trials and helps
disseminate public information about them, announced that it will sponsor a
series of public forums, likely four times a year. The discussions will center
on medical and scientific data from gene therapy trials with the idea of
improving their conduct and enhancing the design of future trials.

   "These will be focused on safety, the here and now--how do we make things
safer for the patients," said Dr. Amy Patterson, director of NIH's office of
biotechnology activities.

   The research has been the focus of intense scrutiny from federal health
officials in recent months, following the death of an 18-year-old Arizonan who
was participating in a gene therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania's Institute of Gene Therapy.

   He had volunteered for the experimental treatment with the hope of curing his
rare genetic disorder, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, which prevents the
liver from breaking down ammonia, a normal byproduct of protein digestion. He
died after researchers infused a genetically modified virus into his liver in an
attempt to introduce new genes that could correct the flawed genes responsible
for his ailment.

   In the aftermath of his death, the FDA determined that the institute had
violated a series of federal regulations and stopped all gene therapy trials
there.

   Zoon refused to speculate whether a monitoring plan could have prevented the
events at the University of Pennsylvania but said of the researchers there:
"They didn't have a plan."

   The first NIH-sponsored symposium will take place later this week during the
scheduled meeting of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. NIH said that
scientists and physicians are scheduled to discuss the safety and future human
applications of a new class of adenoviral vectors--viruses used to transport the
new genes--that have been extensively altered with the aim of improving their
safety.

   Meanwhile, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) announced that he would consider
introducing legislation to strengthen the oversight framework for gene therapy.
"We must do all we can to see that patients who volunteer . . . are protected
from unnecessary risk and are fully informed of the potential side effects,"
Kennedy said.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             732 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                     March 8, 2000 Wednesday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3A

LENGTH: 259 words

HEADLINE: U.S. moves to make gene therapy safer

BYLINE: RICK WEISS Washington Post

BODY:

   Washington -- The Clinton administration announced Tuesday two new
initiatives designed to enhance the safety of patients in gene therapy
experiments. The twin efforts by the Food and Drug Administration and the
National Institutes of Health are a response to recent revelations that many
gene researchers have been lax in their adherence to patient protection rules.

   Effective immediately, gene therapy researchers will be required to submit to
the FDA detailed descriptions of how their medical experiments will be monitored
for safety.

   Researchers are already required to have such plans in place and to follow
those plans, but they have not been required to submit the plans to the FDA for
review. One of several shortcomings that the FDA discovered while investigating
the September death of a gene therapy patient at the University of Pennsylvania
was that no such plan had been prepared.

   The second initiative calls for the NIH and FDA to jointly convene quarterly
meetings where gene therapy researchers can share information.

   Critics said they were unconvinced that the moves would restore public
confidence in the field, battered by reports of federal-rule violations and
worrisome appearances of financial conflicts of interest.

   "This little idea that we're going to have a seminar a few times a year is
not going to cut it," said George Annas, a professor of health law at Boston
University's School of Public Health. Annas has called for a moratorium on gene
therapy while scientific and ethical concerns are fully addressed.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             733 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 8, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

HEADLINE: Health Officials Plan Closer Scrutiny of Gene Therapy Trials

BYLINE: Reuters

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7

BODY:

   Federal health officials released plans today for closer monitoring of
clinical trials involving gene therapy, saying they hoped the new procedures
would restore faith in a field battered by scandal.

   The Food and Drug Administration said it would require sponsors of gene
therapy trials to provide the agency with regular updates. The sponsors would
also have to appoint monitors who would review data from the trials and be able
to make unannounced inspections.

    "Our plan will help restore the confidence in the trials' integrity that is
essential if gene therapy studies are to be able to fulfill their potential,"
the F.D.A. administrator, Dr. Jane Henney, said.

   Also today, the National Institutes of Health said it would hold public
meetings to discuss gene therapy experiments.

   "The knowledge and understanding gained through these safety symposia and
educational outreach efforts will guide the conduct of current trials and
enhance the design of future gene transfer trials to maximize patient safety,"
the institutes' acting director, Dr. Ruth L. Kirschstein, said.

   Gene therapy was thought to be a benign if somewhat unsuccessful approach to
treating disease until the death in September 1999 of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, who
had a severe immune reaction to the treatment.

   Since then, some gene therapy researchers have been criticized for not
following the rules for reporting failures to the agency and the institutes.
Several trials were put on hold while procedures were reviewed.

   Last week the F.D.A. released a warning letter criticizing Dr. James Wilson
of the University of Pennsylvania, who helped lead the experiment in which Mr.
Gelsinger died.

   It said trials on monkeys should have given the researchers a hint that
problems could have arisen with the treatment, which used a virus related to
cold viruses to carry a gene into patients' livers. The gene was supposed to
correct a liver deficiency.

   Last week, Senator Bill Frist, the Tennessee Republican who heads the Senate
Public Health Subcommittee, asked Dr. Donna E. Shalala, the secretary of health
and human services, how often the agency had investigated gene therapy trials,
and why it waited so long to suspend other trials at Penn after hearing of
problems.

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             734 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 8, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words

HEADLINE: NEWS SUMMARY

BODY:


   INTERNATIONAL   A3-16

Clinton Will Visit Pakistan To Press Security Issues
The White House said President Clinton would visit Pakistan "for a few hours" at
the end of his lengthier trip to India this month. Officials said the decision
was based on the need to urge Pakistan's military government to work toward
resolving its dispute with India over Kashmir and to crack down on terrorism.
A12


   More Violence in Kosovo City
Dozens of people were injured in shootings and grenade attacks in the divided
town of Mitrovica, among them French peacekeepers and Albanian and Serbian
civilians.   A10

Studying U.N. Peacekeeping
Secretary General Kofi Annan said he was appointing an international panel to
look at every aspect of United Nations peacekeeping and make recommendations on
how missions could be more effective.   A10

Putin's Campaign Strategy
Vladimir V. Putin, with a hefty lead in the polls for the Russian presidential
election, boasted that he would not participate in televised debates nor use
campaign commercials.   A9

Barak and Arafat Meet
Prime Minister Ehud Barak met with Yasir Arafat to try to restart formal peace
negotiations, after talks on a framework for a final Israeli-Palestinian treaty
stalled.   A6

Israeli Official Investigated
Transportation Minister Yitzhak Mordechai took a leave while the police
investigate a complaint that he sexually assaulted a female employee, an
allegation he strongly denied.   A6

U.S. General in Mozambique
The commander of the American military's relief effort arrived in the southern
African nation as international relief efforts gained pace. Flooding has left at
least 400 dead and a million people either homeless or in desperate need of
help.   A3

South Africa Media Debate
The Human Rights Commission of South Africa issued 36 subpoenas to editors in an
investigation of racism in the media. That raised fears in a country where press
freedom was just recently enshrined in the Constitution, and, after an outcry,
the editors agreed to testify voluntarily.   A3

World Briefing   A10

NATIONAL   A18-27

Bush and Gore Prevail In Super Tuesday Contests
Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore were assured their parties'
nominations after overwhelming their rivals in contests across the country. Both
won their parties' primaries in New York and California, which accounted for
more than 40 percent of the delegates chosen yesterday. Senator John McCain
captured Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Vermont. Bill Bradley did
not win one state and is expected to quit the race soon.   A1

Deal to Raise Aviation Spending
House and Senate negotiators agreed on a three-year plan to raise spending on
air traffic control and on aid to airports by 30 percent as well as let local
airport authorities increase departure taxes to $4.50 from $3 to pay for
additional improvements.   A18

Effort to Push New Gun Laws
President Clinton met with lawmakers to press Congress to break an impasse on
gun legislation, then he met with the mother of a 6-year-old Michigan girl whom
officials say was shot to death by another first grader.   A20

Vermonters on Gay Marriage
In 30 town meetings, residents had their say about same-sex marriages and a
state Supreme Court ruling that committed gay couples should have the same
rights and benefits as straight couples.   A18

SCIENCE/HEALTH

More Scrutiny of Gene Therapy
The F.D.A. presented plans for closer monitoring of clinical trials involving
gene therapy, saying it hoped the new procedures would restore faith in the
field. The National Institutes of Health will hold public meetings on gene
therapy studies.   A20

SPORTS   D1-8

Charges in Hockey Attack
Marty McSorley of the Boston Bruins, left, was ordered to appear in a Canadian
court on April 4, where he will be charged with assault with a weapon for
hitting Donald Brashear of the Vancouver Canucks with his stick on Feb. 21. If
convicted, McSorley could receive up to 18 months in jail.   D4

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Consumer Advocates Hired To Ensure Web Privacy
DoubleClick, the Internet's largest advertisement placement company, has hired
Robert Abrams, a former state attorney general, and Jules Polonetsky, the city's
commissioner of consumer affairs and a former state legislator, in an effort to
reassure the public, investors and federal and state regulators that it will
respect computer users' privacy rights.   B3

Anti-Gay Billboards Criticized
Two billboards quoting a Bible verse to condemn homosexuality have appeared on
Staten Island, shrouded in anonymity and stirring frustration among gay men and
lesbians.   B4

Assessing Big Casino Deal
Experts were divided on how MGM Grand's $4.4 billion buyout of Mirage Resorts
would affect Governor Whitman's efforts to redevelop Atlantic City, but most
agreed that only one of the companies' two casino projects would survive the
combination.   B5

EDUCATION   B8

Plan to Recruit Teachers
The New York State Senate's Republican leaders proposed easing the looming
teacher shortage with salary bonuses, scholarships and other financial
incentives. The plan resembles a proposal by Governor Pataki that was well
received by the Assembly's Democratic leaders.   B1

Getting a Jump on Exams
The New York State education commissioner said a majority of students had
already taken and passed Regents exams in math, science, global studies and
American history and government, even though English is the only exam required
for a diploma this year.   B8

Replacing Coal Boilers
The School Construction Authority wants to complete the replacement of the
remaining 130 coal-burning furnaces in New York City public schools by next
spring, more than a year ahead of schedule, provided the Board of Education and
the New York Power Authority concur.   B8

OBITUARIES   C24-25

Edward H. Levi
Attorney general under President Gerald R. Ford and a president of the
University of Chicago, he was 88.   C25

BUSINESS DAY   C1-24

Stock Markets Sent Reeling
The Dow fell 374.47 points, or 3.68 percent, to 9,796.03, as oil prices surged
above $34 a barrel and Procter & Gamble, which is one of the 30 companies in the
Dow average, warned that the rising cost of raw materials would drive down its
profits. The S.& P. 500 dropped 2.56 percent and the Nasdaq was down 1.16
percent.   A1

YankeeNets Junk Bond Sale
The YankeeNets, the new company that controls a winning baseball team and a
losing basketball team, will offer institutional investors $250 million in junk
bonds today at a rate expected to be 12.25 percent.   C1

German Bank Deal
Deutsche Bank plans to acquire a big domestic rival, Dresdner Bank, in a deal
potentially worth more than $30 billion. Analysts said it would eventually lead
to the elimination of 1,000 to 2,000 branches in Germany and, in time, cut tens
of thousands of jobs.   C1

Microsoft Quits Trade Group
Microsoft withdrew from the oldest and largest software industry trade
association in a dispute over the group's support of the government in the
Microsoft antitrust case.   C2

Business Digest   C1

ARTS   E1-12

DINING   F1-10

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: A decisive day for front-runners; troubled trip to Pakistan; a
verdict on a cover-up.
Columns: Paul Krugman and Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E8
TV Listings   E11
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D5


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             735 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                             Philadelphia Daily News

                  MARCH 8, 2000 Wednesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. 35

LENGTH: 368 words

HEADLINE: FDA RULE SPURRED BY PENN GENE THERAPY TO BE MONITORED FOR SAFETY

BYLINE: Associated Press

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Food and Drug Administration will begin forcing scientists to monitor
patient safety better during gene therapy experiments and will conduct surprise
inspections to make sure researchers follow the rules.

   The FDA made the announcement yesterday amid growing criticism of lax
government oversight of gene therapy experiments, including one that killed an
Arizona teen-ager last fall.

   Federal regulations already require that researchers establish patient-safety
monitoring systems before putting experimental treatments to the test. But the
FDA acknowledged yesterday it has not enforced the rules for gene therapists.

   Indeed, in the University of Pennsylvania experiment that killed 18-year-old
Jesse Gelsinger, "there were deficiencies in the monitoring," said FDA gene
therapy chief Dr. Kathryn Zoon.

   Pennsylvania researchers didn't have a formal patient monitoring system,
something FDA said it discovered only when it inspected the hospital's gene
therapy lab after Gelsinger died.

   Under FDA's new initiative, all gene therapy researchers must appoint someone
not directly involved with their experiments to monitor patient safety. The
monitors could comprise contract research groups or other scientists at a
hospital or university.

   The monitors are not truly independent - the gene therapists hire them.

   But the FDA pledged to ensure gene therapy monitors are working and know the
law requires them to report patient-safety problems to the government - and to
conduct random, surprise inspections to make sure.

   Experiments that don't comply can be halted.

   The initiative sparked a mixed reaction.

   "They were supposed to be doing that already," said bioethicist George Annas,
a Boston University professor of health law. "FDA has let this get out of hand..
. .They don't inspire a lot of confidence."

   He questioned whether FDA inspectors had the time or expertise to oversee how
more than 350 gene therapy experiments now under way are conducted.

   But another critic welcomed the change.

   "The patient-safety monitoring is the most important element that's been
missing in all of this," said Abbey Meyers, president of the National
Organization for Rare Disorders.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2002


                             736 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 8, 2000 Wednesday SF EDITION

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A02

LENGTH: 596 words

HEADLINE: NEW RULES SET FOR TRIALS IN GENE THERAPY SPONSORS OF SUCH TESTS, WHO
ALREADY MUST HAVE PLANS FOR MONITORING PATIENT SAFETY, MUST NOW SUBMIT THOSE
PLANS TO THE FDA. THE AGENCY WILL CONDUCT SURPRISE INSPECTIONS.

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Federal regulators yesterday announced new measures aimed at better
protecting patients in human gene-therapy experiments.

   The measures, adopted after a gene-therapy death at the University of
Pennsylvania in September, fall far short of the reforms advocated by many
bioethicists.

   But federal officials said they hoped the initiatives would help restore
public confidence in the ability of government to protect patients from undue
risks in this competitive field of experimental medicine.

   "We believe these [initiatives] are touching on critical aspects that affect
patient safety," said Dr. Kathryn Zoon, who oversees gene-therapy research at
the Food and Drug Administration.

   The key measure will require sponsors of clinical trials - typically
universities or private companies - to submit to the FDA a plan for monitoring
patient safety. The agency said it would conduct unannounced inspections of
clinical trials to see if sponsors are actually following their monitoring
plans.

   Currently, gene-therapy researchers are required to have such plans, but they
don't have to submit them to the FDA, Zoon said. She said the agency usually
sees the plans only after a major problem, such as an unexpected patient death,
triggers an FDA investigation.

   Other new measures, announced jointly by the FDA and the National Institutes
of Health, include:

   Expanded reporting requirements aimed at making sure gene products are not
contaminated.

   Government-sponsored conferences to be held four times a year on the safety
of different types of gene therapy.

   An NIH database of gene-therapy trials available to the public by year's end.

   And new FDA regulations that would allow public disclosure of more
information about corporate-sponsored gene-therapy trials.

   Currently, the FDA can withhold data about patient deaths because the
companies say disclosure would reveal trade secrets.

   The initiatives do not include stronger measures advocated by some
bioethicists - such as requiring researchers to have an independent ombudsman
for patients or mandating independent data-and-safety monitoring boards, as is
done in federally sponsored AIDS clinical trials.

   Such measures are still under study, federal officials said yesterday.

   The initiatives stem in large part from the Sept. 17 death of Jesse
Gelsinger, 18, of Tucson, Ariz., during Penn's gene-therapy trial for adults
suffering from a rare liver disorder.

   The death - believed to be the first from gene-therapy itself rather than a
patient's underlying disease - has set off congressional criticism of the FDA
and NIH for failing to monitor gene-therapy trials more carefully.

   Alan Milstein, a Pennsauken attorney representing Gelsinger's father, called
yesterday's initiatives "too little, too late."

   He added: "The FDA has already detailed Penn's mistakes with respect to the
death of Jesse Gelsinger. The FDA and the NIH have yet to address their own
mistakes with respect to Jesse's death - particularly and most glaringly their
approval of Penn's study, which had the prospect of very little benefit and
tremendous risk for patients."

   But Rep. Henry A. Waxman (D., Calif.), one of the most vocal congressional
critics of federal oversight of gene therapy, hailed yesterday's announcement.
"This is precisely the oversight that has been lacking," he said.

   "I applaud the Department [of Health and Human Services] for committing to
this work," he said. "I hope that this will better assure the safety of
gene-therapy patients and bolster public confidence in the research."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             737 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 8, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: LIFESTYLE;Pg. E-2

LENGTH: 877 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy works on hemophilia cells

BYLINE: Nicholas Wade; NEW YORK TIMES NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 Gene therapy, a technique long on promise and so far very short on fulfillment,
may be achieving a glimmering of success in a treatment for hemophilia B, a
disease in which the blood does not clot properly.

   The idea of gene therapy is to treat diseases that are the result of a
defective gene by inserting the correct form of the gene into a patient's cells.

   If the technique worked, it could be a powerful remedy for many diseases that
are hard to treat.  But despite 20 years of effort and some 200 current trials,
the Food and Drug Administration has yet to approve any form of gene therapy.

   Biologists report in the journal Nature Genetics that they gave patients
suffering from hemophilia B the correct form of the gene for Factor IX, part of
the cascade of proteins involved in forming a blood clot.

   The trial involved only three patients and was designed to test the safety of
the gene therapy, not its effectiveness.

   From earlier tests in mice and dogs, the researchers had calculated that the
dose of the gene given the patients would be too low to offer any clinical
benefit.

   To their surprise, the researchers said they found that two of the patients
were noticeably better, as judged by their lesser need to inject themselves for
bleedings with extra Factor IX protein.

   Both patients turned out to be making enough of their own Factor IX that
clinically effective amounts were reaching the bloodstream, the researchers
reported.  The correct form of the gene had been injected into their muscle
cells.

   "When we first got the result, we said that must be a mistake," said Dr.
Katherine A. High of Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, an author of the
report.

   Another author, Dr. Mark A. Kay of Stanford University, said, "The patient
noticed it first, and we were real skeptical."

   Effectiveness next

   Although a safety trial can prove nothing about a treatment's effectiveness,
these early results are encouraging because two of the three patients showed a
benefit at the lowest of three planned doses.

   "The data is preliminary, but it is quite suggestive that higher doses will
confirm these results are real," said Dr. Arthur Beaudet, a geneticist at the
Baylor College of Medicine.  "I think these investigators are really close."

   Beaudet, who was not involved in the new study, said he thought that proof
that the therapy worked was a year or so away.  How soon a treatment would be
widely available, he said, depends on factors such as action by patient advocate
groups and the availability of the virus used to insert the corrective gene.

   About 3,300 people in the United States have hemophilia B, caused by one of
several possible mutations in the gene for Factor IX. An additional 12,000
people suffer from hemophilia A, the result of mutations in the gene for Factor
VIII, also a vital component of the body's blood-clotting system.

   It is not known which type of hemophilia afflicted the Russian royal family.
The defective gene was bequeathed by Queen Victoria through her descendants to
the Russian, Prussian and Spanish royal houses, but has now died out in the
English royal family, High said.

   High and Kay have each been trying separately to develop gene therapy
treatments for hemophilia for more than a decade but have now joined forces.

   Finally good news

   The promising result of their research comes in the wake of gene therapy's
long record of failures and the recent death of a patient, Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.  Gelsinger died after
receiving an injection into the liver of a high dose of adenovirus, one of the
causes of the common cold.

   The team led by Kay and High used a different virus, adeno associated virus,
which has very few genes of its own and depends on adenovirus to reproduce
itself.

   Viruses are used to deliver the corrective human genes in most gene therapy
trials because of their natural ability to enter human cells and incorporate
their genetic material into human chromosomes.  The adeno associated virus used
by High and Kay is not as provocative to the immune system as adenovirus and the
cells it infects survive much longer.  High said that dogs given the Factor IX
gene nearly three years ago were still producing the gene's protein.

   The treatment may be working better in people than it did in animals, she
said, because the adeno associated virus is a human virus and may be more active
in its natural host.  One drawback of the virus is that it can carry only rather
small genes.  The human gene for Factor VIII, for example, is too large for it,
so some other virus must be found to treat hemophilia A.

   High and others said gene therapy's record of failure was due largely to the
difficulty of finding appropriate viruses for gene delivery.

   "People should not be discouraged.  The things we and others are doing are
beginning to look promising," she said.

   Hemophilia B is a good target for gene therapy because the level of Factor IX
in the bloodstream needs to be raised and sustained at only 1 percent of normal
for patients to benefit.  Having the protein always available by gene therapy
would probably be far better than the present treatment, in which Factor IX is
injected only after bleeding has occurred.


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             738 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 8, 2000, Wednesday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-15

LENGTH: 109 words

HEADLINE: U.S. tightens rules on gene therapy trials

BYLINE: Reuters

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- The government yesterday released plans for closer monitoring of
gene therapy trials, saying it hoped that the new procedures will restore faith
in a field battered by scandal.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said it will require regular updates on
all gene therapy trials, while the National Institutes of Health said it will
start a series of meetings to air the problems -- and successes -- of ongoing
experiments.

   Gene therapy was thought to be a benign if somewhat unsuccessful approach to
treating disease until the September 1999 death of Jesse Gelsinger, 18, whose
body had a severe immune reaction to the treatment.


LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2000


                             739 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                            March 8, 2000 Wednesday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 681 words

HEADLINE: Federal agencies to expand scrutiny over gene therapy trials

BYLINE: Kitta MacPherson and Edward R. Silverman, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   Two federal agencies yesterday disclosed plans to more closely monitor gene
therapy trials, which are increasingly used to develop novel medicines but have
recently drawn charges they put patients at risk.

   The initiative by the National Institutes of Health and the Food and Drug
Administration, the agencies responsible for overseeing clinical trials and drug
development, follows the widely publicized death last year of an 18-year-old
patient.

    In making the unusual move to heighten their scrutiny of drug trials, agency
officials said they were prompted by emerging evidence that sponsors of several
recent gene therapy trials hadn't taken adequate precautions in protecting human
subjects.

    "We think this is going to be a step in helping us to do routine
surveillance and estimate hazards," said Philip Noguchi, director of the FDA's
division of cellular and gene therapy. "Many of the things we're doing now is in
response" to the September death of Arizona teenager Jesse Gelsinger.

    The agencies have two plans designed to add another layer of oversight to
gene therapy research, and forums for researchers to more quickly and thoroughly
exchange information about other studies, which are often scattered at academic
sites across the country.

    In gene therapy, still an experimental procedure, a new functioning gene is
inserted into a cell or group of cells. The method, studied for more than a
decade in thousands of patients, has always been held to a higher standard
because of public discomfort surrounding any form of genetic experimentation.

    Scientists are investigating gene therapy as a possible tool for eradicating
a wide variety of diseases believed to be caused by malfunctions in genetic
machinery, such as cancer, heart disease, diabetes, AIDS and cystic fibrosis.

    However, there haven't been any clinical trials involving humans that have
proven gene therapy works definitively, although the technique has been shown to
be successful in lab animals and in test tubes.

   The technique has been controversial since Gelsinger's death during a gene
therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania. The teen, who had been
receiving treatment for a rare genetic liver disorder, died shortly after
receiving a high dose of genetically engineered viruses containing a gene meant
to correct his disease.

    In response, researchers nationwide are reviewing their methods and
government agencies are digging deeper for threats to patient safety. In recent
months, the FDA and NIH have questioned procedures used by a number of academic
institutions and biotechnology companies, citing them for failing to promptly
report deaths and illnesses of participating patients.

    The NIH, in particular, is considering new guidelines for reporting adverse
events, which can provide important insight into the benefits and risks of a new
medicine as well as a better understanding of clinical-trial design.

    Tomorrow, a key NIH panel - the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, made up
of experts who will attempt to develop these new guidelines - will meet to
review proposed guidelines. It last met in December.

    "I certainly think there will be efforts made to improve reporting and
tracking of adverse events for clinical trials," Claudia Mickelson, a bio-safety
officer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and chair of the NIH
committee, said in a recent interview.

    In December, the proposed disclosure of adverse events prompted concern from
drug makers and biotech companies, which worry that proprietary data will be
disclosed to competitors. Yesterday, though, industry representatives said they
were satisfied with this aspect of the new government initiative.

    For instance, Schering-Plough Corp., which was asked briefly to stop
enrolling patients this winter in one trial that later resumed, issued a
statement saying it was pleased with the new plan announced by the FDA and NIH.

    Similarly, a spokesman for the Biotechnology Industry Organization, a trade
group for biotech companies, said the members were "supportive" of the new
initiative and that it didn't "cross any lines."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             740 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        March 8, 2000 Wednesday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 523 words

HEADLINE: RULES AIMED AT GENE THERAPY SAFETY;
TWO INITIATIVES TACKLE PROTECTION FOR PATIENTS

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   The Clinton administration announced Tuesday two new initiatives designed to
enhance the safety of patients in gene therapy experiments. The twin efforts by
the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health are a
response to recent revelations that many gene researchers have been lax in their
adherence to patient protection rules.

   Effective immediately, gene therapy researchers will be required to submit to
the FDA detailed descriptions of how their medical experiments will be monitored
for safety. University or corporate sponsors of the experiments will have to
hire specially trained individuals whose job will be to ensure that patients'
rights are protected, the studies are conducted as approved by the FDA, and all
safety data such as side effects are reported properly to university and federal
officials.

   Researchers are already required to have such monitoring plans in place and
to follow those plans, but they have not been required to submit the plans to
the FDA for review in advance. One of several shortcomings that FDA officials
have said they discovered while investigating the September death of a gene
therapy patient at the University of Pennsylvania was that no such plan had been
prepared for that study.

   The second initiative calls for the NIHAU and FDA to jointly convene
quarterly meetings where gene therapy researchers can share information,
including safety reports, gathered from their studies.

   "Clinical trial monitoring and responsible reporting must be taken seriously
by all parties involved in gene therapy trials," said FDA Commissioner Jane
Henney, in a prepared statement. "Our plan will help restore the confidence in
the trials' integrity that is essential if gene therapy studies are to be able
to fulfill their potential."

   Michael Werner, bioethics counsel for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, said the biotech industry supports the initiatives. "It's
important the public knows this research will be conducted responsibly," he
said. "Our goals and the oversight agencies' goals are the same."

   Others, however, said they were unconvinced that the moves would restore
public confidence in the field, which has been battered by reports of
federal-rule violations and worrisome appearances of financial conflicts of
interest.

   "This little idea that we're going to have a seminar a few times a year is
not going to cut it," said George Annas, a professor of health law at Boston
University's School of Public Health who has called for a moratorium on gene
therapy while scientific and ethical concerns are more fully addressed. The
requirement that researchers submit a monitoring plan to the FDA, he said, "is
hardly a substantial increase in oversight or regulation."

   The new proposals respond in part to a February request by Clinton that the
NIHAU and FDA reassess the adequacy of gene therapy regulations. .

   FDA officials said they are planning to propose a new rule that would allow
them to publicly disclose certain details about the safety of gene therapy
treatments -- information the agency is currently required by law to keep
secret.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2000


                             741 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Gannett Company, Inc.
                                   USA TODAY

                    March 8, 2000, Wednesday, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 19A

LENGTH: 527 words

HEADLINE: Federal agencies develop new safeguards for gene therapy

BYLINE: Tim Friend

BODY:

   Federal officials said Tuesday that they will tighten monitoring
of gene therapy studies and begin educational seminars for scientists
to restore public confidence in the field.

   Since the first reported death last September of an Arizona teenager
caused by gene therapy, federal investigations uncovered deficiencies.

   There was withholding of information on side effects, confusion
about rules governing the studies and commercial conflicts of
interest that could jeopardize patient safety.


   Gene therapy is seen as one of the most promising fields of research
in which scientists try to replace defective or missing genes
that cause disease with healthy ones that treat or cure the disease.

   But many scientists say the field's promise has been oversold
since its inception a decade ago.

   Several volunteer health organizations, including the Muscular
Dystrophy Association, have suspended human gene therapy studies
in the wake of increasingly intense scrutiny from the Food and
Drug Administration, the National Institutes of Health and Congress.

   "We believe that these are important steps that we are taking
to ensure patient safety," says Kathryn Zoon, director of the
FDA's Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research.

   Current federal regulations require the sponsors of clinical research,
which in gene therapy are often the same groups conducting the
research, to provide independent monitors of studies.

   Sponsors traditionally are companies or federal funding agencies.
Monitors are supposed to review data compiled by clinical investigators
and ensure the investigators are following regulations.

   FDA officials said reviews of several recent gene therapy clinical
trials found that monitoring by study sponsors "had been less
than adequate."

   The FDA said it now will require study sponsors to submit their
monitoring plans to the FDA and that the agency would review them
and make needed changes to prevent safety lapses. The agency said
it would increase inspections of ongoing studies as well.

   NIH and FDA officials also said they would organize seminars to
teach gene therapy researchers how to comply with federal regulations
governing human research. Scientists in the gene therapy field
have said that many of the people conducting studies are relatively
inexperienced.

   "Any novel field of clinical research has a certain level of
more sophisticated (scientists) and some with less experience,"
Zoon says. "What we're looking for is raising the level of education
and awareness."

   Whether the new initiatives actually increase patient safety remains
to be seen. Zoon acknowledged that the FDA has "constrained resources"
and only about 200 inspectors for all types of human biomedical
research.

   "We will put enough resources in this to get a sense of the community,"
Zoon says. "For 2001 there is some increase (in funding) in bioresearch
monitoring, and we are planning in 2002 on having a larger program
for bioresearch monitoring. This is a transition year where we
will do our best to address the issue under our limited resources
and develop our plan."

LOAD-DATE: March 08, 2000


                             742 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                    March 8, 2000, Wednesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A03

LENGTH: 733 words

HEADLINE: Monitoring Tightened For Genetic Research

BYLINE: Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   The Clinton administration announced yesterday two initiatives designed to
enhance the safety of patients in gene therapy experiments. The twin efforts by
the Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health are a
response to recent revelations that many gene researchers have been lax in their
adherence to patient protection rules.

   Effective immediately, gene therapy researchers will be required to submit to
the FDA detailed descriptions of how their medical experiments will be monitored
for safety. University or corporate sponsors of the experiments will have to
hire specially trained individuals whose job will be to ensure that patients'
rights are protected, the studies are conducted as approved by the FDA, and all
safety data such as side effects are reported properly to university and federal
officials.

   Researchers are already required to have such monitoring plans in place and
to follow those plans, but they have not been required to submit the plans to
the FDA for review in advance. One of several shortcomings that FDA officials
have said they discovered while investigating the September death of a gene
therapy patient at the University of Pennsylvania was that no such plan had been
prepared for that study.

   The second initiative calls for the NIH and FDA to jointly convene quarterly
meetings where gene therapy researchers can share information, including safety
reports, gathered from their studies.

   "Clinical trial monitoring and responsible reporting must be taken seriously
by all parties involved in gene therapy trials," FDA Commissioner Jane E. Henney
said in a statement. "Our plan will help restore the confidence in the trials'
integrity that is essential if gene therapy studies are to be able to fulfill
their potential."

   Michael Werner, bioethics counsel for the Biotechnology Industry
Organization, said the biotech industry supports the initiatives. "It's
important the public knows this research will be conducted responsibly," he
said. "Our goals and the oversight agencies' goals are the same."

   Others, however, said they were unconvinced that the moves would do much to
restore public confidence in the field, which has been battered by reports of
federal rule violations and worrisome appearances of financial conflicts of
interest.

   "This little idea that we're going to have a seminar a few times a year is
not going to cut it," said George Annas, a professor of health law at Boston
University's School of Public Health who has called for a moratorium on gene
therapy while scientific and ethical concerns are more fully addressed. And the
requirement that researchers submit a monitoring plan to the FDA, he said, "is
hardly a substantial increase in oversight or regulation."

   The new proposals respond in part to a February request by President Clinton
that the NIH and FDA reassess the adequacy of gene therapy regulations. In
recent weeks, the two agencies have also been hit by criticisms and detailed
inquiries from several members of Congress, including Rep. Henry A. Waxman
(D-Calif.), Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), who is preparing legislation
overhauling federal oversight of gene therapy, and Sen. Bill Frist (R-Tenn.),
who held a hearing on gene therapy earlier this year and has said he intends to
hold another soon to get testimony from Henney and NIH acting Director Ruth
Kirschstein.

   FDA officials also announced yesterday that they had sent letters to
researchers demanding additional assurances that the viruses and cells used in
gene therapy treatments were free of contamination. The agency has been
investigating a series of errors in a gene therapy study at St. Luke Children's
Medical Research Center in Memphis, in which a lack of documentation of safety
testing had led to fears that treatments may have been contaminated with the
viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis. Tests ultimately found no evidence of
contamination.

   Further, FDA officials said they are planning to propose a new rule that
would allow them to publicly disclose certain details about the safety of gene
therapy treatments--information the agency is currently required by law to keep
secret.

   They said that, despite a lack of extra personnel or funds, they would
increase the number of inspections of gene therapy programs by temporarily
scaling back inspections at other research centers.


LOAD-DATE: March 08, 2000


                             743 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                     March 7, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E5

LENGTH: 669 words

HEADLINE: KENNEDY'S BILL WOULD CREATE GENE THERAPY OVERSIGHT PANEL CLINTON
ADMINISTRATION ALSO SEEKS NEW RULES FOR TESTS

BYLINE: By Aaron Zitner, Globe Staff

BODY:

   WASHINGTON - Lawmakers and the Clinton administration are moving to impose
new regulations on experiments using gene therapy, the promising but largely
unproven treatment in which patients are given new genes, often to replace their
own malfunctioning genes.

   Senator Edward M. Kennedy will file legislation to create a new board that
would review all problems arising from gene-therapy experiments, his office said
yesterday. The board would make recommendations to the Food and Drug
Administration, which has the authority to modify or end gene therapy trials.
Separately, Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala is expected to
make recommendations today on how to bring new oversight to gene therapy trials.
And a panel at the National Institutes of Health that has partial responsibiity
for reviewing gene therapy tests is to begin a three-day meeting tomorrow.

   The safety and oversight of gene-therapy trials have been widely debated in
recent months, largely because of the death last September of an 18-year-old man
in a Pennsylvania experiment. The death triggered a government investigation,
and several gene therapy trials in that state were suspended.

   In Boston, the Food and Drug Administration halted at least one gene-therapy
trial this month at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, which aimed to treat heart
disease. Last summer, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center suspended a trial of
gene therapy to treat cancer, while more recently it halted and then restarted a
trial involving hemophilia.

   Supervision of gene therapy trials is shared by the FDA and the NIH, an
arrangement that has prompted lapses in oversight and confusion among
scientists, critics say. Scientists are supposed to notify both the FDA and the
NIH of any "adverse events," or cases of a patient taking a turn for the worse
during an experiment, but the two agencies have different rules for what
qualifies as a reportable incident.

   Investigations after the Pennsylvania death showed that scientists were not
reporting all incidents as required.

   "I remain concerned about the apparent lack of federal oversight in gene
transfer trials," Senator Bill Frist, a physician and Tennessee Republican,
stated in a letter to Shalala on Friday. The oversight system "is not adequately
protecting patients."

   Under Kennedy's proposal, the government would create a Data Safety
Monitoring Board to review all reports of adverse events and recommend to the
FDA whether to modify or end trials.

   Similar boards already exist for AIDS and cancer experiments. They are
considered a useful oversight tool in those areas because dozens of researchers
are conducing experiments involving hundreds of patients in different countries.
That makes it difficult for the traditional oversight boards at individual
research institutions to track broad trends.

   Kennedy also proposed that the NIH establish a phone and Internet service to
help patients who are considering volunteering for gene therapy trials. He wants
the FDA to step up its on-site inspections of the trials.

   In addition to stronger oversight, Kennedy's goal is to restore public
confidence in the trials so that patients will continue to volunteer for them,
aides said.

   President Clinton could enact some of Kennedy's ideas by administrative
action, but the senator will ask Congress to write them into law if the
administration declines to act, aides said.

   The FDA has approved more than 200 gene therapy trials to date.

   Shalala was asked by President Clinton on Feb. 8 to push the FDA and NIH to
accelerate their reviews of gene therapy guidelines. She is expected to announce
modifications to the government's oversight process today.

   Shalala's proposal and Kennedy's ideas will likely be discussed this week at
a meeting of the NIH's Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. The panel's duties
including reviewing proposals for gene therapy trials that present novel
scientific or ethical issues. The panel includes scientists, ethicists and
patient advo

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             744 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Detroit News
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Detroit News

                      March 7, 2000 Tuesday No dot Edition

SECTION: NEWS; Grada Christensen lost 70 pounds through a walking program and is
featured in "Walk to a Better Life" on PBS this month.Wish-Bone's new dressings
have 2 grams of fat per serving.Toothpaste might help fight nighttime mouth.Keep
these feet from getting odorous with a bit of antiperspirant or a tea
bath.Orloff says we need to pay attention to intuition.; Pg. 3F

LENGTH: 1446 words

HEADLINE: Health News

BYLINE: Compiled Detroit News Health Writer Tracy Boyd

BODY:

   On the Air: PBS offers specials for midlife

   To encourage you to enjoy public TV and help fund its programs, PBS has
several health-related specials this month. At 7:30 p.m. on Thursday, Eating
Well for Optimum Health With Dr. Andrew Weil brings the latest nutritional
science information. At 3:15 p.m. Saturday, Walking magazine editor Mark Fenton
offers tips on starting and maintaining a walking program on Walk to a Better
Life. And at 8 p.m. March 14, Age Power! examines how baby boomers will
transform the aging process. Check local listings for channel information.

   Nutrition: Salad dressing has low-fat taste

   The way the folks at Wish-Bone see it, we've all been sacrificing flavor in
our salad dressings in favor of no fat. The company has introduced a new line of
salad dressings called Just 2 Good. Each of the 11 varieties -- including
Italian, Ranch, deluxe French, Blue Cheese and Thousand Island -- has 2 grams of
fat per serving. The line contains special ingredients to provide flavor without
fat, including fruit purees, vegetable juices and real sugar. They're available
in 8-ounce ($1.49) and 16-ounce ($2.69) bottles at grocery stores. For nutrition
tips and information, visit the Wish-Bone web site at www.wish-bone.

   Books: Intuition can help you heal

   We should trust that gut feeling we get about certain situations or people,
says Dr. Judith Orloff. Her new book, Dr. Judith Orloff's Guide to Intuitive
Healing: Five Steps to Physical, Emotional and Sexual Wellness (Times Books,
$24) discusses combining intuition with more traditional forms of medicine to
diagnose and treat illness. Orloff comes to Warren's Church of Today on March 22
to lecture on this topic; for information, call (810) 758-3050.

   Surveys: Plastic surgery patients want to look like celebs

   When it comes to facial plastic surgery, women often say they want to look
like Julia Roberts and Cindy Crawford, report surgeons from the American Academy
of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery.

   The No. 1 facial feature patients want to mimic? Cheekbones. Surgeons, on the
other hand, said they think the ideal faces of beauty belong to George Clooney,
Pierce Brosnan and Elizabeth Hurley.

   Chronic illness: Researchers study monthly hypertension drug

   In the future, people with high blood pressure might need to take their
medication only once a month. University of Florida researchers have used gene
therapy techniques to develop a new drug that lowers high blood pressure in rats
for up to one month with a single dose. That's significant, researchers say,
because the medications currently prescribed to treat hypertension must be taken
daily and are linked to side effects such as dizziness, fatigue, cough and
impotence. The new medication is patent-pending and will begin testing in
patients soon.

   What's new : P.M. Toothpaste aims for evening use

   During the day, saliva flow helps wash away bacteria and germs in our mouths.
At night, when saliva flow slows down, plaque and odor-causing germs called
volatile sulfur compounds build up and are not washed away. That leads to the
dryness and crummy taste you experience in the morning. Arm &; Hammer P.M.
toothpaste is designed to help prevent this phenomenon. The company says its
newest product is clinically shown to reduce build-up while you sleep, improving
the state of your mouth in the morning. You can find Arm &; Hammer P.M. in
drugstores and discount stores; a 4.5-ounce tube of Bold Mint or Fresh Mint
retails for $2.99. For information, call (800) 524-1328.

   Healthy alternatives

   Natural remedies for stinky feet

   Do your tootsies reek? Try these natural suggestions from Health magazine.
Give your feet a light spritz or thin coat of antiperspirant in the mornings to
help inhibit sweat. Or soak your feet in a tub with tea; the tannins in tea work
to close sweat glands. To do: Steep two tea bags in a pint of boiling water for
15 minutes, then add two quarts of cool water and soak feet for 30 minutes. If
your toes get tinted from the tea, try a weaker solution.

   What they say about...

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

   FIT FACT: Cosmetic surgery rates have risen 113 percent since 1996.

   To contact us, write:

   Tracy Boyd

   Detroit News Health Writer

   615 W. Lafayette Blvd.

   Detroit, MI 48226

   You can call us at (313) 222-2636 or fax us at (313) 222-2451. Or e-mail
health@ detnews.com.

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

   Contraceptive pills

   You've seen the television ads for contraceptive pills that improve acne. Now
a study confirms it: Pills containing a lower dose of estrogen can help clear
problem skin, says a University of South Alabama College of Medicine study.
Researchers found women in each of two groups had a significant reduction in
acne lesions -- 85 percent and 67 percent. None of the women experienced weight
gain, a commonly feared side effect of contraceptive pills. Though all birth
control pills are 99 percent effective in preventing pregnancy when used
correctly, lower doses of estrogen help reduce side effects such as nausea,
breast tenderness and moodiness. The study appeared in the journal
Contraception.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2002


                             745 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 7, 2000, Tuesday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-2

LENGTH: 221 words

HEADLINE: For the record

BODY:
 [] In a March 1 story about the race for 3rd District county supervisor,
candidate Marion Dodson's age was incorrectly reported.  She is 63, not 64.

   [] A story Saturday incorrectly reported the amount of campaign funds raised
by San Diego City Councilman Juan Vargas in the race for the 79th Assembly
District seat.  In fact, the correct amount was $262,884, not $113,422. (Ed. 7)

   The Union-Tribune regrets the errors.

   [] In a story Thursday about research involving gene therapy for heart
disease at UCSD School of Medicine, a paragraph listing the names of other
members of the research team was deleted.

   It said the UCSD research was financed by the National Institutes of Health
and the Thoracic Surgery Foundation.  The team included surgical resident Dr.
Sang Lee, cardiothoracic surgery chief Dr. Stuart Jamieson, clinical professor
of pathology Dr. Paul Wolf, graduate student Ryan Escudero and statistician
Reena Deutsch.  Wolf is also director of the autopsy and hematology laboratory
at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

   It is the policy of the Union-Tribune to correct all errors.  To discuss
accuracy or fairness in the news, please write: Gina Lubrano, readers
representative P.O. Box 120191 San Diego, CA 92112-0191 Telephone: (619)
293-1525, or e-mail: readers.rep@uniontrib.com


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             746 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 7, 2000, Tuesday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1738 words

HEADLINE: Caution Over Gene Therapy Puts Hopes on Hold

BYLINE: Rick Weiss, Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Like most 2-year-olds, Max Randell is a bundle of exuberance, gaining new
mastery over the world with every passing day. But unlike most children his age,
Max has just about reached the prime of his life.

   Max has Canavan disease, a rare inherited disorder that destroys young
brains, dragging toddlers into a near coma by age 4 and typically killing them
before the age of 10. The Chicago-area boy's parents believe that his only hope
for any semblance of a childhood is an experimental gene therapy developed at
Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia, now under federal review.

   But given gene therapy's many troubles of late--including a teenage patient's
death in Philadelphia and revelations of numerous research lapses at other sites
around the country--Max's doctor and parents fear that officials will demand
extraordinary evidence that the Canavan treatment is ready for human testing,
and perhaps withhold a go-ahead until it's too late for Max.

   "I hate that all this happened right now," said Max's mother, Ilyce, speaking
of the current wave of negative attention on gene therapy. "We don't have the
luxury of waiting."

   That urgency infuses an emotional debate that has drawn federal regulators,
scientists and patients into what amounts to a rare public tribunal over an
entire branch of experimental medicine. At stake is gene therapy's scientific
credibility, and perhaps even its economic future, in what experts are calling
the "post-Gelsinger era." The term refers to Jesse Gelsinger, whose September
death at Penn marked the first death attributed to a gene therapy experiment and
a turning point in public confidence in the field.

   On one side are those who believe that gene therapy has become something of a
rogue branch of medical science in which patients, their families and even some
doctors have become deluded by unrealistic hopes--and by hype from gene
therapy's growing cadre of scientist-investors and venture capitalist backers.

   With the decade-old field still lacking a single cure and facing numerous
questions about financial conflicts of interest, some critics are even calling
for a temporary halt to gene therapy pending further studies in animals and a
review of ethics rules.

   "No one seems ready to start saving lives, and it's too valuable an area of
research to not do it right and to lose the public confidence," said George
Annas, a professor of health law and bioethics at Boston University. "I say take
a voluntary moratorium."

   On the other side are many scientists, patients and family members who
acknowledge that the field has had a few mishaps but who believe it's been
unfairly tarnished by overly close news media scrutiny and by activists opposed
to genetic research. If the negative rhetoric doesn't stop soon, these
supporters warn, the field may get curtailed just as it's about to produce
results.

   "The controversy has gotten so overblown," said Carl Feldbaum, president of
the Biotechnology Industry Organization. "That could hurt the very people we're
trying to help."

   Both views will be aired at a three-day National Institutes of Health meeting
beginning tomorrow at which officials will consider the Canavan treatment along
with broader questions about how best to regulate gene therapy.

   Few experts believe that NIH will endorse a moratorium on gene therapy. But
there is evidence that the past six months' events may already be taking a toll
on the beleaguered specialty's supply of volunteers. A gene therapy experiment
for cystic fibrosis at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, for example,
has now gone several months with no patients, said Pamela Zeitlin, a professor
of pediatrics who is running the study.

   Zeitlin had no trouble attracting volunteers for an earlier version of the
study, and she had planned to start the new version in December. But because of
trouble finding willing patients, the first volunteer will be treated just this
month. Meanwhile, many asked about Gelsinger's death and never returned.

   "We've had many more potential volunteers with concerns about risk," Zeitlin
said, "or who planned to start and then had second thoughts and didn't enroll."

   Scientists at other gene therapy centers said it's too soon to say whether
the current climate of distrust is slowing enrollment. Indeed, some noted, if
some patients are thinking twice about getting new genes, others are responding
to gene therapy's crisis in just the opposite way: by scrambling to get into
studies before a feared crackdown occurs.

   When a Boston research hospital last month responded to all the attention on
the field by temporarily halting its hemophilia gene therapy experiment, for
instance, patients with the bleeding disorder seethed with anger. Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center said it suspended the study to make sure that no
potential risks to patients had been overlooked. But the study had already been
fully approved and had experienced no problems, suggesting to angry critics that
the shutdown, which was reversed two weeks later, represented a capitulation to
a mere wave of fear.

   "It sent a very bad message, a terrible message," said Michael Coyne, a
Pittsfield, Mass., board member of the National Hemophilia Foundation whose
9-year-old son, Conor, has the clotting disorder. "If a trial is going to be
shut down, it should be shut down for medical rationale, not political
rationale."

   That reaction miffed hospital officials, who complained that all the hoopla
surrounding gene therapy had left them trapped between competing pressures.

   "What if we say, 'Damn the torpedoes, full speed ahead, everything is fine!'
And what if something had happened to someone in those two weeks?" asked Michael
Rosenblatt, Beth Israel's interim president. "Would patients still support the
hospital then?"

   Abbey Meyers, president of the National Organization for Rare Disorders, was
equally upset with hemophilia patients' desperate demands for access--but for a
very different reason.

   "These people are disappointed that this is going to delay their treatment,
but they don't understand there has been a betrayal here," said Meyers, a former
member of the NIH gene therapy oversight committee, which is meeting this week
in Bethesda.

   "They haven't been told the truth," Meyers said, about how unlikely it is
that they will be helped, or about the risks of participating. "We've got to get
some rules around this to make sure it's being done properly."

   Biotechnology industry representatives have already said they are willing to
impose upon themselves new rules to allay public concerns. And a recent letter
to medical research leaders from Jordon Cohen, president of the Association of
American Medical Colleges (AAMC), said the association would embark upon several
initiatives to reverse the "erosion of public trust" that had been prompted by
recent events.

   But some critics are concerned that the proposed changes may prove more
cosmetic than substantial. One federal health official, speaking on condition of
anonymity, was especially critical of the Feb. 18 AAMC letter, calling it a
blueprint for "damage control" instead of a proposal to more thoroughly protect
medical volunteers.

   The letter describes plans for a conference call among the deans of medical
centers recently targeted by the FDA, with the goal of learning how federal
investigators conducted their inquiries. That information should be used to
develop a "strategic response plan," the letter said, to help other institutions
develop more effective public communications in the event they come under
similar scrutiny.

   Moreover, the letter stated, the association had scheduled a meeting with The
Washington Post's editorial board, and would help coordinate "other media
outreach activities as appropriate."

   "I wouldn't call it 'damage control,' it's just about good communication,"
Cohen said in an interview last week, noting that the letter also describes
planned efforts to educate scientists about federal regulations. "We need to get
the facts out there so people are not operating on rumors or bad information."

   But if the facts are that gene therapy is not working and may even cause
harm, then those facts are not likely to emerge from a young field that is under
growing financial pressures to succeed, Meyers and other critics said.

   Perhaps, some said, that explains why so much was made last week of some very
preliminary findings from a gene therapy study of hemophilia, published in the
journal Nature Biotechnology.

   Results of the study, which involved only three patients, rained upon news
organizations in the form of faxes and repeated phone calls made by a public
relations company hired by Avigen, a California biotechnology company that
sponsored the research. According to a company news release, "even the lowest
dose is effective."

   Yet the amount of clotting factor found in the gene-treated patients' blood
was barely detectable, outside scientists said. And the measure of clinical
effectiveness used in the study--essentially patients' personal assessments that
they were feeling less pain--was all but invalid, experts said, because the
patients knew they'd received a new treatment. Volunteers who know they've
received a new drug predictably report feeling better, because of the so-called
placebo effect.

   Declarations of the treatment's "efficacy," said the University of Michigan's
Randy Kaufman, a hemophilia expert who cloned the gene involved in the most
common form of the disease, are "a lot of hype."

   Still, experts said, it's difficult to ignore the wishes and demands of
patients and their family members, including Ilyce Randell, who want their
personal shot at the latest that medicine has to offer.

   The experiment that Randell craves would involve an injection of genetically
engineered viruses directly into Max's brain. It has never been tried in people,
and the goal for now is just to see if it causes damage, not to see if it can
actually protect dying brain cells.

   Randell said she understands that distinction, and that participation in this
kind of study is really for the good of future patients. But her words also
illustrate how difficult it can be for a patient or parent to stop hoping.

   "We're at the point where Max is almost 2 1/2, and soon he's going to start
losing ground," Randell said. "He can't wait until winter to be treated."

LOAD-DATE: March 07, 2000


                             747 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 Little Rock Newspapers, Inc.
                  Arkansas Democrat-Gazette (Little Rock, AR)

                             March 06, 2000, Monday

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D2

LENGTH: 1054 words

HEADLINE: Technology briefs

BYLINE: BLOOMBERG NEWS

BODY:

   High-tech firm keeps lawsuit alive vs. rival
NEW YORK -- Avesta Technologies Inc., which makes Internet electronic commerce
software, has persuaded a federal judge not to throw out its legal claims
against rival System Management Arts Inc.
System Management has sued Avesta, owned by former employees of a Morgan Stanley
Dean Witter & Co. unit, alleging the rival company infringed on its software
patents.
In a case the judge described as bitter, System Management says another
defendant, David Zenger, visited the company in 1996 to gather information about
its technology. Zenger now works for Avesta but then worked for Morgan Stanley.

Avesta filed counterclaims against System Management, seeking to invalidate the
patents. Avesta says System Management's software uses technology, known as
"Delphi," that had been developed earlier by Morgan Stanley.
U.S. District Judge Robert Sweet on Friday rejected System Management's request
essentially to declare the company's patent valid.
Avesta has "offered enough evidence to survive [System Management's] motion for
summary judgment," Sweet ruled.
Avesta agreed last month to be purchased by Rockville, Md.-based Visual Networks
Inc., which makes telecommunications software, for about $ 415 million in stock.
Avesta, based in New York, has 165 employees.
While Sweet's ruling allows Avesta to pursue some of its claims against System
Management, the judge did dismiss other allegations, including Avesta's claim
that System Management engaged in unfair competition. (Bloomberg News)
Myriad Genetics to sell 2 million shares
WASHINGTON -- Myriad Genetics Inc., a biotechnology company, filed with the
Securities and Exchange Commission to sell 2 million common shares worth more
than $ 300 million at Friday's closing price.
The company, based in Salt Lake City, said it would use the proceeds for
research and development, working capital, and general corporate purposes.
Myriad Genetics seeks to identify genes that may have commercial uses. Company
shares rose $ 7.88 to $ 150.13 on Friday and have risen 1,164 percent over the
past six months. (Bloomberg News)
FDA raps gene therapy unit where teen died
WASHINGTON -- The gene therapy experiments in which an Arizona teen-ager died
were poorly conducted, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration told researchers at
the University of Pennsylvania.
The 20-page FDA warning letter said the researchers at the university's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy didn't promptly report treatment-related
illnesses and disregarded study guidelines, improperly enrolling patients. Also,
the FDA said, the institute failed to tell the agency about changes in its study
guidelines.
The FDA's inspection of the institute, which ended in January, led the agency to
order the institute to halt all gene therapy trials.
"These conclusions about adverse events and your enrollment of subjects
ignore your verbal agreement to obtain FDA concurrence," according to the
letter, addressed to James Wilson, the director of the institute, and dated
March 3.
The warning letter, which can be the final step before the FDA seeks legal
action, listed five major violations of federal rules governing the conduct of
clinical trials and asked the researchers to provide additional safety and
effectiveness data.
The Pennsylvania study was stopped last fall after the death of 18-year-old
Jesse Gelsinger, who volunteered for the experiment. Researchers were testing
the safety of a treatment, in which a virus carried human genes into the body,
in patients with a rare metabolic disorder.
Gelsinger's death drew the attention of Congress and the National Institutes of
Health, which have both conducted hearings examining the issue. Also, the
University of Pennsylvania has asked two panels of experts to review the study.
The warning to the Pennsylvania researchers followed an FDA decision last week
to halt trials being conducted at Vascular Genetics Inc., a closely held
biotechnology company in which Human Genome Sciences Inc. holds a substantial
interest.
Interest in gene therapy, which attacks diseases by using viruses to deliver
healthy genes to patients with flawed or missing genes, has boomed in recent
years. Companies doing gene therapy research include Schering-Plough Corp.,
Targeted Genetics Corp. and Avigen Inc. (Bloomberg News)
Only 40% of wireless licenses sold in auction
WASHINGTON -- Metrocall Inc., Vodafone Airtouch Plc and Western Wireless Corp.
emerged as top winners in a U.S. sale of wireless licenses to offer new
services, although 60 percent of the available licenses remained unclaimed.
Of 2,499 licenses offered for sale by the Federal Communications Commission,
only 985 were sold to 78 winning bidders, generating $ 4,122,500 for the
government. Metrocall bid $ 681,800 on 145 licenses covering markets across the
United States including Boston, New York and San Francisco. Vodafone bid $
277,600 on 78 licenses and Western Wireless bid 448,000 for 63 licenses in
similar areas.
The radio spectrum sold in the six-day auction can be used for one- and two-way
messaging and advanced data services, such as sending Internet information over
wireless systems. Companies were competing for access to frequencies adjacent to
government licenses already used for paging, rather than clear spectrum.
"The FCC wanted to have an economic auction" and offered many licenses to
generate more revenue, said Ken Goldstein, senior vice president for engineering
at Metrocall. "You've got to be careful what you wish for."
The cost to operate multiple frequencies in rural states such as Montana, South
Dakota and North Dakota can be high for companies, and for that reason the FCC
was unable find buyers for 1,500 licenses, he said.
Paging Network Inc. and Arch Communications Group Inc., the two largest U.S.
paging companies, skipped the sale and that also depressed auction bidding and
results, he said.
Most companies that won licenses will build out their networks and expand
coverage, said Rob Hoggarth, senior vice president of messaging for the Personal
Communications Industry Association, a trade group of wireless phone companies.
By shoring up any gaps in their wireless footprint, companies can move
transmitters to relay data more efficiently. (Bloomberg News)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2000


                             748 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                  March 6, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section C; Page 9; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

HEADLINE: PATENTS;
A human gene is patented as a potential tool against AIDS, but ethical questions
remain.

BYLINE: By Sabra Chartrand

BODY:

   FINDING a cure for people infected with the AIDS virus is an ambitious goal,
but even more far-reaching may be the drive to create a vaccine that would keep
people from getting the disease in the first place. Human Genome Sciences Inc.,
one of the companies leading the international race to map the entire human
genome, has won a patent for a gene that might one day do both.

   While the gene has potential in the fight against AIDS, the patent
intensifies the debate over the propriety of patenting human biology. It will be
years before either the potential or the debate is resolved, but in the
meantime, news of the patent caused the stock value of Human Genome to jump 21
percent in one day when the patent was announced last month.

    Human Genome won the patent for a human gene that produces what scientists
believe is a receptor, or entry point, for the AIDS virus into cells. Blocking
that receptor might block AIDS from the body and make transmission of the
disease impossible.

   Scientists know that some people are born without this receptor gene, and
that they appear immune to the AIDS virus. With years of experimentation,
researchers may be able to produce drugs to treat AIDS from this newly patented
gene, or they might be able to devise a way to engineer everyone's genes so that
everyone becomes immune to HIV.

   Heady claims. But for all the research and expectations of the last 20 years,
so far the Food and Drug Administration has not yet approved a single gene
therapy.

   That may be why William Haseltine, chairman and chief executive officer of
Human Genome, goes to great lengths to establish the pedigree of his company's
latest patent. He describes the extensive hypotheses, experiments and research
that started in 1994. "There's a lot of concern going on for some time about
gene patents, what they mean and who gets them," Dr. Haseltine said. "This
patent is based on the discovery of a new gene through sequencing that confirmed
the proposed utilities and gives basis for the claims."

   Gene patents are categorized as chemical patents (as opposed to general and
mechanical, or electrical, the other two categories established at the Patent
and Trademark Office) and the government has clear rules about what kind of
genetic discoveries can win a patent. But that doesn't mean the debate over gene
patenting is settled.

   Religious leaders, medical ethicists and scientists have argued that the
human genome belongs in the public domain and not in the portfolios of private
companies. Opponents of gene patenting worry that commercial considerations
might hamper medical or scientific discovery, and there's alarm at the idea that
one or two companies could hold enough patents to make them the gatekeepers of
the biopharmaceutical industry.

   In fact, the original head of the Human Genome Project at the National
Institutes of Health resigned in the early 1990's to protest the issuing of
patents for genes. Since then, coordinators of the project have stepped up their
research and are actively placing thousands of genes that have been discovered
into the public domain. The government's stated goal is to make the sequence of
human genes available for the common good.

   Thousands of gene patent applications are still pending. Only a fraction have
been issued, and none of those have been tested or defended in court, but Human
Genome continues to amass patents. The company now owns 112, one of the largest
portfolios in the genomics industry.

   Dr. Haseltine says that "we do not use our patents to prevent anyone in
academics or the nonprofit world from using these materials for whatever they
want, so long as it is not commercial." Nevertheless, the company has licensing
agreements with American, Japanese, French and German drug companies that allows
some of the world's major pharmaceutical giants access to its arsenal of
patents.

   Since research is a commodity to biotechnology and drug companies, many
discoveries that might be crucial to the treatment of disease are patented to
protect investment.

   And yet, because of the overwhelming public interest in AIDS research, the
Patent and Trademark Office was pressured into establishing a separate database
for AIDS-related inventions in 1994, to give other scientists access to the
cutting-edge research in patents.

   At that time, searching through patent archives was a specialized,
time-consuming task. But now that the agency has put much of its patent database
on the Internet, anyone can track down AIDS-related patents.

   The work of two scientists at Human Genome, Li Yi and Steven Ruben, now joins
that group. Their patent covers a gene known as the CCR5 receptor gene.
Receptors are found on the surface of cells, much like pins sticking out of a
pin cushion, and act as a sort of docking port, sometimes for lethal viruses.
But the receptor and the virus have to match, like a key and a lock. CCR5 is
known to fit the AIDS virus. The virus binds to the receptor, then fuses to the
cell, and fusion allows HIV to work its way inside.

   "We are looking for substances that use the cell lines and methods described
in the patent to find new anti-HIV drugs that work by binding to CCR5 receptors
and blocking them," said Dr. Haseltine, who did pioneering work in sequencing
the genome of HIV at Harvard's Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. "Think of it as a
blanket over the receptor. The virus must recognize special structures on the
surface of the cell. If it can't see them, it can't get to them."

   The CCR5 receptor is important because in 1996, researchers at the National
Institutes of Health discovered that the small number of people who are missing
that gene appear immune to the human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV.

   The defect is "present in about 5 percent of the population originating from
Northern Europe," Dr. Haseltine explained. "There's speculation that a previous
viral epidemic was highly lethal and those who survived had this natural
variation that caused the defect in the CCR5. It's not widely distributed in
Asian or African populations."

   Dr. Haseltine hopes the patent could be used for research that will create
drugs to treat, cure and even prevent AIDS in the first place. The latter might
mean finding a therapy that healthy people could adopt to block transmission of
the virus.

   "We might get long, slow-acting-release forms of drugs, or genetically
engineered genes to create inhibitors," Dr. Haseltine said. "You could protect
people from this virus, same as a vaccine."

   Human Genome Sciences Inc. (www.hgsi.com) received patent 6,025,154.


   http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: William A. Haseltine, chief executive of Human Genome Sciences
Inc., which has patented a gene that may be useful in combating AIDS. (Ann
Grillo for The New York Times)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             749 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                      MARCH 6, 2000, MONDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. B1; BIOSCOPE

LENGTH: 1171 words

HEADLINE: A Thank You to the Volunteers Who Step Up for Clinical Trials;

Experimental trials offer last chance when other treatments fail

BYLINE: Tom Abate

BODY:
I remember the day my friend JoAnn told me she had breast cancer. She was
chopping carrots in her kitchen, when she mentioned it matter-of-factly,
brushing the carrots off the cutting board into the salad.

    That was years ago. Doctors treated her cancer aggressively and, thankfully,
it hasn't returned. My mother, mother-in-law and several close friends could
tell the same story.

    But not everyone discovers the disease in time for today's therapies to give
them a fighting chance.

    It is these people who make up the ranks of clinical trial volunteers. It is
unethical to withhold a proven medicine to test whether an experimental drug
might work better.

    So physicians must find patients who have already undergone unsuccessful
surgery, radiation and chemotherapy, and ask them to be test subjects, even
though the doctors cannot hold out much hope of a cure.

    It's a tough sell. But the volunteers I've spoken to are generally upbeat
about their decisions. "I really believe in this," said Nancy Schroeder, a
cancer trial volunteer living in Fresno. "When you're under a research program,
they monitor you closely. You really get top care."

    The National Cancer Institute has made clinical trials easy to find on the
Web at cancertrials.nci.nih.gov.

    More information can be found in a book by science writer Robert Finn,
"Cancer Clinical Trials: Experimental Treatments & How They Can Help You"
($14.95 softcover).

    But in truth, their participating in a trial is a gift to the rest of us. To
Nancy and the many people like her -- thanks!

   -- THIRD WORLD VACCINES: Pharmaceutical and biotech executives met President
Clinton last week and made a substantial down payment toward the goal of making
vaccines widely available in the poorest countries.

    Merck, American Home Products, SmithKline Beecham and Aventis Pharma all
pledged substantial donations of free medicines. Merck will donate $100 million
worth of its Hepatitis B vaccine. SmithKline said it will expand its malaria
vaccine research and renewed its pledge to donate $1 billion to help fight
elephantiasis, a parasitic disease that enlarges the arms, legs and breasts and
afflicts 120 million people in the Third World.

    Bay Area biotech executives Donald Francis of VaxGen and Sean Lance of
Chiron helped brief the president on the results of a recent workshop -- led by
Richard Feachem of the Institute for Global Health in San Francisco -- which
came up with proposals to stimulate vaccine development. (Bioscope, February
21).

    Some of these ideas have been incorporated into the Vaccines for the New
Millennium Act, introduced last week by San Francisco Rep. Nancy Pelosi. The new
bill updates similar legislation Pelosi introduced last year (Bioscope, April 5,
1999).

   -- THE QUIET GAME: Firms raising money on Wall Street are supposed to observe
a "quiet period" during which they refrain from statements that might be
construed as touting the stock.

    Companies interpret this requirement quite differently, as is evident by
watching two Bay Area biotech firms play the quiet game.

    First, realize that at the moment, biotech is so hot that all a company has
to do is whisper "genome" and Wall Street will shower it with money.

    Against this backdrop, I called Lou Lange, chief executive of CV
Therapeutics in Palo Alto late one Friday afternoon, to express interest in
profiling one of his drugs. Great, Lange said, call next week, and we'll get
going.

    But when I called back, public relations guy Chris Chai said the company
wasn't interested in talking, and when I asked him to explain the sudden change,
he promised that all would be clear in a few days.

    Sure enough, after CV Therapeutics announced plans to raise $175 million,
Chai called back to explain that company lawyers had told him to avoid any
publicity during the quiet period.

    At roughly the same time, Avigen Inc. of Alameda filed plans to sell 4
million additional shares. Avigen is conducting an early human trial of an
experimental gene therapy for hemophilia. Its goal is to restore at least some
blood clotting capacity to people who bleed uncontrollably.

    The last time I wrote about this was after a scientific meeting in December,
when Avigen revealed that the first three patients in its experiment had
produced some clotting chemicals -- without specifying exactly how much.

    Last week, the scientists working with Avigen published a scientific paper
with more details. Most press accounts glossed over the details, portraying the
experiment as a potential cure for hemophilia. Dow Jones put Avigen on its "hot
stocks to watch list."

   THE STOCK DID WHAT? I would think that when Avigen officials announced their
stock offering in February, they knew the scientific paper would give them some
timely publicity. (I phoned to check out this supposition but didn't get a call
back.) The stock jumped from $60 to $80 in the two days before the scientific
article appeared, and enjoyed a little bump after publication. Avigen lost six
points Friday, to close at $76.94.

    Not that Avigen violated any quiet period guidelines. There aren't any.

    "There are no specific rules on what people can say or when they can say
it," said Securities and Exchange Commission spokesman John Heine.

    How companies behave depends on common sense and the advice of their
lawyers, said Joe Grundfest, an expert on securities law at Stanford University.

    "Companies are permitted to go about their standard business in the standard
way," Grundfest said. "You don't stop announcing the results of research."

    Indeed, Avigen didn't even announce the results. That was done by the
university scientists conducting the study. This is the quiet period philosophy
of ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, who let Charlie McCarthy do his talking.

    One last point about the Avigen experiment that got lost in all the quiet --
just how much clotting factor did the patients produce?

    I didn't see that detail in the press release issued by Stanford, where some
of the experiments are being done. But Stanford professor Mark Kay, who
conducted some of the trials and holds stock in Avigen, told me one patient
produced almost 1 percent of the normal level. Another produced something less
than 1 percent, and the third was too tough to measure.

    The mere fact that any clotting factor was produced is noteworthy. But how
much is enough? In earlier briefings, Kay had told me something between 2.5
percent and 5 percent would be needed. Now, he says, observing these patients
makes him think that even a 1 percent change could make a dramatic difference in
the lives of hemophiliacs.

    The first three patients took a low dose of the gene therapy. The next three
patients will get three times as much. Will that boost the clotting factor
production threefold? We'll have to see.



   Look for BioScope every Monday in the Business section. Send your
bio-feedback to Tom Abate by e-mail, abate@sfgate.com; fax, (415) 543-2482; or
phone, (415) 777-6213.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             750 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         March 6, 2000 Monday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 552 words

HEADLINE: PROGNOSIS SEEMS GOOD FOR TEACHING HOSPITALS

BYLINE: By John Pope Staff writer

BODY:

   When for-profit chains began buying teaching hospitals in New Orleans and
elsewhere, there was great anxiety in some parts of the medical community: Would
the new owners' fixation on the bottom line let these institutions continue in
their traditional roles of teaching new doctors, treating the poor and
conducting research?

   The answer seems to be yes, according to a study published today that
examines Tulane University Hospital and two other recently sold academic
hospitals.

   The report is in the current issue of Health Policy, a peer-reviewed journal.
It was underwritten by a grant from the Commonwealth Fund, a New York City
philanthropic organization interested in health-care.

   The other institutions studied were St. Joseph's Hospital in Omaha, Neb., the
primary teaching hospital of Creighton University, and George Washington
University Hospital in Washington, D.C.

   Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corp. paid Tulane $132 million in 1995 for an 80
percent share of its 300-bed hospital.

   "We're working well with our partner," said Dr. Paul Whelton, Tulane's senior
vice president for the health sciences. "We have had a lot more money to invest
in our mission."

   To measure commitments to education and treating the poor, the study's
authors looked at federal allocations for treating senior citizens and paying
interns and residents.

   Since Columbia bought Tulane's hospital, the money the hospital has received
for postgraduate medical education has risen by 23 percent, researchers found,
and money to treat poor, elderly patients is up by 34 percent.

   For all three hospitals, the money for interns and residents rose by 39
percent, and reimbursement for treating poor senior citizens climbed 32 percent.

   Tulane and another hospital in the study declined to release figures on
uncompensated care, said Joel Weissman, one of the study's two authors.

   Tulane's money from Columbia helped the medical center wipe out debts, launch
a family-practice program and invest heavily in programs related to cancer,
organ transplantation and women's health, as well as centers for gene therapy
and infectious diseases, Whelton said.

   He and officials at the other two hospitals said the new owners have made no
attempt to influence curriculum, the authors said.

   "We detected no measurable adverse effects of change of ownership on the
(hospitals') social missions," they wrote. "These conclusions seem at variance
with conventional wisdom."

   "We wanted to see if anything negative was happening, and in this case, it
wasn't," said Weissman, a Harvard Medical School faculty member.

   Weissman said he and his colleague, Dr. David Blumenthal of Harvard Medical
School, had several explanations for the way things have worked out.

   The social mission is part of each hospital's duty, they wrote, and carries
potential benefits in money and image.

   Moreover, they said, each hospital was the first teaching institution its new
owner had bought, putting the corporations on their best behavior.

   "I don't know if it would be a jewel in their crown, but it certainly does
enhance the new owners' appearance," Weissman said.

   Also, the costs of research and postgraduate medical training are borne by
the federal government, the academic institution and other grants, not by
hospital owners, the article said.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             751 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      March 6, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: FINANCIAL; Pg. F18

LENGTH: 2112 words

HEADLINE: At a Loss for Laboratory Space; For Profit-Starved Biotechnology
Firms, Room to Grow in Montgomery County Can Be Scarce--and Prohibitively
Expensive

BYLINE: Dana Hedgpeth , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:



   Ken C. Carter's biotechnology company has outgrown its petri dish.

   He and the six scientists and lab technicians who make up Therapeutic
Genomics Inc. have been in their Rockville cubicles at the Maryland Technology
Development incubator for start-up companies barely a month, and they are
already tripping over each other. Carter said seven more employees will come on
board in the coming months, putting more pressure on the company's labs and
offices.

   Finding a larger space, however, may be as difficult as probing for the
genetic answers to disease that Carter wants to find. That's because the success
of the biotech corridor that has grown up along Interstate 270 in Montgomery
County has led to a serious shortage of office and lab space for the
fast-growing, venture capital-rich industry.

   And it's not ordinary office space these companies are looking for. Few
buildings can handle the specialized equipment and ventilation systems a biotech
firm needs. And outfitting a warehouse-style spot can run about $ 150 per square
foot--nearly six times the cost of refitting a traditional office building. Some
highly specialized labs can cost as much as $ 1,000 per square foot to outfit.

   County economic development officials say there are typically five to 10
companies vying for every space that comes on the market. Part of the local
attraction is a "herding instinct," one official said. Another is proximity to
the National Institutes of Health, which fund much federal medical research.

   "If we don't have the space, those that are trying to set up or trying to
expand will leave Montgomery County," said Lawrence Cunnick, president of Biocon
Inc. in Rockville and a director of the High Technology Council of Maryland. "If
they can't locate here where the core of the industry is, these are
entrepreneurs, they are going to find somewhere else to locate."

   A profitable niche market has been born as real estate companies, developers
and landlords have set up divisions dedicated to finding room for biotech firms.

   Robert Scheer, whose real estate company created a biotechnology services
group two years ago, said there are an estimated 5 million square feet of lab
space in the county, but another 1 million square feet are needed.

   With a dozen staff members, including a former scientist, devoted to helping
find that space, Scheer Partners has handled 22 of the 28 major bioscience
building transactions in Montgomery County in the past two years, he said.

   Alexandria Real Estate Equities Inc., of Pasadena, Calif., also works
extensively in biotech real estate. It owns nearly 4 million square feet of such
space nationwide--about 35 percent of it in Montgomery County, said Jim
Richardson, president of Alexandria.

   Local and state government is doing what it can to find space for these
companies, too. That's because 235 bioscience companies in Maryland generate
about 15,200 jobs--nearly half of them in Montgomery County, according to MdBio
Inc., a nonprofit corporation in Frederick that promotes biotech development in
the state. That translates into $ 3.3 billion in annual revenue for the
companies and millions in taxes for the state.

   State and local officials offer grant and loan packages to help attract and
keep those jobs. The state, for example, has spent about $ 40 million since 1992
in job incentive and tax credit programs and low-interest loans for expansion
and development for biotech firms, said Martha J. Connolly, who oversees such
programs for the Maryland Department of Business and Economic Development.

   Montgomery County has spent about $ 1 million since 1996 in grants and loans
to help attract and keep 15 biotech firms. "Life-science companies produce
high-quality jobs," said David W. Edgerley, the county's economic development
director. "They bring world attention. And it's critically important to build a
larger mass of engineers, scientists and researchers."

   Just last week, the state and Montgomery County ponied up $ 4 million to
attract a major Dutch genetics company to a new facility west of Germantown.

   Start-up entrepreneurs such as Carter's Therapeutic Genomics are anxious to
find space, while trying to be conservative at the same time. "You don't want to
put all your money in a building when you're in an early stage," he said.

   Take an estimated 40,000-square-foot space, for example. It can cost close to
$ 6 million just to furnish the interior of the building, said Bill Gaudreau, a
Baltimore architect who specializes in high-tech buildings.

   It costs $ 15,000 to install a large hood to keep specimens free of bacteria.
Most labs need at least five. Add at least half a million for chemically
resistant countertops, shelves and cabinets to store chemicals, beakers and
microscopes. Another $ 4 to $ 10 a square foot for heavy-duty flooring--that's
compared with $ 1 to $ 1.50 a square foot to lay tiles in an office.

   Add between $ 700,000 and $ 1 million to install equipment and wiring to run
3,000 amps of electricity through a modest-sized lab. (That's enough electricity
to power 40 houses.) Plus $ 3 million, at least, for specialized plumbing pipes,
walk-in refrigerators and boiler rooms, incubators and centrifuges, heating and
air-conditioning and sprinkler systems and backup generators. The rest includes
good lighting, heavy doors, insulated and cleanable walls and often stainless
steel sinks and drains.

   "It's not like plugging in a bunch of PCs in an office," said Scheer's Ken
Berkman. "It's mission-critical equipment."

   Most landlords are reluctant to invest in outfitting a building for a biotech
firm because the company, typically, has yet to make a profit.

   "You're taking a company that tells you it has great prospects with its drugs
and could go to the stratosphere in stock prices and have every pharmaceutical
company knocking on its door, but there's a good possibility it may fail," said
Rick Farren, vice president of Manekin LLC, a Baltimore-based contractor that
owns and works on labs in the I-270 corridor.

   GenVec, a company that has developed a gene therapy designed to induce new
blood vessel formation in human hearts, spent $ 7.3 million last year to turn a
43,000-square-foot building on West Watkins Mill Road in Gaithersburg near
MedImmune Inc.'s headquarters into its headquarters, with lab space for 85
employees.

   Manekin, GenVec's landlord, put in $ 2 million worth of work to prepare the
building, adding backup generators, temperature-controlled rooms, heavy-duty
electrical wiring, hoods and more than three miles of copper piping just for the
plumbing system. The state and GenVec's corporate collaborator, Warner-Lambert
Co., backed GenVec's loan with $ 5 million in bonds and the firm got a $ 125,000
grant from Montgomery County contingent on the company creating 53 jobs in the
next three years, said Jeff Church, the company's chief financial officer.

   "Inside is more than twice what it costs to build the outside," Farren said.
"We've got millions in the building and they haven't paid us any rent. You have
to have some serious risk appetite to do it." Manekin also built facilities for
Human Genome Sciences Inc. in Rockville and MedImmune in Gaithersburg.

   There are cheaper ways to do it. The cost for warehouse-style space in
Baltimore typically runs about 20 percent less than space in Montgomery County,
said real estate experts, architects and builders in the industry. But the I-270
corridor is the popular spot, its reputation burnished by success stories such
as MedImmune and Human Genome Sciences, which have gained widespread recognition
on Wall Street and in the industry. Companies also want to be close together so
they can attract talented scientists from neighboring NIH and each other and so
they can, in some cases, collaborate in research.

   "They've got a herding mentality," said Henry Bernstein, the county's
assistant economic development director, who oversees biotech companies' moves
and expansions. "There's lab space in downtown Baltimore, but there's an image
thing to deal with."

   Carter said he considered sites in Baltimore after not finding anything in
Montgomery County at first. But, he said, "I ruled it out pretty quickly."

   "All but one of my employees lives in Montgomery County," Carter said. "This
is where the action is. This is where the talent is."

   Carter, a former scientist at Human Genome Sciences, received $ 3 million in
December from Oxford Bioscience Corp., a venture capital company backed by Alan
G. Walton, who was the former head of gene mapping at Human Genome Sciences.
Carter said he is about to close a deal for a 10,000-square-foot space in
Rockville, but didn't want to "ruin" his chances by identifying it.

   When companies find their space and build on it, smaller start-ups look to
them for help. "I've had people knocking on my door, saying, 'You got any space
in there?' " said Delano W. Tucker Sr., director of facilities administration at
Life Technologies, one of the world's leading suppliers of chemicals and
products used by bioscientists.

   His company looked at 750 sites in Frederick County, Pennsylvania and
Northern Virginia before building its $ 50 million, 200,000-square-foot
headquarters for 450 employees two years ago in the Shady Grove Life Sciences
park. It will soon put in a specialty lab that will cost between $ 550 to $ 700
per square foot for the stainless steel equipment.

   To save money, the company put its 250,000-square-foot distribution and
manufacturing facility with 350 workers on five acres in Frederick County. "We
don't have enough room here and the labor costs there are cheaper," Tucker said.

   Losing companies to other regions worries county officials, fueling the
incentive movement. The state and Montgomery County offered Qiagen, a
fast-growing Dutch manufacturer of genetics research products, a $ 4 million
incentive package last week to build a $ 40 million, 190,000-square-foot
headquarters and manufacturing facility on Route 118 west of Germantown. The
company got $ 400,000 from a state training fund for its employees, $ 1.1
million from the county's Economic Development Fund and $ 2.5 million from the
state's Sunny Day Fund, which is designed to lure and keep large companies.

   In return, Qiagen agreed to create 300 jobs by 2004 and maintain them until
2009.

   Qiagen said it searched for land over the past year along the East Coast,
from North Carolina to Massachusetts. Its main criterion: a green field for a
building that will handle the specialized work of making products and tools used
in genetics-based research and diagnostics.

   Qiagen's 18 acres in Montgomery County off I-270 near Dawson Farm Road put it
close to NIH, one of its largest clients, said Michael W. Burgett, vice
president of North American operations for the company, in Valencia, Calif.

   Time is important for fast-moving biotech companies, which know they are in a
race with competitors to be the first to the market with a new drug.

   Digene Corp., a company that develops and markets DNA and RNA tests that
screen for diseases afflicting women, just moved its 140 employees from Silver
Spring and Beltsville to a brand new, 100,000-square-foot building worth an
estimated $ 20 million--after a three-year search.

   "Three years searching for space is forever in the life of an emerging
biotech company," said Charles M. Fleischman, president of Digene. "We've grown
at 40 to 50 percent a year, and on the one hand that's exciting, but it's
terrifying. You don't want to be in a situation where you fill your space as
soon as you get there."

   The new location is across from GenVec in the Bennington Corporate Center.
Digene plans to move its 50-employee manufacturing arm from Beltsville next
month.

   Growing fast both excites and worries Mark Zimmer, president and chief
executive officer of Claragen Inc., a company that is trying to find drugs to
treat premature babies with neonatal lung disease.

   Even though he has only six scientists and assistants working with him now at
a lab space in the University of Maryland at College Park's incubator, he has
tried off and on over the past year to find a larger spot.

   So far, no luck.

   "We decided to stay here," said Zimmer. "If you're expecting to grow, what's
too big for you now might be too small for you later. We did find a
20,000-square-foot facility, but we just didn't want to take on that kind of
commitment.

   "We're pretty jammed in, but we get by."



   Dana Hedgpeth writes about local business from The Post's Rockville bureau.

    Lab Space: Specialized and Costly (This graphic was not available)



GRAPHIC: Illustration, The Washington Post

LOAD-DATE: March 06, 2000


                             752 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                      March 6, 2000, Monday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1639 words

HEADLINE: Fund for Start-Up Firms Yields Big Payoff for Md.

BYLINE: Dana Hedgpeth , Washington Post Staff Writer

BODY:


   Like many other investors in today's overheated stock market, Richard C.
"Mike" Lewin has seen his investments hit it big---real big. He turned a $
750,000 stake in two start-up companies into $ 44 million in recent months.

   But Lewin won't be buying a Mercedes-Benz or a vacation villa, or taking the
Concorde to Paris for lunch. All of his profits, in fact, went straight to the
state of Maryland. After all, it was taxpayers' money in the first place.

   Lewin is one of the few venture capitalists on the public payroll. The state
set up its Enterprise Investment Fund, which has an annual $ 2.5 million budget,
in 1994 with the hope of attracting private venture capital and creating new
jobs.

   As secretary of the state's Department of Business and Economic Development
since 1998, former private investment banker Lewin oversees the fund and decided
when to cash in. "This is a windfall," he said of the recent sales of interests
in Visual Networks of Rockville and Gene Logic of Gaithersburg. "We went at this
to create jobs and we got an enormous profit. It's a bonus."

   The profits were reinvested in the fund and would be used to invest in other
start-up companies.

   States have long provided money and tax breaks to companies as an economic
development lure. Maryland has 20 job-creation and loan funds, but only one that
holds stock in companies. The state is also one of the few where government
officials pick and manage direct investments in companies. Virginia doles out
plenty of funds but doesn't take shares; neither does the District.

   Mark G. Heesen, president of the National Venture Capital Association in
Arlington, predicted the other states with similar funds will soon see big
payoffs, too. "This is a unique time where the market is doing really well. They
[Maryland officials] wouldn't have been able to do as well years ago. We're
still in a very bull market, and they made money."

   Robert Heard, president of the National Association of State Venture Funds,
an Oklahoma-based nonprofit that helps states set up such programs, said, "The
fact they've made two home runs from their investments is quite something."

   A few states have made large profits from their investments, but it usually
takes much longer, Heard said. "Maryland's a bit of an anomaly. It's a
remarkable success."

   The enterprise fund has invested about $ 11.25 million in 33 Maryland
companies. So far those firms have created about 600 jobs, according to Daniel
P. Healey, director of the state's investment financing group, which includes
the enterprise fund and two others.

   Not all the state's picks have been winners. One company has gone out of
business, another was taken over by a larger firm, and a third has left the
state--costing the fund $ 1.2 million of its seed money.

   It holds other interests now worth $ 10 million.

   The fund gives technology start-ups from $ 150,000 to $ 500,000, if they have
a sound business plan, a promising technology and three times as much backing
from private venture capitalists. In exchange, the company promises to stay in
the state for five years, and the state gets shares for its investment--no more
than 25 percent of the company.

   A six-member board hears about 10 presentations a month and funds six or
seven a year, Healey said.

   The state tries to keep free of any perceived conflict--for favoring some
companies--by staying out of any other state decisions on grants, loans or
regulatory issues, Healey added.

   Marc Schneebaum, who runs a Germantown-based medical device company and is a
member of the enterprise fund's advisory board, said: "This is no different than
what a typical venture-capital firm would do. The twist for us is that we always
looking at the opportunity for development in jobs."

   Maryland's success on the Visual Networks and Gene Logic deals stands out.
Typically, in the venture-capital industry, about a third of the companies
become winners, another third simply tread water and the rest lose money,
according to Jesse Reyes, director of Venture Economics, a New Jersey company
that studies capital markets.

   Connecticut, which has a quasi-state agency that manages its equity
investments, made about $ 21 million off 19 companies last year after four years
of operating at a deficit, said Pamela Hartley, director of business development
at Connecticut Innovations Inc. Massachusetts Technology Development Corp. in
Boston, another quasi-public entity, said it expects to make $ 35 million this
year when it sells off its shares in a telecommunications company and an
information technology firm.

   In Maryland, Visual Networks was one of the fund's first investments. The
advisory board---comprised of a real estate executive, a college dean of
engineering, investors and a lawyer appointed by Lewin---heard the founders'
sales pitch. The company had only a handful of people, but a compelling story.
They were going to locate failures on major computer networks.

   "We felt if there was going to be a revolution with the Internet, they were
essentially going to be the policemen of it," Healey said. "They weren't two
young people who came out of college with some idea. They were sophisticated.

   "We were swayed by them," he said. "They knew the business." The state cut
them a check for $ 250,000 to go along with another $ 1.2 million from venture
capitalists and other investors. "It was one of our firsts. We weren't so cocky
then," Healey said.

   Scott E. Stouffer, the company's president and chief executive officer, said,
"Getting that bit of money from Maryland was an important piece to encourage
some of our venture capitalists to go ahead and close their deals with us."

   Indeed, Visual Networks found its niche. It went from six employees to 150 in
Rockville. Its revenue jumped from $ 56 million in 1998, the year it went public
at $ 12.50 a share, to nearly $ 92 million last year.

   It reported a $ 9.6 million profit last year, compared with a $ 1.4 million
loss the year before. In the next few months Visual Networks is set to acquire a
New York-based technology company, adding another 30 jobs in Rockville.

   The state began selling its shares last March and sold the rest during a
market surge in July. The average price overall was $ 36.48 a share. The total
take was $ 27.5 million.

   Lewin, who worked for BT Alex. Brown Inc. of Baltimore for 11 years, scored
again for the state just last month, after a rapid run-up in the stock price of
Gene Logic.

   When the company's founders first made their speech in front of the board in
1996, the company was little more than a handful of scientists with an idea.
They also had one thing that impressed the investment board--the name Alan G.
Walton, known as the "godfather" of venture capital in biotech companies.

   Walton, one of the founders of Maryland's foremost biotechs, including
MedImmune Inc., Human Genome Sciences Inc. and Genetic Therapy Inc., told the
board he was going to help fund Gene Logic and asked the state to chip in. The
state ponied up half a million.

   Healey said: "Most of the time, we try to stop them [applicants] on the phone
if we think they're going to waste their postage and our time. This one had Alan
involved, and because of his track record we said we're in in a heartbeat."

   "They had a good-smell test about them," said John May, a venture capitalist
and member of the enterprise fund's advisory board. "We took the risk and it
paid off."

   Gene Logic moved from Connecticut to Columbia with 16 employees and no
revenues in 1996. It went public at $ 8 a share a year later, but its stock
price was stagnant.

   The company considered leaving the state two years ago. But it would have had
to pay the state back at the fair market value of its share. And a combined $
425,000 loan package from the county and the state got the firm to stay. It
turned an unused IBM building on Quince Orchard Road into its headquarters.

   Last year Gene Logic had 175 employees and $ 19 million in revenues, but
still hadn't reported a profit. Then late last year its stock price began to
take off, going from $ 6 in November to $ 119 last month.

   "There were eight days or so there where we were watching it hourly," Lewin
recalled, referring to the jump in Gene Logic's share price last month.

   Lewin gave the order to sell over four days in February, at prices between $
75 and $ 90 a share. The total take was $ 17.2 million.

   "We were excited and delighted with the way the stocks were acting," Lewin
recalled. "I don't think any investor, let alone a public investor, would be
disappointed" with the results.


   Staff writer Peter Behr contributed to this report.


   Major Investments


   Here is the current value of companies that Maryland's Enterprise Investment
Fund invested $ 500,000 each in:


   1995


   Osiris Therapeutics: $ 500,000

   Anthem Capital: $ 500,000

   CIP Capital: $ 1 million


   1996


   Gene Logic: $ 17.2 million (sold shares in mid-Feb. for this amount)

   MetaMorphix: $ 500,000


   1997


   Lion Pharmaceuticals (went out of business): 0


   1998


   Powerize.com*: $ 550,000


   1999


   Internet Cargo Services: $ 910,000

   The Technology Group: $ 500,000

   NewComm Net: $ 566,666 (sold shares in fall of '99 for this amount)

   2000


   Biosynexus: $ 500,000

   Advertising.com: $ 500,000


   The fund got a huge return recently on its investment in two companies:


   Gene Logic

   Initial 1996 investment: $ 500,000

   Value when sold (mid-Feb. 2000): $ 17.2 million


   Visual Networks

   Initial 1996 investment: $ 250,000

   Value when sold (July 1999): $ 27.5 million


   *Original investment was $ 550,000


   NOTE: Current value is as of Feb. 28, except for shares that have been sold,
as noted.


   SOURCE: State of Maryland, Bloomberg News



LOAD-DATE: March 06, 2000


                             753 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                          March 5, 2000, Sunday ,FINAL

SECTION: EDITORIAL ,3C

LENGTH: 735 words

HEADLINE: Removing 'deficiencies' in human research

BYLINE: Ruth Faden and Tom Beauchamp

BODY:

   THE HISTORY of the ethics of research involving human subjects is a history
of progress propelled by scandal.

    Perhaps it is too soon to tell whether the tragic death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger in September during a gene-therapy experiment at the University of
Pennsylvania will join the canon of notorious cases of failure to protect
subjects. It is not too soon, however, to use the impetus in public
consciousness riveted by this heartbreaking loss to take overdue steps to
improve protections for human subjects, especially in innovative areas such as
gene therapy.

    In October 1995, the Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments,
convened to investigate another scandal involving violations of human rights in
Cold War- era experiments, reported that it had found evidence of "serious
deficiencies in some parts of the current system for the protection of the
rights and interests of human subjects."

    In January 2000, this same phrase -- "serious deficiencies" -- was used by
the Food and Drug Administration to explain why it is halting all research
involving human subjects at the institute that conducted the experiment in which
Mr. Gelsinger died.

    It may not be surprising that serious deficiencies in the system of research
review have not been corrected in the past five years, but it is inexcusable.

    Despite some significant efforts, oversight of human subject research has
been going in the wrong direction. Offices at the FDA and the National
Institutes of Health responsible for monitoring the safety of human subjects
remain woefully understaffed and undervalued, despite climbing numbers of new
research projects. Research ethics committees that operate at the local
university level, many of whom labor diligently to protect the interests of
human subjects, are similarly overworked, underbudgeted and undervalued. Few
institutions have the resources to adequately monitor what happens to human
subjects after the paperwork has been reviewed and approved.

    In the Pennsylvania case, the facts that have emerged suggest that oversight
and monitoring of clinical trials are precisely where the ethical lapses have
occurred. Violations that allegedly were not caught in this case include
underreporting of adverse effects, underreporting of animal data, and
underreporting to government officials, as well as to potential subjects and
their families.

    It would be wrong to suggest that every research project involving human
subjects requires intensive prospective monitoring. Most human research is
straightforward and poses few real risks to subjects. But some research projects
cry out for heightened scrutiny -- for example, research in uncharted scientific
territory, research that carries substantial risk, research in which
investigators have financial interests (conflicts of interest, in some cases).

    We all have an interest in the advancement of medical science. Most of us
know someone whose hopes for the future are dependent on medical progress.
Increasingly, this progress is likely to be found in the critical frontiers of
genetic medicine.

    But a basic truth about medical progress must be faced. Progress entails
risk. In the early stages of a new field, these risks can be significant. Many
uncertainties and risks remain even after carefully planned laboratory analysis
and research with animals. This is precisely why research with human subjects is
performed.  The highest levels of uncertainty often attend the most inventive
and untested work.

    Some must bear these risks that science and society ultimately benefit. This
is the essence of the moral problem about human- subjects research. It is not
confined to gene-therapy trials or even to the more innovative areas of
medicine. The practical import is that we owe those who assume risk of harm for
our benefit a system of protections free of " serious deficiencies."

    Medical ethics and research ethics have long insisted that the safety
interests of patient-subjects and human volunteers must take priority over the
interests of science and society.

    This commitment is not easy to express or to instill in practice, but it
deserves more serious consideration than it has received.

    Ruth Faden is executive director of the Bioethics Institute at the Johns
Hopkins University. Tom Beauchamp is senior research scholar at the Kennedy
Institute of Ethics, Georgetown University.


LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000


                             754 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                              March 5, 2000 Sunday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1450 words

HEADLINE: Women shun test of cancer drugs

BYLINE: Kitta MacPherson, Star-Ledger Staff

BODY:

   Last May, some of the nation's top breast cancer specialists launched an
ambitious study to compare the effectiveness of two promising drugs in a
head-to-head contest rarely seen in clinical trials.

    Now, some of the same doctors are reporting an unanticipated and deeply
worrisome problem: They can't persuade enough women to volunteer as test
subjects.

    Of the 22,000 women needed to participate in the trial so scientists can
make a statistical case for which is the better drug, only about 3,500 have
volunteered.

    "The recruiting is going much more slowly than we thought it would," said
Deborah Capko, a breast surgeon at the Institute for Breast Cancer at the
Hackensack University Medical Center. Of 100 women she has interviewed since
last summer to become study volunteers, only six have signed on. She had been
hoping for 50 in the first year alone.

    Part of the problem is how the test would operate.

    Women who participate will take two pills daily. One of them will be either
tamoxifen or raloxifene, but the subject won't know which it will be. The other
pill will be a placebo.

    Many of the women who would fit the profile of the perfect volunteer -
middle-aged and at risk for breast cancer - are on hormone replacement therapy
and don't want to give it up to go on the trial, physicians say.

    Others are already being prescribed raloxifene for osteoporosis, and by some
doctors for cancer prevention, even though those benefits are far from proven.
Tamoxifen also is prescribed as a treatment after breast cancer is diagnosed,
and is FDA-approved for cancer prevention in high-risk women.

    Still others are afraid of tamoxifen's side effects, which could be as mild
as nausea and as serious as uterine cancer, although that risk is minimal
compared with the statistically higher chances of developing breast cancer.

    Much is at stake in the success or failure of the nationwide STAR trial,
short for the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene, one of the largest breast
cancer prevention studies ever undertaken.

    Eight months in, the financial investment already is substantial. Eli Lilly
and Company of Indianapolis, the maker of raloxifene, has contributed $36
million to the trial to defray recruitment costs. Lilly and AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals of Wilmington, Del., which manufactures tamoxifen, are spending
millions more in providing drugs for free. The Pittsburgh organization managing
the study, known as the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, is
funded mostly by the federal National Cancer Institute.

    Medically speaking, hopes have been high that the study would make the dream
of preventing cancer in all postmenopausal women a reality by proving what is
the best drug available. Breast cancer is still the most common type of cancer
in North American women. It is a leading cause of cancer death, second only to
lung cancer.

    Lawrence Wickerman, associate chairman of the national trial center, insists
the study isn't in danger of folding. Angela Sekston, a Lilly spokeswoman, said
her firm was satisfied with the progress of the trial, based on reports from
company physicians and data provided from the national trial center in
Pittsburgh.

    Mary Lynn Carver, a spokeswoman for AstraZeneca, said her firm's main
participation in the trial was in contributing their drug, Tamoxifen, for free.
As for questions of attracting patients to the trial, she said, "That would be a
matter of science best left up to the researchers running the trial. Let the
scientists determine the science."

    Persuading women to join the trial has become "indeed a challenge,"
Wickerman said, but he described the current enrollment figures as "very
impressive."

    To the nurses and physicians on the front lines of the study, Wickerman's
position is a real head- scratcher.

    Fred and Alice Cohen, the father-daughter oncology team managing the study
at Newark-Beth Israel Medical Center in Newark, report there are 10 patients
currently in the trial. They would like to have 40. The same goes for medical
officials at the Cancer Institute of New Jersey in New Brunswick who report that
the 14 patients enrolled in the trial falls far shy of the 50 they need to
recruit by the summer. A nationwide problem Wickerman suggested the recruiting
troubles might be limited to New Jersey - a contention challenged by officials
here and at hospitals across the country.

    "It clearly is not just a problem in this area," said Judy Much, the nurse
practitioner managing the trial at the New Brunswick facility. "All over the
country, people are saying the same thing."

    Medical officers at the Comprehensive Cancer Institute in Huntsville say
they are the only one of three sites in Alabama to have brought any patients
into the study. As of last weekend, they had enrolled two patients. They would
like to have 150.

    Trial coordinators at the Mesa Cancer Resource Network in Arizona have taken
to displaying public service announcement film slides on local movie theater
screens and airing 15-second radio spots to attract interest in the study. Of 47
women they interviewed for the study, two have enrolled.

    "It does not seem to have occurred to anyone, at least initially, that the
study would not have been well-received," said Mike Whiting, executive director
of the Mesa network, composed of eight hospitals in the greater Phoenix area.

    Physicians are worried that recent negative publicity about drug studies -
particularly a report about a teenager's death in a gene-therapy trial - may be
hindering volunteers. Mostly, cancer specialists believe that women are confused
by all the competing factors they must weigh before taking steps that will
affect their well-being.

    Simply put, asking healthy women to ingest a drug daily because of a
theoretical possibility of developing breast cancer is a harder sell than
medical officers expected. Still, the study's scientific significance can't be
overstated.

    "It's an excellent study; it's so exciting," said Alice Cohen of Newark-Beth
Israel. "We are looking for answers that are so important to have."

    Women who participate in the trial must be postmenopausal, at least 35, and
have a higher risk of developing breast cancer than the general population, due
to such factors as age, family history of breast cancer, personal medical
history, age at first menstrual period and age at first live birth.

    Once a woman chooses to participate, she is randomly picked to be given
either tamoxifen or raloxifene. She won't know which she is taking and neither
will her physician - she swallows two pills a day. One of them is a placebo.

    Tamoxifen blocks the ability of estrogen to stimulate the proliferation of
breast cells. When cells turn cancerous, estrogen still prods them to grow. In
use for breast cancer treatment since the 1970s, tamoxifen was conclusively
shown to reduce chances of developing breast cancer by about half in a national
trial that concluded in 1998.

    Raloxifene, a drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 1997 for
preventing osteoporosis in postmenopausal women, appears to function like
estrogen in bone, acting to maintain bone strength and increase bone density. In
addition, it resembles estrogen in its ability to lower cholesterol levels,
decreasing the risk of heart disease.

    Information on the long-term risks and benefits of raloxifene is limited
compared with tamoxifen. Preliminary evidence suggests that raloxifene may turn
out to be helpful in preventing cancer.

    Despite recruitment difficulties, physicians who believe in the study's
potential are continuing to reach out.

    Deborah Capko and Kathy Kirn, a nurse who with Capko is managing the study
at the Hackensack medical center, recently gathered 11 women in a mauve
conference room in an information session for prospective volunteers.

    Drinking decaf coffee and picking at pieces of chopped fruit, the group
spent 90 minutes charting the intricate terrain of the study and the choices
they had to make for themselves.

    Though frank and happy to give detailed answers to questions, the pair
didn't plead or proselytize, tapping into altruistic instincts. "You just can't
do that," Capko said. "It's a personal decision."

    At least one woman who has already agreed to participate in the national
study would agree.

   Pat Bishop, a nurse in the oncology unit at Newark-Beth Israel, has been
taking her two unidentified pills at bedtime each day since October. She is
familiar with the ravages of cancer. With that knowledge and two daughters of
her own, she said her choice was easy.

    "I don't think about statistics, I think about individuals, about people,"
the 57-year-old Mendham resident said. "And if this helps save one life, then
it's worth it to me."

GRAPHIC: 1. Nurse Kathleen Kim, left, and surgeon Deborah Capko review paperwork
at Hackensack University Medical Center. 2. Physician Frederick Cohen with Pat
Bishop, a nurse in the oncology unit at Newark-Beth Israel who has been taking
part in the drug trial since October.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             755 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                         March 4, 2000, Saturday ,FINAL

SECTION: TELEGRAPH ,2A National Digest

LENGTH: 936 words

SOURCE: From wire reports

BODY:

   In Washington

    FDA accuses scientist of violating rules in fatal gene experiment

    The Food and Drug Administration accused a University of Pennsylvania
researcher yesterday of violating safety regulations in a gene therapy
experiment in which a patient died.

    In a stern warning letter, the FDA said that Dr. James M. Wilson of the
University of Pennsylvania "violated regulations governing the proper conduct of
clinical studies" in a series of gene therapy experiments designed to correct a
liver disease.

    A warning letter is an FDA procedure that notifies a researcher or
institution of what the agency considers to be violations of federal law. It
means that unless the offending actions are corrected, the agency can take
enforcement action without further notice.

    $40 billion aviation bill hits a snag in Senate

    Last-minute objections from the Senate have again thwarted an agreement,
months in the making, on a three-year, $40 billion aviation bill that includes a
raise in passenger taxes, more money for small airports and more flights out of
several busy airports.

    Republican Sen. Ted Stevens of Alaska accused the House of altering the
compromise to add a new parliamentary barrier to funding aviation programs at
levels below what the Aviation Trust Fund takes in every year.

    The House has given its approval to the huge bill, and House sources said
the language that Stevens objected to had been carefully worked out among
congressional leaders.

    In the Nation

    Court documents detail suspect's hate messages

    WILKINSBURG, Pa. -- The writings of Ronald Taylor, the black man accused in
a deadly shooting rampage in suburban Pittsburgh, were filled with hatred -- for
whites, Jews, Asians and police, investigators say.

    Taylor, 39, was arraigned yesterday on a third count of criminal homicide
after a third victim died.

    Court documents were released detailing the hate messages that police say
they found in his apartment.

    INS official is indicted in alleged passing of secrets

    MIAMI -- A U.S. immigration official was indicted yesterday on charges of
handing over U.S. secrets to a Cuban citizen and lying about contacts with Cuban
government officials.

    Mariano Faget, a Cuban-born supervisor in the Miami office of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, has been jailed without bond since his
high-profile arrest Feb. 17.

    Faget was charged with communicating national defense secrets, converting
classified information to his own use and making false statements.

    Bill on abandoned newborns passes easily in Ga. House

    ATLANTA -- Trying to give troubled mothers an alternative to dumping their
babies in trash bins and bathroom stalls, the Georgia House voted 153-15
yesterday to allow women to leave newborns at a hospital.

    If the bill passes the Senate and is signed into law, parents of newborns
would be exempt from prosecution for abandonment or child cruelty if they leave
a baby with a hospital staff member. The baby could be no more than a week old.
Parents could still be prosecuted if the infant has been abused.

    The bill's sponsors said it would save infants who would otherwise be left
to die.

    U.S. appeals court orders convicted killer held

    HOUSTON -- A U.S. appeals court ordered a Texas death row inmate whose
lawyer slept through his trial to stay in prison yesterday, overturning a
federal judge's ruling that the convicted killer should be released.

    The 5th Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in New Orleans ruled that Calvin
Burdine, 46, must remain behind bars until it decides whether he gets a new
trial for the 1983 murder that resulted in his receiving a death sentence.

    U.S. District Judge David Hittner had ruled Wednesday that Burdine, who has
been on death row for 16 years, should be freed within five days because the
Texas attorney general's office missed a deadline in its appeal of an earlier
decision granting a retrial.

    Prosecutors seek death in fatal dragging of child

    KANSAS CITY, Mo. -- Prosecutors said yesterday that they will seek the death
penalty for a man accused in the death a 6-year-old boy who was dragged along a
highway as his mother's vehicle was stolen.

    Prosecutor Robert Beaird's announcement came after a grand jury's decision
to upgrade charges against Kim Davis, 34, from second-degree murder to first-
degree murder.

    Jake Robel was dragged Feb. 22 for nearly five miles at speeds of up to 80
mph before three vehicles blocked the car at a stoplight.

    Jury foreman who accepted bribe gets 17 1/2 years

    MIAMI -- The jury foreman in one of Florida's most ignominious drug trials
was sentenced yesterday to 17 1/2 years in prison for accepting a $500,000 bribe
to acquit two alleged "kings of cocaine."

    U.S. District Judge James King also ordered former jury foreman Miguel Moya
to serve three years of supervised release upon finishing his sentence.

    The sentence was close to the maximum 20 years Moya had faced. Assistant
U.S. Attorney Guy Lewis said the long sentence was appropriate because "jury
tampering and obstruction of justice cuts at the very heart of our judicial
system."

    DWI conviction costs beauty queen her crown

    LITTLE ROCK, Ark. -- A woman who won Miss Northeast Arkansas on an
anti-drunken driving platform was convicted of driving under the influence. She
surrendered her crown yesterday.

    Bethany Tosh, 21, of Jonesboro, was found guilty Thursday. She was ordered
to pay $800 and perform 40 hours of public service for the Dec. 23 incident.

    "I guess ironic would be a good way to say it," Jonesboro City Attorney
Phillip Crego said.


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             756 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     March 4, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Metro; Part B; Page 7; Editorial Writers Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

HEADLINE: GENE PATENT REFORM VITAL;
 THE PATENT OFFICE'S CURRENT APPROACH THREATENS TO IMPEDE RESEARCH. GENE
DISCOVERIES MUST BE SHARED FOR THE SAKE OF SOCIETY.

BODY:


   In a few months scientists will have completed a rough first draft of the
complete human genome, the 60,000 to 80,000 strings of chemical codes that
determine who we are, from brown hair to a predisposition to cancer.

   Gene research offers promise for curing major diseases like AIDS and cancer,
but progress is threatened by the increasingly aggressive quest of biotechnology
entrepreneurs to patent genes as their structures are unlocked. A patent holder
can claim exclusive right to use of the gene.

   Patents once went only to those who produced inventions that significantly
advanced the state of an art. The first human gene patents were awarded nearly
two decades ago to companies and research centers that showed how a gene could
be used to produce a specific valuable drug product such as human growth hormone
or insulin. Since then, however, the patent office has come to issue patents far
more broadly. For example, it has given hundreds of patents to biotech firms
that did little more than use computers to decode the chemical sequences that
make up the genome.

   In handing out gene patents this way, the federal government risks impeding
valuable research, allowing companies to hide gene sequences as though they were
trade secrets and discouraging scientists from understanding and experimenting
with genes patented by someone else.

   On Wednesday, the patent office outlined what it said were reforms aimed at
awarding patents less broadly. The reforms, however, don't address key problems.

   One problem is that when patent owners withhold information about human genes
from perceived competitors, they prevent the sharing of knowledge that's
essential to scientific progress. Another is that while future drugs are likely
to work by simultaneously affecting the behavior of many genes, current patent
laws essentially prohibit drug researchers from experimenting with genes they
don't own. Gene therapies may one day produce miracle cures. But researchers who
are permitted to study only a limited number of genes will be severely hampered
because diseases often arise from complex interactions between multiple genes
and the environment.

   One worthy suggestion for reform comes from the University of Michigan's
Rebecca Eisenberg, a legal scholar. She says that rather than handing out broad
gene ownership patents that allow companies to hide their gene discoveries from
others, the patent office could draw up "cross-licensing arrangements." These
arrangements would legally ensure that companies got a share of profits whenever
the gene they helped discover was used in a mass-market drug. At the same time,
cross-licensing would guarantee that all scientists could experiment with a
given gene without fearing reprisal from a company claiming ownership.

   Last month, President Clinton declared that the human genome should be
readily accessible to everyone. He should direct the patent office to develop
approaches that encourage rather than impede science. This includes reclaiming
the original intent of patents, which should balance reward to inventors with
benefit to science and the public. Biotechnology companies have every right to a
share of profits gained when others market drugs based on genes they helped
discover. But genes are natural creations and everyone should have equal access
to them.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000


                             757 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Times Mirror Company
                               Los Angeles Times



                     March 4, 2000, Saturday, Home Edition

SECTION: Part A; Page 15; National Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

HEADLINE: NATION IN BRIEF / WASHINGTON, D.C.;
 FDA: GENE LEADER VIOLATED RULES

BYLINE: From Times Wire Reports

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration accused a University of Pennsylvania
researcher of violating safety regulations in a gene therapy experiment in which
a patient died. In a stern warning letter, the FDA said that Dr. James M. Wilson
of the University of Pennsylvania "violated regulations governing the proper
conduct of clinical studies" in a series of gene therapy experiments designed to
correct a liver disease. Wilson headed a gene therapy experimental study that
was halted after the death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, the first
patient known to have died as a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000


                             758 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                        MARCH 4, 2000 Saturday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 776 words

HEADLINE: FDA REJECTS PENN'S PLEA TO RESTART GENE TRIALS A HARSH LETTER
RESPONDED TO THE CENTER'S DEFENSE OF ITS WORK AFTER A TEEN DIED. THE FDA SAID
RULES WERE IGNORED.

BYLINE: Frederick Cusick, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Federal regulators yesterday rejected the University of Pennsylvania's
attempt to lift a freeze on clinical trials at its prestigious Institute of
Human Gene Therapy.

   The harsh response came in what is known as a "warning letter" from the Food
and Drug Administration - the final step before the agency can take legal
action.

   While not using the word lie, the FDA letter came close to that. It accused
the Penn scientists of numerous inaccuracies, misrepresentations of fact, and
incomplete reporting of an animal experiment.

   The letter, sent to James M. Wilson, the institute's director, kept in place
the FDA's January ban on gene-therapy trials at Penn and also faulted the
university for giving inadequate responses to the agency's earlier critique. It
gave the institute 15 business days to respond.

   For now, research on disorders ranging from cancer to muscular dystrophy to
cystic fibrosis will remain on hold. The institute was the largest gene-therapy
research center in the country until the FDA stopped all its trials on Jan. 21.

   The government enforcement action was touched off by the Sept. 17 death of
Jesse Gelsinger, an 18-year-old Arizona teenager, four days after being given an
experimental gene drug.

   In a decade of gene-therapy research involving 4,000 Americans in various
centers around the country, Gelsinger is thought to be the first person to have
died directly as a result of the therapy. Although other patients had died, most
were very sick and their deaths were the result of the condition for which they
were being treated.

   Gelsinger's death prompted Penn to immediately shut down the safety trial in
which he had been involved. In January, following an extensive investigation of
the Penn institute's procedures and safeguards, the FDA ordered Penn to stop all
gene-therapy tests run by the institute.

   The institute responded to the FDA's accusations with a detailed rebuttal on
Feb. 14. Its main point was that, despite some lapses in procedures and research
protocol, there was no evidence that these had contributed to Gelsinger's death.

   In a statement last night, Penn said that neither the university nor Wilson -
who, in addition to heading the institute, was the leader of the study in which
Gelsinger died - had had time to carefully review the warning letter. However,
the university said that it took the FDA's charges "extremely seriously."

   "We are disappointed that the FDA appears to discount a number of the
responses to those charges filed by the [Institute of Human Gene Therapy] three
weeks ago," the university said.

   The violations cited by the FDA in January and repeated for the most part in
yesterday's warning letter included recruiting study subjects who may have been
too sick to participate; underreporting side effects in patients treated earlier
in the trial; and keeping the FDA in the dark about important decisions.

   Gelsinger was the 18th patient to be treated in this trial. The study was
designed to test the safety of a gene therapy that it was hoped could eventually
correct ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) deficiency. OTC is an inherited disease
in which the liver is unable to rid the body of ammonia, a byproduct of
metabolism.

   Gelsinger died four days after institute scientists infused trillions of
genetically altered viruses into his liver in an effort to give him the gene he
lacked.

   In the warning letter, the FDA rejected the institute's effort to minimize
the fact that it had not notified the agency about a test with monkeys that were
given a similar gene-therapy treatment a year before Gelsinger. The monkeys
suffered some of the same symptoms as the Arizona teenager.

   "As sponsor, you failed to notify FDA in a written . . . safety report of the
findings of tests with laboratory animals that suggest a significant risk for
human subjects," the agency said.

   The FDA said that "the fact that the subject [Gelsinger] subsequently
developed DIC" - a clotting disorder that also affected the monkeys - "confirms
that, despite your assertion to the contrary, the toxicity experienced by the
monkeys did have significant implications for the safety of the [human] study.
You had an affirmative obligation to notify the FDA about these results so they
could be evaluated."

   The FDA has come under extraordinary scrutiny in the wake of Gelsinger's
death. This has lead to a general tightening of the agency's oversight
functions.

   In addition to the Penn institute, the FDA has shut down gene-therapy test
programs in other parts of the country.

   * This story contains information from the Washington Post and the Associated
Press.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             759 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 4, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-6

LENGTH: 157 words

HEADLINE: FDA: Gene therapy leader broke rules

BYLINE: Associated Press

BODY:
 WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration accused a University of
Pennsylvania researcher yesterday of violating safety regulations in a gene
therapy experiment in which a patient died.

   In a stern warning letter, the FDA said that Dr. James M. Wilson of the
University of Pennsylvania "violated regulations governing the proper conduct of
clinical studies" in a series of gene therapy experiments designed to correct a
liver disease.

   Wilson headed a gene therapy experimental study that was halted after the
death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz. The teen-ager is the first
patient known to have died as a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

   In its letter, the FDA ordered Wilson and the University of Pennsylvania's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy to continue cessation of all current human
experimental drug trials and not to apply for new studies until "corrective
actions have been implemented."


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             760 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

                March 4, 2000, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1450 words

HEADLINE: NATION & WORLD BRIEFS

BYLINE: From News Services

BODY:


NATION

HUNTSVILLE, Ala.

Parts for space station are mistakenly discarded

   Boeing Co. workers unsuccessfully combed a Huntsville landfill looking for
two mistakenly discarded parts of the international space station valued at $
750,000.

   The nitrogen and oxygen tanks used by astronauts were never found despite a
"pretty intense search," said Boeing spokesman Jim Keller. The tanks apparently
were sent to the landfill last month after they had been moved outside a
building, still in their 5-by-5-foot wooden crates, to make room at Boeing's
Huntsville plant, officials said Thursday.

   "Unfortunately, the crates were not moved back into the building and, as a
result, they have been mistakenly discarded," Keller said. Boeing is building
most of the major U.S. components of the space station at NASA's Marshall Space
Flight Center in Huntsville. Spares have already been installed.

SEATTLE

Trial of explosives case is moved to Los Angeles

   The trial of Ahmed Ressam, an Algerian accused of bringing explosive
materials into the country from Canada, was moved Friday from Seattle to Los
Angeles because of publicity over the case.

   Attorneys for Ressam, 32, had argued that a fair trial in Seattle would be
impossible because of "pervasive and ongoing" publicity. Prosecutors argued that
none of the news coverage of Ressam had reported pejoratively about his
background.

   U.S. District Judge John Coughenour granted the defense request, and the
trial is scheduled to begin July 10 in Los Angeles, said Harold Malkin, a
spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office. Ressam was arrested Dec. 14 for
allegedly crossing from Victoria, British Columbia, to Washington state with
explosives and timing devices in his rental car.

WILKINSBURG, Pa.

Shooting suspect's writings contain messages of hate

   The writings of Ronald Taylor, the black man accused in a deadly shooting
rampage in suburban Pittsburgh, were filled with hate - hate for whites, Jews,
Asians and police, investigators say.

   Taylor, 39, was arraigned Friday on a third count of criminal homicide after
a third victim died. Court documents were released detailing the hate messages
that police say they found in his apartment. One paper called "The Satan List"
contained the names of businesses referred to as "targets," police said in court
papers.

   On Wednesday, Taylor - who acknowledged to a judge that he has a history of
mental illness - apparently became enraged over work being done at his
apartment. Authorities said he shot one of the men, killing him, set the
apartment on fire and walked to two fast-food restaurants, where he shot four
others. In all, three people were killed and two wounded. All five victims were
white.

LOS ANGELES

Police chief disbands elite units cited in scandal

   The police department said Friday that all of its CRASH anti-gang units will
be disbanded in the aftermath of a corruption scandal involving one of the elite
squads.

   Chief Bernard Parks ordered that the units be deactivated by March 12 and
that the officers return to patrol duties.

   Allegations spiraling out of the Rampart Division's Community Resources
Against Street Hoodlums - or CRASH - have painted a picture of rogue officers
operating like a gang themselves, beating, framing and even shooting suspects.

   Since the scandal broke last fall, at least 20 officers have been relieved of
duty, and 40 convictions have been overturned. Dozens of other criminal cases
are under investigation.

WASHINGTON

Leader of fatal experiment violated rules, FDA says

   The Food and Drug Administration accused a University of Pennsylvania
researcher Friday of violating safety regulations in a gene therapy experiment
in which a patient died.

   In a stern warning letter, the FDA said that Dr. James M. Wilson of the
University of Pennsylvania "violated regulations governing the proper conduct of
clinical studies" in a series of gene therapy experiments designed to correct a
liver disease.

   Wilson headed an experimental gene therapy study that was halted after the
death of 18-year-old Jesse Gelsinger of Tucson, Ariz. The teen-ager is the first
patient known to have died as a direct result of a gene therapy experiment.

HENDERSON, Nev.

Two guards are killed in armored car heist

   Masked gunmen with assault rifles ambushed and killed two armored car guards
in a strip mall before escaping with three bags of money Friday.

   At least three men were involved in the heist. Police Capt. Richard Perkins
said the robbers had arrived at the mall to wait for the armored car guards
about 2 1/2 hours earlier.

LITTLETON, Colo.

Two $ 250,000 gifts go toward Columbine library

   Two Denver-area residents have each donated $ 250,000 to help build a new
library at Columbine High School.

   Relatives of survivors and victims of the massacre want the old library,
where several students were killed in April, closed forever and a new library
built nearby.

   Bob Sturm, son of billionaire Donald Sturm, matched an earlier donation by
Sharon Magness this week. Magness is the widow of Denver cable pioneer Bob
Magness. The two donations bring the money raised so far to $ 1,128,562.
Organizers say $ 3.2 million is needed.

   Columbine seniors Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold killed 12 students and a
teacher, and wounded 23 others at the school, before taking their own lives
April 20.

WORLD

ZIMBABWE

Squatters ignore orders to leave invaded farms

   Former guerrillas on Friday mostly ignored orders to leave white-owned farms
they have invaded after the president said the government would not intervene to
drive them out.

   President Robert Mugabe contradicted his police minister by saying the
government would not move against the squatters, who he said were engaged in
"peaceful and lawful demonstrations" in support of demands for white-owned land.

   Over the past week, former guerrillas and their families, tired of waiting
for the government to buy white-owned land and distribute it to poor black
farmers, have taken over some 70 homesteads.

NETHERLANDS

Croat general receives 45 years for war crimes

   U.N. judges sentenced a Croat general on Friday to 45 years in prison for
atrocities committed by his soldiers during the Bosnian war.

   The verdict against Gen. Tihomir Blaskic was the Yugoslav tribunal's harshest
punishment yet.

   Blaskic, who commanded Bosnian Croat militia during the 1992-95 war, was
found guilty of war crimes, crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the
1949 Geneva Conventions on the protection of noncombatants.

   He was the 14th suspect convicted at the tribunal but the first top military
commander. Since its establishment in 1993, the U.N. court has handed down
sentences against suspects from all sides of the Bosnian war.

   The three-judge panel found Blaskic responsible for ordering an "ethnic
cleansing" campaign against Muslim villages that left hundreds of Muslims dead.

SUDAN

Bombing of relief group's hospital kills two people

   Two people were killed and about a dozen were injured when a Sudanese
government aircraft bombed a hospital compound in a rebel-held town in southern
Sudan, a U.S.-based relief agency said Friday.

   Andrew Kinyanjui, Sudan logistics coordinator for the Nairobi office of
Samaritan's Purse, said the aircraft dropped bombs Wednesday on the agency's
hospital in Lui, 85 miles northwest of Juba, the largest town in southern Sudan
still in government hands. He said 11 of the 12 bombs exploded at or near the
hospital.

   The attack took place on the day the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army set
as the deadline for private aid agencies to sign a memorandum that would force
them to grant increased rebel control over aid distribution or cease operations
in rebel-controlled southern Sudan. Eleven international agencies refused to
sign and pulled out their staffs.

HAITI

Elections are postponed for third time in 4 months

   Haiti has postponed legislative and local elections for a third time in four
months, citing voter registration problems, election officials said Friday.

   The country's electoral body announced the postponement but did not give a
new date for the elections, which had been scheduled for March 19, with a
run-off vote on April 30.

   The postponement was the latest hitch in efforts to hold the first elections
in Haiti in three years. Voter registration had been meant to be completed by
Friday, but that was delayed for two weeks.

   Elections were originally due to take place Nov. 28, then postponed to Dec.
19. The elections are to fill 10,000 empty elected posts nationwide.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO Photo by THE ASSOCIATED PRESS - Officials examine the wreckage of
a television news helicopter that crashed Friday into a small traffic circle in
a residential neighborhood in southwest Miami-Dade County. The pilot and
cameraman were killed. No injuries were reported on the ground.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000


                             761 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                        March 4, 2000 Saturday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 367 words

HEADLINE: FDA: LEADER OF FATAL GENE TEST VIOLATED RULES;
PENN'S EXPERIMENTS BANNED INDEFINITELY

BYLINE: By Rick Weiss and Deborah Nelson The Washington Post

DATELINE: WASHINGTON

BODY:

   Federal regulators Friday issued a final, 20-page litany of research
violations against the director of the University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy
program and indefinitely extended a ban on human gene experimentation there.

   The letter rejected point by point a series of defenses proffered by James
Wilson, a leading gene scientist and director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy, who led an experiment that killed a Tucson teen-ager in September.

   "I consider this to be a sponsor with problems adhering to regulations with
the FDA," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research.

   The action represents the latest setback for one of the nation's
highest-profile gene therapy research centers. The FDA suspended the fatal
experiment in the fall, then halted the rest of the institute's human trials in
January, after an investigation uncovered evidence of numerous violations of
federal patient safety rules.

   "We are disappointed that the FDA appears to discount a number of the
responses to those charges filed by IHGT (Institute for Human Gene Therapy)
three weeks ago," the university said.

   Wilson and his team initially contended that they committed no serious
mistakes or violations in running the experiment and that any lapses were
administrative oversights that did not jeopardize patient safety. In a formal
response to FDA charges last month, Penn officials continued to contest some
allegations but acknowledged others and promised to tighten compliance at the
institute by hiring an independent monitor and making other changes.

   FDA officials said they want a more detailed plan from Penn before deciding
whether to remove or modify the ban on experiments.

   The violations include the research team's decision to treat Jesse Gelsinger,
the teen who died, when he was too sick to meet the study's entry criteria; the
failure to halt the study as required when several patients preceding him
suffered serious side effects, and to report the problems to the FDA; and the
failure to disclose serious side effects, including deaths, suffered by monkeys
given the same genetically engineered virus Wilson used in the fatal experiment.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000


                             762 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 4, 2000, Saturday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A04

LENGTH: 745 words

HEADLINE: FDA Lists Violations by Gene Therapy Director at U-Penn.

BYLINE: Rick Weiss; Deborah Nelson, Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   Federal regulators yesterday issued a final, 20-page listing of research
violations by the director of the University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy
program and indefinitely extended a ban on all human gene experimentation there.

   The letter rejected point by point a series of defenses proffered by James
Wilson, a leading gene scientist and director of Penn's Institute for Human Gene
Therapy, who led a controversial experiment that killed a Tucson teenager in
September.

   "I consider this to be a sponsor with problems adhering to regulations with
the FDA," said Kathryn Zoon, director of the Center for Biologics Evaluation and
Research, a branch of the Food and Drug Administration.

   The action represents the latest setback for one of the nation's highest
profile gene therapy research centers. The FDA suspended the fatal experiment
last fall, then halted the rest of the institute's human trials in January,
after an investigation uncovered evidence of numerous violations of federal
patient safety rules.

   "We are disappointed that the FDA appears to discount a number of the
responses to those charges filed by" the Institute for Human Gene Therapy, the
university said in a statement yesterday.

   Wilson and his team initially contended that they had committed no serious
mistakes or violations in running the experiment and that any lapses were
administrative oversights that did not jeopardize patient safety.

   In a formal response to FDA charges last month, Penn officials continued to
contest some allegations. But they acknowledged the validity of others and
promised to tighten compliance at the institute by hiring an independent monitor
and making other changes.

   FDA officials said they want a more detailed plan from Penn about how and
when it intends to address the violations before the agency decides whether to
remove or modify the ban on human experiments.

   Moreover, yesterday's letter relates only to Wilson's role as administrative
overseer of the institute's research program. The letter says future
correspondence will assess Wilson's actions while directly conducting clinical
experiments.

   The violations cited in the letter include the research team's decision to
treat Jesse Gelsinger, the teenager who died. The letter said Gelsinger, 18, was
too sick to participate in Penn's study of an experimental treatment for a rare
liver disorder. The letter also criticized the team's failure to halt the study,
as required, when several patients preceding him suffered serious side effects,
and to report the problems to the FDA; and the failure to disclose serious side
effects, including deaths, suffered by monkeys given the same genetically
engineered virus Wilson used in the fatal experiment.

   In particular, Penn had argued that those animal side effects, including a
clotting disorder known as DIC, were irrelevant to the human experiment.
However, the FDA letter stated, "The fact that [Gelsinger] subsequently
developed DIC confirms that, despite your assertion to the contrary, the
toxicity experienced by the monkeys did have significant implications for the
safety of the [human] study."

   The letter also cited Penn for failing to properly obtain the informed
consent of volunteers, to adequately train staff in conducting human research
and to develop basic standard operating procedures for carrying out experiments
on people.

   Penn's statement said officials had not had sufficient time to "carefully
review" the FDA's letter. However, it said, "nothing less than the highest
possible standards for the conduct of research are acceptable at the University
of Pennsylvania."

   Penn has appointed an internal committee and an independent panel of experts
to look into the gene therapy institute and the university's human research
program overall.

   Thomas Murray, president of the Hastings Center, a bioethics think tank in
Garrison, N.Y., and a member of a special National Institutes of Health working
group looking into federal oversight of gene therapy experiments, said that
researchers owe it to volunteers to scrupulously follow rules designed to
protect them.

   "It's absolutely imperative that people who are being asked to be subjects in
gene transfer research and in other kinds of medical research have the full
confidence that they are being protected and that all the relevant information
has been provided to them and to federal regulators before they agree to
participate," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 04, 2000


                             763 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

               Copyright 2000 The Times-Picayune Publishing Co.
                        Times-Picayune (New Orleans, LA)

                         March 3, 2000 Friday, ORLEANS

SECTION: NATIONAL; Pg. A07

LENGTH: 684 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE &HEALTH BRIEFS

BYLINE: From wire reports

BODY:

   *** Vitamin C linked with clogged arteries ***

   SAN DIEGO -- A new study raises the disturbing possibility that taking
vitamin C pills may speed up hardening of the arteries. Researchers called their
discovery a surprise and cautioned that more experiments are needed to know for
sure whether megadoses of the vitamin actually are harmful. Still, they said the
finding supports the recommendations of health organizations, which generally
urge people to avoid high doses of supplements and to get their nutrients from
food instead. Many people load up on vitamin C and other nutrients on the
assumption that these supplements are good for their health, even though there
is little scientific evidence this is true. In theory, vitamin C and some other
nutrients might protect the circulatory system and other organs by suppressing
the damaging effects of oxygen. "When you extract one component of food and give
it at very high levels, you just don't know what you are doing to the system,
and it may be adverse," said Dr. James Dwyer, an epidemiologist who directed the
study. He presented the findings Thursday at a meeting in San Diego of the
American Heart Association.

   *** Gene therapy shows help for hemophilia B ***

   NEW YORK -- Gene therapy, a technique long on promise and so far very short
on fulfillment, may be achieving a glimmering of success in a treatment for
hemophilia B, a disease in which the blood does not clot properly. Biologists
report in Thursday's issue of the journal Nature Genetics that they gave
patients suffering from hemophilia B the correct form of the gene for Factor IX,
part of the cascade of proteins involved in forming a blood clot. The trial
involved three patients and was designed to test the safety of the gene therapy,
not its effectiveness. To their surprise, the researchers said they found that
two of the patients were noticeably better, as judged by their lesser need to
inject themselves for bleedings with extra Factor IX protein. They had received
the lowest of three planned doses. Both patients turned out to be making enough
of their own Factor IX that clinically effective amounts were reaching the
bloodstream, the researchers reported.

   *** Hospital-acquired infections fall sharply ***

   ATLANTA -- The number of people contracting bloodstream infections while
hospitalized appears to have dropped more than 30 percent over the past decade,
the government reported Thursday. The largest reduction was in nonsurgical
intensive care units, where infections dropped 44 percent since 1990, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported. Coronary ICUs had a 43
percent decline, pediatric ICUs had a 32 percent decrease and surgical ICUs had
a 31 percent decrease. The CDC said the results far surpassed its 1990 goal of
reducing such infections by 10 percent during the decade. "These decreases
really are dramatic," said Dr. Julie Gerberding, head of the CDC's Hospital
Infections Program. The report was based on data obtained between 1990-1999 from
300 hospitals in 42 states, the CDC said.

   *** Refined stone tools reveal ancient skills ***

   WASHINGTON -- Highly refined stone age tools discovered in China disprove an
old theory that ancient people in East Asia were less accomplished at making
stone cutting tools than early humans in Africa and the Middle East. In a study
to be published Friday in the journal Science, researchers report that stone
tools found in China have the same sophisticated shape and consistency in design
as tools found in Africa and the Middle East. The Asian tools, found near the
Chinese border with Vietnam, were age-dated at about 800,000 years ago. Richard
Potts, a researcher with the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, said the
discovery proves that the early humans of East Asia, the Middle East and Africa
"had comparable abilities in flaking stones and adapting to the environment."
Potts said that there are some subtle differences between ancient stone tools
from Africa and Asia, but the implements have generally the same teardrop shape
with double sharp edges.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2000


                             764 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Atlanta Constitution
                      The Atlanta Journal and Constitution

                     March 2, 2000, Thursday, Home Edition

SECTION: Business; Pg. 4F

LENGTH: 448 words

HEADLINE: Frenzy for Palm ignites 3Com;
 IPO expected today: Shares of spun-off unit won't be available to average
investors.;
 THE DAY ON WALL STREET;
 DAILY INVESTING REPORT

BYLINE: From our news services

SOURCE: CONSTITUTION

BODY:
Investors scrambled to snatch up shares of 3Com (ticker symbol COMS) Wednesday
as a way to get their hands on shares of the company's Palm unit. That drove
3Com up $ 6.12 1/2 to $ 104.12 1/2 on almost 58 million shares, making it the
second-most-active stock of the day, behind Lucent Technologies (LU).

   Palm's initial public offering is expected today. The offering price is
expected to be $ 30 to $ 32 a share, double the earlier range. Some 23 million
shares, or a 4 percent stake, will be sold to the public, and 7.3 million
shares, or a 1 percent stake, to America Online (AOL), Nokia (NOK) and Motorola
(MOT) in a private placement.

   "Unless you are a major institutional customer, you cannot get any of Palm's
shares," said Peter Lieu, an analyst at Needham & Co. "Shares are 10 times
oversubscribed, and people are begging for these shares."

   So they look for alternative routes, and the path of choice is buying 3Com
shares. If a person became a 3Com shareholder Wednesday, the new 3Com investor
will receive Palm shares when 3Com distributes them, according to Lieu.

   To date, 3Com hasn't announced the distribution terms.

   In other trading:

   Lucent Technologies jumped $ 8.51 1/2 to $ 68.12 1/2 after announcing it will
spin off its PBX, Systimax structured cabling and LAN-based data businesses to
shareholders.

   The move will allow the company to focus on fast-growing areas such as
optical networking, Internet infrastructure, wireless, semiconductors, opto-
electronics, Web-based enterprise solutions, and professional design and
consulting services for service providers and enterprises.

   Apple Computer (AAPL) jumped $ 15.68 3/4 to $ 130.31 1/4 amid optimism that
products introduced last month will boost the personal computer maker's fiscal
second-quarter sales and profit.

   Last month at MacWorld in Tokyo, Chief Executive Steve Jobs unveiled faster
versions of the PowerBook laptop PC and PowerMac as well as a new graphite-
colored iBook. Sales of the new machines are going well and could help boost
earnings in the quarter ending this month, analysts said.

   Gateway (GTW) rose $ 1.06 1/4 to $ 69.81 1/4 after Chief Financial Officer
John Todd said he is comfortable with analysts' views that see the company
posting first-quarter net income of 41 cents a share and revenue of about $ 2.
48 billion.

   Todd said some observers had questioned whether Gateway would meet the
revenue target, but he is comfortable with the current estimate.

   Chiron (CHIR) climbed $ 15 to $ 65 after the biotechnology company, one of a
few that are profitable, said it was awarded two patents on a way to use gene
therapy to make vaccines for AIDS and hepatitis C.

GRAPHIC: Photo
Chart shows Wednesday's close at $ 104.12 1/2 up $ 6.12 1/2

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2000


                             765 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                     Copyright 2000 Journal Sentinel Inc.
                     Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (Wisconsin)

                      March 2, 2000 Thursday FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 1B

LENGTH: 519 words

HEADLINE: New drugs promising for Alzheimer's patients;
Latest research described at conference here

BYLINE: KAWANZA L. GRIFFIN of the Journal Sentinel staff

BODY:

   A vaccine for Alzheimer's disease has started human trials, and two new drugs
to slow its progression could be available within a year, a national expert said
Wednesday at a Milwaukee conference.

   The highly publicized Betabloc vaccination, developed by Elan Corp., entered
Phase I trials in patients with moderate Alzheimer's disease last December. The
study involves about 50 people and will test several dosages over the next year
for safe use in humans.

   Last summer, the company reported that the experimental vaccine had blocked
the formation of Alzheimer's plaque in the brains of mice.

   "Just think, if you could delay the disease for five years, you could more
than halve its prevalence and cost," said Steven T. DeKosky, director of the
University of Pittsburgh's Alzheimer's Disease Center. "So if you start
(treatment) at an early time, maybe you can stop it. . . . Will this work in
humans? We have to wait and see."

   DeKosky, who also is chairman of the Alzheimer's Association medical and
scientific advisory board, spoke to about 400 participants at the 5th Annual
Conference on Alzheimer's Disease and Other Dementia at the Four Points Sheraton
Hotel.

   Alzheimer's disease is an irreversible neurological disorder that destroys
brain cells and memory in about 4 million Americans. An estimated 100,000 people
in Wisconsin have the disease.

   Although the cause is unknown, the majority of Alzheimer's patients have an
overproduction of beta-amyloid protein -- which forms damaging plaque deposits
-- and tangled nerve fibers.

   The Betabloc vaccine would block the process by which amyloid accumulates in
the brain, DeKosky said. Two drugs that have been shown to slow the progression
of the disease could have FDA approval within a year, he said.

   Rivastigmine, manufactured by Novartis, is an inhibitor that works by
blocking the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which causes acetylcholine depletion
in the brains of Alzheimer's patients. FDA approval is expected as early as May.

   Galantamine, manufactured by Janssen Pharmaceutica, a division of Johnson &
Johnson, also increases acetylcholine levels in the brain. It acts by inhibiting
acetylcholinesterase and stimulating nicotine receptors in the brain torelease
more acetylcholine. Approval is expected in early 2001.

   "These drugs have lower toxicity and less severe side effects" than currently
prescribed medications, DeKosky said.

   Cognex, the first treatment for Alzheimer's, caused liver toxicity in many
patients and is being replaced with improved drugs, he said.

   Although side effects such as nausea and vomiting still are possible, the
symptoms usually are transient.

   "It's imperative that we understand what is happening," said Sig Tomkalski,
executive director of the Alzheimer's Association of Southeastern Wisconsin.
"Research and improvements in the diagnosis and treatment are our major hope for
changing the course of the disease in the future."

   Other areas to look for progress in the future include gene therapy, more
medications to treat behavioral complications and alternative methods of care,
DeKosky said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000


                             766 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 2, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

HEADLINE: Hint of Success in Gene Therapy Study

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WADE

BODY:

   Gene therapy, a technique long on promise and so far very short on
fulfillment, may be achieving a glimmering of success in a treatment for
hemophilia B, a disease in which the blood does not clot properly.

   The idea of gene therapy is to treat diseases that are the result of a
defective gene by inserting the correct form of the gene into a patient's cells.
If the technique worked, it could be a powerful remedy for many diseases that
are hard to treat. But despite 20 years of effort and some 200 current trials,
the Food and Drug Administration has yet to approve any form of gene therapy.

    Biologists report in today's issue of the journal Nature Genetics that they
gave patients suffering from hemophilia B the correct form of the gene for
Factor IX, part of the cascade of proteins involved in forming a blood clot.

   The trial involved only three patients and was designed to test the safety of
the gene therapy, not its effectiveness. From earlier tests in mice and dogs,
the researchers had calculated that the dose of the gene given the patients
would be too low to offer any clinical benefit.

   To their surprise, the researchers said they found that two of the patients
were noticeably better, as judged by their lesser need to inject themselves for
bleedings with extra Factor IX protein.

   Both patients turned out to be making enough of their own Factor IX that
clinically effective amounts were reaching the bloodstream, the researchers
reported. The correct form of the gene had been injected into their muscle
cells.

   "When we first got the result, we said that must be a mistake," said Dr.
Katherine A. High of Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, an author of the
report.

   Another author, Dr. Mark A. Kay of Stanford University, said, "The patient
noticed it first, and we were real skeptical."

   Although a safety trial can prove nothing about a treatment's effectiveness,
these early results are encouraging because two of the three patients showed a
benefit at the lowest of three planned doses.

   "The data is preliminary, but it is quite suggestive that higher doses will
confirm these results are real," said Dr. Arthur Beaudet, a geneticist at the
Baylor College of Medicine. "I think these investigators are really close."

   Dr. Beaudet, who was not involved in the new study, said he thought that
proof that the therapy worked was a year or so away. How soon a treatment would
be widely available, he said, depends on factors like action by patient advocate
groups and the availability of the virus used to insert the corrective gene.

   About 3,300 people in the United States have hemophilia B, caused by one of
several possible mutations in the gene for Factor IX. Another 12,000 people
suffer from hemophilia A, the result of mutations in the gene for Factor VIII,
also a vital component of the body's blood-clotting system.

   Dr. High and Dr. Kay have each been trying separately to develop gene therapy
treatments for hemophilia for more than a decade but have now joined forces.

   The promising result of their research comes in the wake of gene therapy's
long record of failures and the recent death of a patient, Jesse Gelsinger, 18,
in a gene therapy trial at the University of Pennsylvania.  Mr. Gelsinger died
after receiving an injection into the liver of a high dose of adenovirus, one of
the causes of the common cold.

   The team led by Dr. Kay and Dr. High used a different virus, adeno associated
virus, which has very few genes of its own and depends on adenovirus to
reproduce itself.

   Viruses are used to deliver the corrective human genes in most gene therapy
trials because of their natural ability to enter human cells and incorporate
their genetic material into human chromosomes. The adeno associated virus used
by Dr. High and Dr. Kay is not as provocative to the immune system as adenovirus
and the cells it infects survive much longer. Dr. High said that dogs given the
Factor IX gene nearly three years ago were still producing the gene's protein.

   The treatment may be working better in people than it did in animals, she
said, because the adeno associated virus is a human virus and may be more active
in its natural host. One drawback of the virus is that it can carry only rather
small genes. The human gene for Factor VIII, for example, is too large for it,
so some other virus must be found to treat hemophilia A.

   Dr. High said gene therapy's record of failure was due largely to the
difficulty of finding appropriate viruses for gene delivery.



   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2000


                             767 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                 March 2, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

HEADLINE: Panel Seeks Better Monitoring Of Experiments Using People

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS

BODY:

   Citing failures of scientists to report problems, federal health officials
and members of the National Bioethics Advisory Commission said yesterday that
changes were needed in the monitoring of research on people.

   The commission heard testimony as part of its review of the safety and ethics
of human research.

    It has been working for more than a year, holding hearings around the
country, but in that time several problems in experiments involving people have
emerged. Federal regulators have halted experiments at several major
institutions, citing violations of ethics rules. Certain trials involving gene
therapy were halted after a patient died.

   After hearing testimony from witnesses representing the National Institutes
of Health and the Food and Drug Administration, Dr. Harold T. Shapiro of
Princeton University, chairman of the bioethics commission, said: "One problem
we have heard again and again is that, once an experiment is approved, there is
a failure to follow what's going on with the patients. I think there is a
growing consensus that something must be done."

   Dr. Lana R. Skirboll, director of the Office of Science Policy, acknowledged
that there had been some serious problems with experiments in gene therapy,
which is designed to treat inherited defects by giving patients infusions of
working genes. She said that the institutes had begun to change procedures to
deal with the problems and noted that the Department of Health and Human
Services would soon announce further changes needed to protect participants in
the experiments.

   The central issue of yesterday's discussion was the disclosure, after the
death of Jesse Gelsinger, a patient in a gene expeirment at the University of
Pennsylvania, that scientists had often failed to inform federal agencies of
"serious adverse effects" involving patients.

   Adverse events can include anything that happens to a subject while an
experiment is under way, even things seemingly unrelated to the research.
(Sometimes a serious event may not appear to be related to an experiment, but is
later found to be related. For example, if a patient falls down the stairs and
is injured, that may be a accident, but if the patient was given a drug in an
experiment that brought on dizziness, the experimental drug could be considered
the cause of the fall.)

   Until yesterday, the N.I.H. said there had been 691 "serious adverse events"
in gene therapy experiments involving the use of adenovirus, a weakened cold
virus used to carry genes into the body, but that scientists had reported only
39.

   Dr. Skirboll said the number for last year was 970 in adenovirus experiments,
and an additional 100 in other gene therapy experiments.

   Gene therapy experiments are among the hottest in medicine, and the number is
rising. Dr. Claudia Mickelson of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who
is chairman of the N.I.H.'s Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, which helps make
policy on what kind of gene experiments should be permitted, said that in 1988
there was one experiment, but last year there were 91. In that period, there
have been more than 300 experiments, he said.

   There are few reports of success, but there is hope for the experimental
treatments in a variety of conditions, from cancer to hemophilia.

   Dr. Skirboll said most of the reporting failures discussed yesterday involved
potential problems, rather than harm to patients. But she said the reporting is
important both to understand which types of experiments might be more hazardous,
and in building trust that scientists are carefully watching for problems.

   "This research, we think, is very exciting and may produce huge benefits to
human health ultimately," she said. "But to get there we have to go through the
door of clinical trials with human patients. And we can't go through there if we
don't have the patients' trust."

   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2000


                             768 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       MARCH 2, 2000 Thursday SF EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1250 words

HEADLINE: PATIENTS IN GENE TRIAL FOR HEMOPHILIA IMPROVE TWO STARTED PRODUCING
LOW LEVELS OF A CLOTTING FACTOR. RESEARCHERS SEE CAUSE FOR "CAUTIOUS OPTIMISM."

BYLINE: Huntly Collins, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   In one of the most promising developments in a decade of human gene-therapy
experiments, a team of scientists led by researchers at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia yesterday reported that two of three people with severe hemophilia
showed measurable improvement after being injected with a gene to correct their
bleeding disorder.

   While the patients are far from cured, a one-time infusion of the gene for
the blood-clotting protein known as factor IX has allowed the patients to begin
producing low levels of their own clotting factor and to dramatically reduce
their reliance on artificial factor, one by 50 percent and another by 80
percent.

   Not enough time has passed since the start of the trial last June to
determine whether the third patient will also be able to reduce his use of
artificial factor, scientists said.

   Currently, people who suffer from hemophilia B, the less common form of
hemophilia, must undergo weekly intravenous injections of factor IX to prevent
life-threatening bleeding episodes. The medicine is inconvenient and expensive,
costing from $50,000 to $100,000 a year. Gene therapy, by contrast, holds out
the promise of correcting the genetic defect that causes the protein deficiency,
allowing people to produce their own factor IX.

   Katherine A. High, a Children's Hospital hematology expert who led the
research effort, said the results were cause for "cautious optimism" that gene
therapy might turn severe hemophilia B into a milder form of the disease. The
preliminary findings, she said, do not constitute evidence of a cure, although
that is the hope as scientists continue to slowly increase the doses of the gene
drug in the ongoing trial.

   If the therapy pans out, it could dramatically improve the quality of life
for people who suffer from hemophilia B, said Catherine S. Manno, a pediatrician
at Children's and principal investigator for the trial. "The cost in dollars
would also be considerably less," she said.

   The findings, announced in Nature Genetics, offer the first encouraging news
about gene therapy since last fall, when the scientific field was rocked by the
death of a teenager enrolled in a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Savio Woo, a gene-therapy expert at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York and
president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, called yesterday's report "a
milestone" in gene-therapy research.

   'THE BEST HOPE'

   Jeanne Lusher, a hematologist at Children's Hospital in Detroit and chief
medical adviser to the National Hemophilia Foundation, said the findings would
have to be demonstrated in much larger numbers of people and show greater
increases in the production of factor IX in order to hold up.

   "But the fact that they are getting reductions in bleeding and some increase
in factor IX is really very exciting," Lusher said. "All of us in the hemophilia
community believe that the best hope for a cure is through gene therapy."

   Normally, scientific findings that are as preliminary as those reported by
High are not published in peer-reviewed journals.

   But in an editorial, Nature Genetics said it was publishing the study because
of its unexpected outcome: Even at very low doses, the gene drug showed "modest
evidence" of effectiveness with no side effects. The trial was only designed to
test the safety of the approach and was not expected to show any evidence of
effectiveness until much higher doses of the gene drug were given to patients.

   An estimated 5,000 American boys and men suffer from hemophilia B, which
stems from mutations in the gene that controls the body's production of factor
IX. A different gene is involved in hemophilia A, which affects about 25,000
Americans, most of them males. Both forms are usually inherited, but can also
result from spontaneous mutations of the genes.

   'A YEAR OR TWO AWAY'

   High's team is in the early stages of research on gene therapy for hemophilia
A, a much more difficult challenge.

   The three patients cited in the paper are the first of nine hemophilia B
sufferers in the preliminary safety trial. They received the lowest dose of the
gene drug. The next group of three will get a medium dose, and the last group
will get a high dose. The trial will not be completed until year's end - and an
additional several years will be required for even larger human trials, High
said.

   "We are always concerned about raising false hope," said Arthur Beaudet, a
geneticist at Baylor College of Medicine. "But the paper suggests that a
successful gene-therapy treatment for hemophilia will be a year or two away, not
five years as we had previously thought."

   High said the scientific team - including researchers at Stanford University
and the University of Pittsburgh - was so surprised that the therapy appeared to
be working in the first patient that researchers asked other laboratories to
check and recheck the data. The results held up, she said, and continue to do so
nine months later.

   Just as important, High said, was that none of the three patients has had any
side effects from the treatment and none has developed antibodies against the
newly introduced gene product. Such an immune response would nullify the effects
of the therapy and pose major safety problems because patients likely would no
longer be able to benefit from artificial factor IX.

   Before the experiment began, all three patients were making less than 1
percent of the normal amount of factor IX that people need for their blood to
clot.

   To boost that level, the patients were given a one-time injection, into the
thigh muscles, of genetically modified viruses - known as vectors - that carry a
correct copy of the factor IX gene.

   The patients were then followed to see if the viruses delivered their genetic
payloads to the patients' muscle cells and if the cells, in turn, began churning
out factor IX.

   The first two patients showed small but measurable increases in factor IX.
The third patient showed no measurable change.

   Before the study began, the first two patients had been relying on artificial
factor to combat bleeding episodes once every seven to 10 days. After the gene
therapy, however, the first patient was able to reduce his use of artificial
factor by 50 percent and the second by 80 percent, scientists said.

   High said the third patient normally uses artificial factor only about four
times a year so it will take several years to determine whether the gene therapy
affects his need for the factor.

   She said the reduction in the use of artificial factor was encouraging, but
no substitute for hard data showing a clear and sustained rise in factor IX
following gene therapy. The aim, she said, will be to maintain factor IX levels
above 1 percent, an achievement that would prevent most of the joint damage and
life-threatening bleeding complications of hemophilia B.

   High's work is supported by funding from the National Institutes of Health,
the Hoxie Harrison-Smith Foundation and Avigen Inc., of Alameda, Calif.

   Avigen, a publicly traded company, manufactures the adeno-associated viral
vector used in the trial. The company has an exclusive license for the vector
from Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, which holds the patent.

   Both High and her collaborator, Mark A. Kay at Stanford, are members of
Avigen's scientific advisory board. In exchange, the scientists said they were
given stock holdings amounting to "far less" than 1 percent of Avigen's total
stock offering.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             769 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                    March 2, 2000, Thursday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 637 words

HEADLINE: EARLY TRIAL OF GENE THERAPY FOR HEMOPHILIA GOES WELL

BYLINE: HUNTLY COLLINS, KNIGHT RIDDER NEWSPAPERS

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA

BODY:


   In one of the most promising developments in a decade of human gene-therapy
experiments, a team of scientists led by researchers at Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia reported yesterday that two of three people with severe hemophilia
showed measurable improvement after being injected with a gene to correct their
bleeding disorder.

   While the patients are far from cured, a one-time infusion of the gene for
the bloodclotting protein known as factor IX has allowed the patients to begin
producing low levels of their own clotting factor and to dramatically reduce
their reliance on artificial factor, one by 50 percent and another by 80
percent.

   Not enough time has passed since the start of the trial in June to determine
whether the third patient will also be able to reduce his use of artificial
factor, scientists said.

   At present, people who suffer from hemophilia B, the less common form of
hemophilia, must undergo weekly intravenous injections of factor IX to prevent
life-threatening bleeding episodes. The medicine is inconvenient and expensive,
costing from $ 50,000 to $ 100,000 a year. Gene therapy, by contrast, holds out
the promise of correcting the genetic defect that causes the protein deficiency,
allowing people to produce their own factor IX.

   Katherine A. High, a Children's Hospital hematology expert who led the
research effort, said the results were cause for "cautious optimism" that gene
therapy might turn severe hemophilia B into a milder form of the disease.

   The preliminary findings, she said, do not constitute evidence of a cure,
although that is the hope as scientists continue to slowly increase the doses of
the gene drug in the ongoing trial.

   If the therapy pans out, it could dramatically improve the quality of life
for people who suffer from hemophilia B, said Catherine S. Manno, a pediatrician
at Children's and principal investigator for the trial. "The cost in dollars
would also be considerably less," she said.

   The findings, announced in Nature Genetics, offer the first encouraging news
about gene therapy since last fall, when the scientific field was rocked by the
death of a teen-ager enrolled in a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Savio Woo, a gene-therapy expert at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York and
president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, called yesterday's report "a
milestone" in gene-therapy research.

   Jeanne Lusher, a hematologist at Children's Hospital in Detroit and chief
medical adviser to the National Hemophilia Foundation, said the findings would
have to be demonstrated in much larger numbers of people and show greater
increases in the production of factor IX in order to hold up.

   "But the fact that they are getting reductions in bleeding and some increase
in factor IX is really very exciting," Lusher said. "All of us in the hemophilia
community believe that the best hope for a cure is through gene therapy."

   Normally, scientific findings that are as preliminary as those reported by
High are not published in peer-reviewed journals.

   But in an editorial, Nature Genetics said it was publishing the study because
of its unexpected outcome: Even at very low doses, the gene drug showed "modest
evidence" of effectiveness with no side effects. The trial was designed to test
only the safety of the approach and was not expected to show any evidence of
effectiveness until much higher doses of the gene drug were given to patients.

   An estimated 5,000 American boys and men suffer from hemophilia B, which
stems from mutations in the gene that controls the body's production of factor
IX. A different gene is involved in hemophilia A, which affects about 25,000
Americans, most males.

   Both forms are usually inherited, but can also result from spontaneous
mutations of the genes.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2000


                             770 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 2, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-8

LENGTH: 492 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy proves helpful to two with severe hemophilia; 'Cautious
optimism' result of research

BYLINE: Huntly Collins; KNIGHT RIDDER NEWS SERVICE

BODY:
 PHILADELPHIA -- In one of the most promising developments in a decade of human
gene-therapy experiments, a team of scientists led by researchers at Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia reported yesterday that two of three people with severe
hemophilia showed measurable improvement after being injected with a gene to
correct their bleeding disorder.

   Though the patients are far from cured, a one-time infusion of the gene for
the blood-clotting protein known as factor IX has allowed the patients to begin
producing low levels of their own clotting factor and to dramatically reduce
their reliance on artificial factor, one by 50 percent and a second by 80
percent.

   Not enough time has passed since the start of the trial last June to
determine whether the third patient will also be able to reduce his use of
artificial factor, scientists said.

   People who suffer from hemophilia B, the less-common form of hemophilia, must
undergo weekly intravenous injections of factor IX to prevent life-threatening
bleeding episodes.

   The medicine is inconvenient and expensive, costing from $50,000 to $100,000
a year.  Gene therapy, by contrast, holds out the promise of correcting the
genetic defect that causes the protein deficiency, allowing people to produce
their own factor IX.

   Katherine A. High, a Children's Hospital hematology expert who led the
research effort, said the results were cause for "cautious optimism" that gene
therapy might turn severe hemophilia B into a milder form of the disease.  The
preliminary findings, she said, do not constitute evidence of a cure, although
that is the hope as scientists continue to slowly increase the doses of the gene
drug in the ongoing trial.

   If the therapy pans out, it could dramatically improve the quality of life
for people who suffer from hemophilia B, said Catherine S. Manno, a pediatrician
at Children's and principal investigator for the trial.  "The cost in dollars
would also be considerably less," she said.

   The findings, announced in Nature Genetics, offer the first encouraging news
about gene therapy since last fall, when the scientific field was rocked by the
death of a teen-ager enrolled in a gene-therapy trial at the University of
Pennsylvania.

   Savio Woo, a gene-therapy expert at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York and
president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, called yesterday's report "a
milestone" in gene-therapy research.

   Normally, scientific findings that are as preliminary as those reported by
High are not published in peer-reviewed journals.

   But in an editorial, Nature Genetics said it was publishing the study because
of its unexpected outcome: Even at very low doses, the gene drug showed "modest
evidence" of effectiveness with no side effects.  The trial was only designed to
test the safety of the approach and was not expected to show any evidence of
effectiveness until much higher doses of the gene drug were given to patients.


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000


                             771 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 2, 2000, Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: UCSD study may benefit heart patients

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Imagine you're at high risk for a heart attack, but rather than being rushed
under the surgeon's knife you instead get a simple injection: a gene therapy
that rapidly stimulates the growth of new blood vessels all by itself.

   While such a scenario is far from becoming the standard of care, new findings
from the University of California San Diego might bring the practice one small
step closer to reality.

   The UCSD researchers discovered that hours after blood vessels are blocked
and parts of the heart muscle begin to die from lack of oxygen a cascade of
rescuing genetic events occurs naturally.  It is the first time the process has
been documented in a living human heart.

   As it dies, heart tissue promptly begins to express a gene called HIF-1a
(hypoxia inducible factor) which, a few hours later, stimulates a growth factor
called VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor). Eventually, VEGF causes new
pin-sized capillaries to bud out, again delivering oxygen to needy heart tissue.

   "The production of HIF-1a in the heart is one of the body's earliest
responses to lack of oxygen," said Dr. Patricia Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant
professor of surgery and the principal investigator of the research.  "HIF-1a in
turn stimulates the production of VEGF."

   This results in new blood vessel growth.

   Unfortunately, the natural process is not fast enough to save all the dying
tissue.

   "You can imagine, if we could inject HIF-1a, we might be able to massively
stimulate capillary growth for an area that's lacking in oxygen," Thistlethwaite
said.

   The report by Thistlethwaite and colleagues is published in today's edition
of the New England Journal of Medicine.

   The idea for the study was not a new one, nor was the finding unexpected,
because the process has been well documented in studies of live animals, said
researchers who have studied the HIV-1a and VEGF process.

   "The UCSD researchers have shown what we've known in animals, that HIF-1a is
expressed early following an ischemic episode in a human being, stimulating
certain genes that act to protect the tissue against a low oxygen environment,"
said Stephen Goldman, vascular biology and medicine chief at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   On the basis of those animal studies, clinical trials with HIF-1a in patients
with severe vascular disease in the leg are under way in Cleveland and Boston
and are being planned for patients with severe coronary artery disease.

   The UCSD team biopsied snips of heart tissue from 37 patients who underwent
coronary bypass surgery two years ago.  Tissue from the damaged areas of 25
emergency patients in three separate stages of heart attack was compared with
tissue from nondamaged areas, and from 12 patients who were having nonemergency
surgery for heart disease.

   The researchers found the cascade of HIF-1a expression leading to VEGF at
three stages in damaged tissue from each of the three heart attack patient
groups.  But they did not find it in undamaged tissue.  In the 12 patients who
did not have a heart attack, HIF-1a and VEGF were not found.

   The genetic process that regrows blood vessels is one of the most exciting in
medicine.  It is called angiogenesis, the same process that occurs with tragic
result in patients with cancer.  Organs receive certain genetic signals,
sometimes because of HIF-1a activation, prompting them to grow new blood vessels
that increase blood supply to the tumor.

   In numerous clinical trials, anti-angiogenesis compounds are being used to
stop capillary formation and block that supply of blood, in effect starving the
cancer to death.

   The use of HIF-1a and VEGF in the heart, however, is a flip side of that
coin, an attempt to use angiogenesis to grow new blood vessels where they are
needed.

   Ongoing experiments in animals and humans show promise for this approach.
Physicians at Boston's Tufts University School of Medicine have used an HIF-1a
variant designed by Genzyme Corp. to successfully regrow blood vessels in
rabbits whose limb arteries had been removed.  The researchers also used HIF-1a
in the hearts of pigs whose coronary arteries were surgically occluded.

   "In both cases, the HIF-1a strategy seemed to result in significant
improvement," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of vascular medicine and
cardiovascular research at Tufts and the trial's principal investigator.

   Isner and researchers at the Cleveland Clinic injected Genzyme's HIF-1a in
the leg muscles of six patients with severe peripheral vascular disease in an
effort to stimulate vessel regrowth.

   Later this year, researchers at UCSD and elsewhere plan to use HIF-1a in
patients with severe coronary artery disease, pending approval from the National
Institutes of Health.

   Because risks of the procedure are unknown, the patients selected are the
sickest, with no options left, Isner said.

   "They can't have bypass surgery or angioplasty, and they are not responding
to other medications," Isner said.

   Other strategies include injecting VEGF directly, said Gregg Semenza, a
professor at the Institute of Genetic Medicine at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, who originally sequenced the HIF-1a gene years ago.

   "The question is: If VEGF is insufficient to relieve the ischemia (cell
death) it may be that you need to go further upstream, to use HIF-1a that will
turn on more of the angiogenic program," he said.

   That is what Thistlethwaite is trying to do, she said.

   Thistlethwaite said the use of VEGF alone appears to have limited effects in
the heart.

   "The hope is that we can find some other factor that is not only more potent,
but will also be longer lasting than previously tested angiogenic genes," she
said.

   Gene therapy experiments are enduring a series of setbacks.  Last year,
deaths of some patients in clinical trials, including an 18-year-old in
Pennsylvania, raised questions about whether the technique will become accepted
routine.

   The problem is in how the gene is delivered to the cells.  It is first
injected into a viral carrier to target the therapy to specific tissue.  But
that can provoke an unwanted, perhaps fatal, immune response.

   Thistlethwaite, who also has a degree in molecular biology, said she believes
that scientists will engineer new viral carriers to overcome that problem.  And
in time, she said, surgeons will be able to use gene therapy with surgery to
stimulate blood flow to areas that cannot be fixed with balloon catheters or
coronary bypass.

   The UCSD research was financed by the National Institutes of Health and the
Thoracic Surgery Foundation.  The team included cardiothoracic surgery chief Dr.
Stuart Jamieson, surgical resident Dr. Sang Lee, staff pathologist Dr. Paul
Wolf, graduate student Ryan Escudero and statistician Reena Deutsch.


GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; DON KOHLBAUER / Union-Tribune; Up close: Dr. Patricia
Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant professor of surgery and molecular biologist,
examined a genetic sequence of an HIF-1a (hypoxia inducible factor), which
stimulates a growth factor in the heart. (B-8:7; B-2:2; B-7:1)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             772 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                            March 2, 2000, Thursday
                              CORRECTION APPENDED

SECTION: LOCAL;Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1131 words

HEADLINE: UCSD study may benefit heart patients

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 Imagine you're at high risk for a heart attack, but rather than being rushed
under the surgeon's knife you instead get a simple injection: a gene therapy
that rapidly stimulates the growth of new blood vessels all by itself.

   While such a scenario is far from becoming the standard of care, new findings
from the University of California San Diego might bring the practice one small
step closer to reality.

   The UCSD researchers discovered that hours after blood vessels are blocked
and parts of the heart muscle begin to die from lack of oxygen a cascade of
rescuing genetic events occurs naturally.  It is the first time the process has
been documented in a living human heart.

   As it dies, heart tissue promptly begins to express a gene called HIF-1a
(hypoxia inducible factor) which, a few hours later, stimulates a growth factor
called VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor). Eventually, VEGF causes new
pin-sized capillaries to bud out, again delivering oxygen to needy heart tissue.

   "The production of HIF-1a in the heart is one of the body's earliest
responses to lack of oxygen," said Dr. Patricia Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant
professor of surgery and the principal investigator of the research.  "HIF-1a in
turn stimulates the production of VEGF."

   This results in new blood vessel growth.

   Unfortunately, the natural process is not fast enough to save all the dying
tissue.

   "You can imagine, if we could inject HIF-1a, we might be able to massively
stimulate capillary growth for an area that's lacking in oxygen," Thistlethwaite
said.

   The report by Thistlethwaite and colleagues is published in today's edition
of the New England Journal of Medicine.

   The idea for the study was not a new one, nor was the finding unexpected,
because the process has been well documented in studies of live animals, said
researchers who have studied the HIV-1a and VEGF process.

   "The UCSD researchers have shown what we've known in animals, that HIF-1a is
expressed early following an ischemic episode in a human being, stimulating
certain genes that act to protect the tissue against a low oxygen environment,"
said Stephen Goldman, vascular biology and medicine chief at the National Heart,
Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md.

   On the basis of those animal studies, clinical trials with HIF-1a in patients
with severe vascular disease in the leg are under way in Cleveland and Boston
and are being planned for patients with severe coronary artery disease.

   The UCSD team biopsied snips of heart tissue from 37 patients who underwent
coronary bypass surgery two years ago.  Tissue from the damaged areas of 25
emergency patients in three separate stages of heart attack was compared with
tissue from nondamaged areas, and from 12 patients who were having nonemergency
surgery for heart disease.

   The researchers found the cascade of HIF-1a expression leading to VEGF at
three stages in damaged tissue from each of the three heart attack patient
groups.  But they did not find it in undamaged tissue.  In the 12 patients who
did not have a heart attack, HIF-1a and VEGF were not found.

   The genetic process that regrows blood vessels is one of the most exciting in
medicine.  It is called angiogenesis, the same process that occurs with tragic
result in patients with cancer.  Organs receive certain genetic signals,
sometimes because of HIF-1a activation, prompting them to grow new blood vessels
that increase blood supply to the tumor.

   In numerous clinical trials, anti-angiogenesis compounds are being used to
stop capillary formation and block that supply of blood, in effect starving the
cancer to death.

   The use of HIF-1a and VEGF in the heart, however, is a flip side of that
coin, an attempt to use angiogenesis to grow new blood vessels where they are
needed.

   Ongoing experiments in animals and humans show promise for this approach.
Physicians at Boston's Tufts University School of Medicine have used an HIF-1a
variant designed by Genzyme Corp. to successfully regrow blood vessels in
rabbits whose limb arteries had been removed.  The researchers also used HIF-1a
in the hearts of pigs whose coronary arteries were surgically occluded.

   "In both cases, the HIF-1a strategy seemed to result in significant
improvement," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of vascular medicine and
cardiovascular research at Tufts and the trial's principal investigator.

   Isner and researchers at the Cleveland Clinic injected Genzyme's HIF-1a in
the leg muscles of six patients with severe peripheral vascular disease in an
effort to stimulate vessel regrowth.

   Later this year, researchers at UCSD and elsewhere plan to use HIF-1a in
patients with severe coronary artery disease, pending approval from the National
Institutes of Health.

   Because risks of the procedure are unknown, the patients selected are the
sickest, with no options left, Isner said.

   "They can't have bypass surgery or angioplasty, and they are not responding
to other medications," Isner said.

   Other strategies include injecting VEGF directly, said Gregg Semenza, a
professor at the Institute of Genetic Medicine at Johns Hopkins University in
Baltimore, who originally sequenced the HIF-1a gene years ago.

   "The question is: If VEGF is insufficient to relieve the ischemia (cell
death) it may be that you need to go further upstream, to use HIF-1a that will
turn on more of the angiogenic program," he said.

   That is what Thistlethwaite is trying to do, she said.

   Thistlethwaite said the use of VEGF alone appears to have limited effects in
the heart.

   "The hope is that we can find some other factor that is not only more potent,
but will also be longer lasting than previously tested angiogenic genes," she
said.

   Gene therapy experiments are enduring a series of setbacks.  Last year,
deaths of some patients in clinical trials, including an 18-year-old in
Pennsylvania, raised questions about whether the technique will become accepted
routine.

   The problem is in how the gene is delivered to the cells.  It is first
injected into a viral carrier to target the therapy to specific tissue.  But
that can provoke an unwanted, perhaps fatal, immune response.

   Thistlethwaite, who also has a degree in molecular biology, said she believes
that scientists will engineer new viral carriers to overcome that problem.  And
in time, she said, surgeons will be able to use gene therapy with surgery to
stimulate blood flow to areas that cannot be fixed with balloon catheters or
coronary bypass.

   The UCSD research was financed by the National Institutes of Health and the
Thoracic Surgery Foundation.  The team included cardiothoracic surgery chief Dr.
Stuart Jamieson, surgical resident Dr. Sang Lee, staff pathologist Dr. Paul
Wolf, graduate student Ryan Escudero and statistician Reena Deutsch.


CORRECTION-DATE: March 7, 2000

CORRECTION:

   For the record | In a story Thursday about research involving gene therapy
for heart disease at UCSD School of Medicine, a paragraph listing the names of
other members of the research team was deleted. It said the UCSD research was
financed by the National Institutes of Health and the Thoracic Surgery
Foundation. The team included surgical resident Dr.  Sang Lee, cardiothoracic
surgery chief Dr. Stuart Jamieson, clinical professor of pathology Dr. Paul
Wolf, graduate student Ryan Escudero and statistician Reena Deutsch. Wolf is
also director of the autopsy and hematology laboratory at the Veterans Affairs
Medical Center. The Union-Tribune regrets the error.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; DON KOHLBAUER / Union-Tribune; Up close: Dr. Patricia
Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant professor of surgery and molecular biologist,
examined a genetic sequence of an HIF-1a (hypoxia inducible factor), which
stimulates a growth factor in the heart. (B-8:7; B-2:2; B-7:1)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000


                             773 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                     MARCH 2, 2000, THURSDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4

LENGTH: 675 words

HEADLINE: Natural Heart-Attack Defense System Unlocked;

Discovery could have potential for stroke, cancer treatments, too

BYLINE: Carl T. Hall, Chronicle Science Writer

BODY:
After a long and difficult search, doctors reported yesterday that they have
discovered the key workings of a natural defense system against heart disease
and stroke.

    The findings point to a possible new strategy for harnessing the process
known as angiogenesis -- the sprouting of new blood vessels -- in the form of
drugs or gene therapies.

    Cancer researchers also are taking keen interest, but they are looking for
ways to turn the same process off, thereby stripping tumors of their insidious
capacity to generate their own blood-supply system.

    The study, published in today's issue of the New England Journal of Medicine
by a medical team at the University of California at San Diego, concerns an
intriguing gene-stimulating factor called HIF-1, or hypoxia inducible factor-1.

    UCSD researchers performed special biopsies and genetic analysis on 37
patients admitted for coronary bypass surgery. HIF-1 showed up in significant
amounts only in the damaged areas of heart muscles, and only during the very
early stages of heart attack.

    A closer look suggested that HIF-1 functioned as a kind of molecular
starting signal for many other natural substances, including enzymes
orchestrating the angiogenesis process.

    Earlier work indicated HIF-1 may be part of a protective mechanism that
gradually kicks in to keep heart cells alive when the main arteries supplying
blood to the heart become blocked.

    Similarly, HIF-1 may help insulate brain cells from the ravages of stroke
due to ischemia, the medical term for oxygen deprivation. HIF-1 also has been
found to be active against oxygen loss affecting the kidneys and retina.

    HIF-1 and various co-factors related to it amount to "a very nice defense
mechanism," said Dr. Patricia Thistlethwaite, a UCSD heart surgeon and study
co-author. "The goal is to exploit it."

    Dr. Gregg Semenza, a professor of pediatric medicine at Johns Hopkins
University who first isolated the HIF-1 protein in 1995, said a reliable
strategy to take clinical advantage of HIF-1, perhaps by flooding vulnerable
tissues with HIF-1-related proteins, is still a long way off.

    Nevertheless, he said the UCSD researchers had achieved "a very important
result."

    "The novel part is they actually demonstrated that HIF-1 is induced by
ischemia in the human heart," Semenza said. "You can do all the work in animals
you like, but you still need to demonstrate it does what you think it does in
human beings."

    One of the big puzzles remaining is how HIF-1 might work during the acute
phase of heart attacks -- when it's too late, presumably, for angiogenesis to do
much good.

    Experts speculate that the molecule may help limit cell death by switching
on an alternative energy-supply system that does not need oxygen.

    The UCSD researchers said they have already begun trying HIF-1 in animals.
Limited clinical trials in people are perhaps a year or two away, depending in
part on how fast broader concerns about the safety of gene-therapy experiments
can be solved.

    For now, the focus is still on unraveling the complicated natural responses
to oxygen loss. What makes HIF-1 so promising, Thistlethwaite said, is the
finding that tiny quantities can trigger a long-lasting molecular cascade and
"torrential growth" of fresh blood vessels.

    It's an ever-widening effect she likened to the huge ripples sent out when
even a small rock is dropped into the middle of a pond. "HIF is an incredibly
potent molecule," she said. "It's present for a very short time, but once it's
active, it keeps many other genes going for a long period after that."

    In the heart, one of those other genes yields a protein known as VEGF, or
vascular endothelial growth factor, a long-studied focus of drug development
efforts in angiogenesis.

    Prior VEGF drug development efforts have yielded mostly disappointing
results. Now, the latest findings, showing how HIF-1 and VEGF function in a
tightly controlled sequence, suggests the vascular growth factor may be vastly
enhanced if plenty of HIF-1 is also present.



LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2000


                             774 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                             March 2, 2000 Thursday

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. B-1

LENGTH: 1119 words

HEADLINE: UCSD study may benefit heart patients

BYLINE: Cheryl Clark, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Imagine you're at high risk for a heart attack, but rather than being rushed
under the surgeon's knife you instead get a simple injection: a gene therapy
that rapidly stimulates the growth of new blood vessels all by itself. While
such a scenario is far from becoming the standard of care, new findings from the
University of California San Diego might bring the practice one small step
closer to reality. The UCSD researchers discovered that hours after blood
vessels are blocked and parts of the heart muscle begin to die from lack of
oxygen a cascade of rescuing genetic events occurs naturally.

   It is the first time the process has been documented in a living human heart.
As it dies, heart tissue promptly begins to express a gene called HIF-1a
(hypoxia inducible factor) which, a few hours later, stimulates a growth factor
called VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor). Eventually, VEGF causes new
pin-sized capillaries to bud out, again delivering oxygen to needy heart tissue.
"The production of HIF-1a in the heart is one of the body's earliest responses
to lack of oxygen," said Dr. Patricia Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant professor
of surgery and the principal investigator of the research.

   "HIF-1a in turn stimulates the production of VEGF." This results in new blood
vessel growth. Unfortunately, the natural process is not fast enough to save all
the dying tissue. "You can imagine, if we could inject HIF-1a, we might be able
to massively stimulate capillary growth for an area that's lacking in oxygen,"
Thistlethwaite said. The report by Thistlethwaite and colleagues is published in
today's edition of the New England Journal of Medicine. The idea for the study
was not a new one, nor was the finding unexpected, because the process has been
well documented in studies of live animals, said researchers who have studied
the HIV-1a and VEGF process. "The UCSD researchers have shown what we've known
in animals, that HIF-1a is expressed early following an ischemic episode in a
human being, stimulating certain genes that act to protect the tissue against a
low oxygen environment," said Stephen Goldman, vascular biology and medicine
chief at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute in Bethesda, Md. On the
basis of those animal studies, clinical trials with HIF-1a in patients with
severe vascular disease in the leg are under way in Cleveland and Boston and are
being planned for patients with severe coronary artery disease. The UCSD team
biopsied snips of heart tissue from 37 patients who underwent coronary bypass
surgery two years ago.

   Tissue from the damaged areas of 25 emergency patients in three separate
stages of heart attack was compared with tissue from nondamaged areas, and from
12 patients who were having nonemergency surgery for heart disease. The
researchers found the cascade of HIF-1a expression leading to VEGF at three
stages in damaged tissue from each of the three heart attack patient groups.

   But they did not find it in undamaged tissue.

   In the 12 patients who did not have a heart attack, HIF-1a and VEGF were not
found. The genetic process that regrows blood vessels is one of the most
exciting in medicine.

   It is called angiogenesis, the same process that occurs with tragic result in
patients with cancer.

   Organs receive certain genetic signals, sometimes because of HIF-1a
activation, prompting them to grow new blood vessels that increase blood supply
to the tumor. In numerous clinical trials, anti-angiogenesis compounds are being
used to stop capillary formation and block that supply of blood, in effect
starving the cancer to death. The use of HIF-1a and VEGF in the heart, however,
is a flip side of that coin, an attempt to use angiogenesis to grow new blood
vessels where they are needed. Ongoing experiments in animals and humans show
promise for this approach. Physicians at Boston's Tufts University School of
Medicine have used an HIF-1a variant designed by Genzyme Corp. to successfully
regrow blood vessels in rabbits whose limb arteries had been removed.

   The researchers also used HIF-1a in the hearts of pigs whose coronary
arteries were surgically occluded. "In both cases, the HIF-1a strategy seemed to
result in significant improvement," said Dr. Jeffrey Isner, chief of vascular
medicine and cardiovascular research at Tufts and the trial's principal
investigator. Isner and researchers at the Cleveland Clinic injected Genzyme's
HIF-1a in the leg muscles of six patients with severe peripheral vascular
disease in an effort to stimulate vessel regrowth. Later this year, researchers
at UCSD and elsewhere plan to use HIF-1a in patients with severe coronary artery
disease, pending approval from the National Institutes of Health. Because risks
of the procedure are unknown, the patients selected are the sickest, with no
options left, Isner said. "They can't have bypass surgery or angioplasty, and
they are not responding to other medications," Isner said. Other strategies
include injecting VEGF directly, said Gregg Semenza, a professor at the
Institute of Genetic Medicine at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, who
originally sequenced the HIF-1a gene years ago. "The question is: If VEGF is
insufficient to relieve the ischemia (cell death) it may be that you need to go
further upstream, to use HIF-1a that will turn on more of the angiogenic
program," he said. That is what Thistlethwaite is trying to do, she said.
Thistlethwaite said the use of VEGF alone appears to have limited effects in the
heart. "The hope is that we can find some other factor that is not only more
potent, but will also be longer lasting than previously tested angiogenic
genes," she said. Gene therapy experiments are enduring a series of setbacks.

   Last year, deaths of some patients in clinical trials, including an
18-year-old in Pennsylvania, raised questions about whether the technique will
become accepted routine. The problem is in how the gene is delivered to the
cells.

   It is first injected into a viral carrier to target the therapy to specific
tissue.

   But that can provoke an unwanted, perhaps fatal, immune response.
Thistlethwaite, who also has a degree in molecular biology, said she believes
that scientists will engineer new viral carriers to overcome that problem.

   And in time, she said, surgeons will be able to use gene therapy with surgery
to stimulate blood flow to areas that cannot be fixed with balloon catheters or
coronary bypass. The UCSD research was financed by the National Institutes of
Health and the Thoracic Surgery Foundation.

   The team included cardiothoracic surgery chief Dr. Stuart Jamieson, surgical
resident Dr. Sang Lee, staff pathologist Dr. Paul Wolf, graduate student Ryan
Escudero and statistician Reena Deutsch.

GRAPHIC: 1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Up close: Dr. Patricia Thistlethwaite, UCSD assistant
professor of surgery and molecular biologist, examined a genetic sequence of an
HIF-1a (hypoxia inducible factor), which stimulates a growth factor in the
heart. (B-8:7; B-2:2; B-7:1); PHOTOBY: DON KOHLBAUER / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             775 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                             March 2, 2000 Thursday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 37

LENGTH: 530 words

HEADLINE: Nasdaq sets record volume as tech stocks lead

BYLINE: Nick Olivari, BLOOMBERG NEWS

DATELINE: NEW YORK

BODY:

   Wall Street sent stocks higher as investors bet a new round of
telecommunications spinoffs and mergers will boost demand for the shares, with
the Nasdaq climbing to its 13th record this year on record- breaking volume.

    Lucent Technologies Inc. gained after it said it will spin off businesses
that sell and set up office phone systems to focus on fiber-optic and Internet
equipment. 3Com Corp. advanced before the company's sale of shares in its Palm
Inc. unit, the No. 1 maker of electronic organizers.

    SBC Communications and BellSouth led telephone stocks higher. The companies
are in talks to merge their U.S. cellular-phone units, a person familiar with
the discussions said.

    "Telecommunications companies are taking whatever steps are necessary to
realize their growth potential and increase profits," said Linda Ray, a
portfolio manager at Northstar Group.

    The Nasdaq jumped 87.35, or 1.9 percent, to 4,784.04 as investors snapped up
some of the year's best performers, including JDS Uniphase Corp. and Immunex
Corp.

    The Nasdaq stock market reported 2.1 billion shares traded, its busiest day
ever and the second straight day with volume of more than 2 billion. It was the
second-busiest day ever on the New York Stock Exchange, with some 1.3 billion
shares changing hands.

    The Standard & Poor's 500 Index rose 12.81, or 0.9 percent, to 1379.23, led
by Lucent and SBC Communications.

    The Dow Jones Industrial Average eked out a gain of 9.62 to 10,137.39 after
bouncing between small gains and losses most of the day. Rising and falling
stocks were about even on the New York Stock Exchange.

    Lucent, the world's No. 1 phone-equipment maker, gained 83/4 to 681/4 after
it announced its spinoff. 3Com rose 7` to 105` on analyst predictions that Palm
stock could triple when trading opens today. 3Com plans to sell about 4 percent
of Palm and to spin off the rest of the company to shareholders in six months.
The stock surged 23 percent on Tuesday.

    BellSouth gained 2-7/16 to 43, while SBC Communications rose 3 to 41.

    The Nasdaq stock market reported 2.1 billion shares traded, its busiest day
ever and the second straight day with volume of more than 2 billion. It was the
second-busiest day ever on the New York Stock Exchange, with some 1.3 billion
shares changing hands.

    The Russell 2000 Index of small stocks gained 10.64, or 1.8 percent, to
588.35, its 12th record this year.

    Chiron Corp. gained 141/4 to 641/4 after the biotechnology company, one of a
handful that are profitable, said it was awarded two patents on a way to use
gene therapy to make AIDS and hepatitis C vaccines.

    The AMEX Biotechnology Index is up 89 percent this year, almost matching
last year's 111 percent gain.

    Apple Computer Inc. shares were the fifth biggest gainer in the S&P 500,
jumping 15-11/16 to 130-5/16 on optimism that products introduced last month
will boost the personal computer maker's fiscal second-quarter sales and profit.

    JDS Uniphase, the world's biggest maker of parts for fiber-optic
communications networks, gained 171/4 to 280 and has risen 74 percent so far
this year. Immunex, one of the biggest biotechnology companies, rose 21-9/16 to
219 and has doubled so far this year.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007


                             776 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 The Washington Post

                               The Washington Post

                     March 2, 2000, Thursday, Final Edition

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A08

LENGTH: 927 words

HEADLINE: FDA Stops Researcher's Human Gene Therapy Experiments

BYLINE: Deborah Nelson; Rick Weiss , Washington Post Staff Writers

BODY:


   The Food and Drug Administration has halted four human gene therapy
experiments conducted by a leading researcher who was trying to grow new blood
vessels in patients with heart disease and other circulatory problems.

   Neither the FDA nor the company sponsoring the experiments would provide a
detailed explanation of why the agency had stopped the experiments, which were
led by Jeffrey Isner of Tufts University School of Medicine and St. Elizabeth's
Medical Center in Boston.

   The move comes on the heels of disclosures that Isner failed to promptly
report the deaths of two volunteers to the National Institutes of Health as
required by federal rules. Isner has said the deaths were not related to the
treatment. But Vascular Genetics of Durham, N.C., a company founded by Isner to
commercialize the technology, recently acknowledged that one of those deaths
remains unexplained.

   The FDA's move against Isner's research marks the second time in two months
that the agency has put human gene experiments on hold. In January, the agency
suspended the University of Pennsylvania's high-profile gene therapy program
after a federal investigation into a teenage patient's death there uncovered
scientific and regulatory lapses.

   The field of gene therapy, in which researchers give patients new genes in an
effort to cure cancer or other disorders, has been roiled with controversy since
the September death of that youth, Jesse Gelsinger--the first death directly
attributed to gene therapy. In the weeks after Gelsinger's death, The Washington
Post revealed that Isner and another gene therapy researcher, Ronald Crystal of
Cornell University Medical Center in New York, had not reported patient deaths
in compliance with NIH rules.

   A subsequent inquiry from Congress revealed that other gene therapy
researchers had similarly failed to report hundreds of "adverse events,"
including many deaths, prompting both the FDA and the NIH to start developing
strategies for increasing compliance with federal research rules. Meanwhile,
some researchers have begun to wonder openly whether the fledgling field, which
has failed to produce a single cure in 10 years of efforts on thousands of
patients, can survive much more airing of its problems.

   The latest action involves two experiments in which scientists gave new genes
to patients with coronary artery disease in an effort to help them grow fresh
vessels to increase blood flow to their hearts, and two experiments for patients
with painful vessel problems in their limbs. Unlike the Penn study, which used
potentially toxic viruses to deliver new genes to patients, Isner's studies
infused raw, or "naked" DNA into patients' vessels. The approach has been touted
by some as being safer than those using viruses.

   John Cumming, president of Vascular Genetics, said researchers in three of
those four studies had recently enrolled and treated their final volunteers. But
he was told by the FDA last week that the company must stop enrolling or
treating patients in its large, ongoing heart study, which was taking place at
medical centers around the nation. That study was the one in which the
unexplained death occurred last May, less than 24 hours after the gene infusion.

   Cumming would not talk about the FDA's specific concerns except to say that
the agency had requested additional data relating to the fate of the gene in
patients' bodies. He said he did not think that the FDA's action reflected any
agency concerns that the treatment might have caused any of the patient deaths
(a third death, in one of the limb vessel studies, occurred and was promptly
reported last fall). Rather, he said, the move reflected generic concerns about
the study that the company was already addressing.

   "We're putting together a full presentation for the FDA," Cumming said. "Our
philosophy is to err on the side of thoroughness. We are very comfortable with
the data."

   Cumming said the company had hoped to use the heart study's results to gain
FDA approval for a larger and final "pivotal" study, which could lead to
eventual marketing approval of the treatment. With only about three-quarters of
the intended volunteers enrolled to date, he said, and no clues about whether or
when the FDA might eventually allow the study to continue, it was not clear
whether the company would succeed in getting that study approved this year.

   FDA officials said it is the agency's policy not to comment when it puts an
experiment on "clinical hold," the technical term for the open-ended suspension
order imposed on the Isner experiments.

   Inder Verma, a gene therapy researcher at the Salk Institute in La Jolla,
Calif., and president of the American Society for Gene Therapy, said yesterday
he had not heard about the FDA's action against the Isner study but that the
field of gene therapy badly needed to regain a level of public trust. "If people
have not done the right thing," he said, "then they need to be held
responsible."

   Vascular Genetics is being heavily underwritten by Human Genome Sciences
Inc., a Rockville biotechnology company that owns patent rights on the gene,
called VEGF-2, being studied in all four closed experiments. William Haseltine,
chairman and chief executive of Human Genome, said he did not foresee major
problems from the delay.

   "Basically it's routine," he said. "It's a request for more and better
pharmacology to measure blood levels of VEGF-2. We think there's going to be no
trouble complying."


   Staff writer Justin Gillis contributed to this report.


LOAD-DATE: March 02, 2000


                             777 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                       Copyright 2000 The Buffalo News
                            Buffalo News (New York)

                     March 1, 2000, Wednesday, CITY EDITION

SECTION: VIEWPOINTS, Pg. 3B

LENGTH: 181 words

HEADLINE: DEMAND TO KNOW RISKS OF MEDICAL PROCEDURES

BODY:


   Informed consent is often required by law, especially in medical research. As
a public health scientist, I have been working with the little-known U.S. Office
for Protection from Research Risks. OPRR deals with non-compliance -- the
failure of doctors and medical facilities to obey the rules made to protect
research patients. There is far more non-compliance than the public realizes.

   OPRR recently became involved in the Gelsinger case, the death of a young man
from gene therapy. This death was caused by repeated and flagrant non-compliance
with the protocol of this human experiment. An OPRR investigation could find no
documentation that the patient had ever been told about the serious risks of his
gene therapy.

   When people go into a hospital or doctor's office, they must make sure they
are fully informed about the risks of any medical procedure. If the doctor or
nurse is "too busy" to talk, consider going to a different kind of specialist
for a second opinion. People must demand informed consent. The life they save
may be their own. IRWIN BROSS Amherst

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2000


                             778 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                          Copyright 2000 The Oregonian
                                 The Oregonian

                    March 1, 2000 Wednesday SUNRISE EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE; Pg. A18

LENGTH: 1575 words

HEADLINE: A PLEA FOR MORE TESTING

SOURCE: OZ HOPKINS KOGLIN of the Oregonian Staff

BODY:

   Summary: Gresham resident Wendy Hatton, who is a carrier of a rare liver
disorder and whose children have suffered from it, worries that the response to
a teen's death in a gene therapy experiment will jeopardize further research

   A Gresham woman who participated in a gene therapy study halted after a
teen-ager died says the experiments must be resumed for the good of those who
"live with death every day."

   Wendy Hatton, 41, is a carrier of OTC [ornithine transcarbamylase
deficiency], a rare inherited liver disorder that causes life-threatening levels
of ammonia to build up in the body. She has no symptoms of the disease but
joined the University of Pennsylvania gene therapy trial to help scientists
learn more about how to treat the disease. Two of her four daughters have been
identified as carriers of the disease, and her 14-month-old son died of the
disorder.

   Although she feels deeply saddened by the death of 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger, Hatton hopes fallout from the Pennsylvania program will not generate
a climate that would slow the progression of research.

   "If we don't continue gene therapy, there will be no cures," Hatton said.

   In September, Gelsinger, the 18th participant in the Pennsylvania gene
therapy trial, had the treatment. He died four days later. In January, the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration indefinitely shut down all of the University of
Pennsylvania's human gene therapy trials, saying that in addition to procedural
violations, the researchers were deficient in ensuring patient safety.

   That ruling started a snowball effect in which some gene therapy programs
voluntarily suspended their human trials and some biotechnology companies
started re-evaluating their role in gene therapy. And last week, the National
Institutes of Health announced plans to order all scientists who have conducted
gene therapy to open their files and report all instances of side effects during
trials. The federal action covers more than 400 trials conducted with more than
4,000 patients in the past decade.

   Hatton worries that the response will jeopardize the promise of gene therapy
in treating OTC.

   "We want to be on record as saying we live with death every day," Hatton said
for her family. "Everybody who has this in their family has either lost a child
or lives with a sick child."

   After Gelsinger's death, the National Urea Cycle Disorders Foundation, a
support group for such disorders as OTC, issued a statement saying that despite
medications and dietary restrictions, gene therapy is the only hope for
successfully treating the disorder.

   "The medications are a stopgap to a death sentence," the statement said.
"Even with this treatment, mortality rates in these children are about 50
percent."

   Baby struggles with disorder OTC occurs in about one in 30,000 births. There
are 15 children with urea cycle defect being treated at the Oregon Health
Sciences University Child Development and Rehabilitation Center, which treats
patients from throughout the region. Five children have OTC.

   Hatton, a travel consultant who works from her home, and her husband, Robert,
an engineer at Providence St. Vincent Medical Center, had never heard of OTC
when their son, Zachary, was born Sept. 19, 1989.

   When he was 3 days old, the baby went into a coma, and doctors at two
hospitals couldn't figure out what was wrong with him, Hatton said. "They
actually thought I was a drug mom or something because he was having seizures."

   The next day, Zachary was taken by ambulance to OHSU's Doernbecher Children's
Hospital, where the illness was identified as OTC. The diagnosis marked the
beginning of desperate months of trying to control toxic levels of ammonia in
the baby's body. Emergency hospital visits became routine, as well as long
hospital stays.

   When the boy died Nov. 27, 1990, "Zack's disabilities were he was blind,
never sat up, never ate with his mouth, was 24-hour tube-fed," his mother said,
"but he smiled."

   By that time, the family members had been tested for the disorder, and Hatton
learned she was a carrier, as well as two of her daughters, Tonya, now 17, and
Jenna, now 12. However, Jenna is the only one who suffers symptoms and receives
medical treatment. To keep her ammonia levels down, Jenna must follow dietary
restrictions, and she is supposed to take 30 pills a day but can seldom get more
than 26 down, her mother said. The medicine costs $1,000 a bottle, and Jenna
goes through four bottles a month. The family's health insurance covers most of
the cost.

   Linked to X chromosome The OTC deficiency is called an X-linked disorder
because it is on the X chromosome. Females have two X chromosomes, and males
have one X and one Y, so when men have an OTC deficiency it is usually the
severe form because they don't have another X chromosome to compensate for the
defect, said Dr. Robert D. Steiner assistant professor of pediatrics and
molecular and medical genetics at OHSU .

   Steiner is Jenna's doctor at the Child Development and Rehabilitation Center,
and at the request of the University of Pennsylvania researchers he was the
follow-up physician for Hatton and two other Pacific Northwest women who
participated in the Pennsylvania study.

   The abnormal OTC gene leads to an abnormal enzyme that is unable to break
down proteins and prevent ammonia buildup in the body. Treatments include
restricting protein intake and taking medicine that allows the body to get rid
of potentially toxic proteins. Affected children don't eat hamburgers, hot dogs
or regular milk. However, their diets have to include enough protein for them to
grow and develop normally, Steiner said.

   Women have the abnormal OTC gene on only one of their X chromosomes, so they
can compensate to some degree for the abnormal one, Steiner said. Therefore,
women with the gene can be totally unaffected by the defect and be healthy, or
they may have a variety of symptoms, such as episodes of lethargy, vomiting,
coma, learning problems or profound mental retardation, Steiner said.

   For more than a decade, gene therapy has offered hope for patients with
diseases such as cystic fibrosis, Duchenne's muscular dystrophy, hemophilia and
sickle cell anemia. The basic idea of the therapy is to repair or replace
damaged or abnormal genes by infusing normal genes into a patient's body. The
challenge is for researchers to find ways to deliver healthy genes that will
remain in the body, thereby promoting a cure.

   The University of Pennsylvania trial in which Hatton and Gelsinger
participated did not seek a cure for OTC. Rather, it was a an early step
designed to test the safety of the process researchers were using to get the
normal OTC gene into the body.

   Felt no pressure in study In June 1997, Hatton became the second person to
test the therapy in the Pennsylvania trial.

   Her motives for joining the trial were selfish, she said: "I have two
daughters who could have boys that get sick, and I was hoping that some day it
would help Jenna."

   Hatton suffered no ill effects from the experimental treatment, and she
thought she was carefully and adequately informed of possible risks. During her
two-week stay in Pennsylvania, she never felt pressure to stay in the study if
she wanted to withdraw.

   However, Hatton said, "The whole time I was there was not like I was at a
resort. It doesn't feel good to be poked, and it doesn't feel good to have a
backache from being on a table six hours." This she did on the day researchers
threaded a catheter in her groin and slowly infused the OTC gene into her liver.

   Steiner and some other researchers fear that the Pennsylvania experience has
been a major setback and that it may be a long time before researchers can
proceed with gene therapy trials for OTC.

   But patients may be more afraid of a backlash to the Pennsylvania study than
scientists, said Dr. Louis Picker, director of the vaccine program at the new
vaccine and gene therapy center being formed at OHSU's Hillsboro campus.

   "I mean, they have the most to lose. They are the ones who are going to
suffer and die," Picker said. The Pennsylvania tragedy has led to "a public
relations fiasco" that has generated in the public mind the thought that
scientists are reckless, he said.

   Although there has been tremendous progress in gene therapy, the
biotechnology is still in its infancy, and no one has been cured with the
process.

   Scientists have learned that it is very difficult to do gene therapy trials.
Preliminary laboratory and animal studies are essential, "but when you come
right down to it, there is a certain level of experimentation you have to do on
people," Picker said.

   Inevitably, there are going to be legitimate risks, but the scientists' job
is to rationally consider all the issues and come up with a plan that ultimately
can be pursued in humans, Picker said. At the same time, scientific studies
should be carefully monitored by experts who are not directly involved in
experiments, he said.

   "As far as I am concerned, what needs to happen is a careful review of the
rules and making sure that rules are being followed, and then to continue and be
smarter than we were before the hubris that led us to this problem," he said.

   Hatton is banking on scientists making gene therapy as safe as possible.

   "I have already told them I would volunteer again," she said.

   You can reach Oz Hopkins Koglin at 503-221-8376 or by e-mail at
ozkoglin@news.oregonian.com.

GRAPHIC: Color Photo by STEPHANIE YAO/for The Oregonian; Graphic -- Diagram by
Knight Ridder Tribune -- GENE THERAPY: INSERTING MODIFIED DNA - Since 1990, gene
therapy has been used without great success in an attempt to treat inherited
diseases in children or adults. How it works...

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000


                             779 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 29, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: OP-ED; Pg. A11

LENGTH: 647 words

HEADLINE: HARRIS A. BERMAN AND JON M. KINGSDALE Dr. Harris A. Berman is CEO of
Tufts Health Plan. Jon M. Kingsdale is senior vice president.;
LET REASON RULE ON HEALTH CARE

BYLINE: By HARRIS A. BERMAN AND JON M. KINGSDALE

BODY:

   Like the proverbial elephant being described by four blind men, the health
care crisis feels different to each of us, depending upon our vantage point.
What is clear is that there are problems. Hospital expenses exceed revenues;
nursing homes are closing; home health agencies are going broke; and one of our
premier HMOs is in receivership. Even worse, 44 million Americans do not have
coverage. What is also clear is that the issues are very complex, and so are the
solutions.

   It is not going to be simple, but solutions exist, and we will find them if
we work together. Responsible state government initiatives are part of the
solution.  Some that might help include:  Setting adequate financial reserve
requirements for HMOs, as recommended by 50 state insurance commissioners;
enacting responsible patient protection legislation, such as the consensus bill
drafted last year by the state's HMOs and the Massachusetts Medical Society;
assisting efforts underway through the Affiliated Health Information Networks of
New England to eliminate paper claims and simplify administration; and extending
comprehensive health insurance to the Commonwealth's 700,000 uninsured.

   What we don't need is legislation that will do nothing to improve quality of
care but will raise costs by needless regulation or by encouraging litigation.
And we don't need more myths manufactured to support someone's self-serving pet
solutions.

   Myths that bean-counters make medical necessity decisions in our HMOs, that
HMOs intentionally withhold payments, or that we can readily afford
everything-for-everyone medicine if we just cut out administrative waste do not
get us any closer to solutions.

   And we don't need more panic.  The calm leadership of Attorney General Tom
Reilly and Insurance Commissioner Linda Ruthardt during Harvard Pilgrim's
receivership stands in stark contrast to the belligerent attitude and
accusations that so often characterize public debate over health care financing.

   Ever since the 1930s, when the Committee on the Costs of Medical Care issued
its multi-volume report on health spending, we have publicly bemoaned the crisis
in health care financing. In the meantime, virtually every indicator of
Americans' longevity and health has improved dramatically.

   Some of these improvements come from government-sponsored public health
measures, such as cleaning up our environment, fluoridation of water, and the
regulation and inspection of the food supply.  Some of these improvements are
attributable in part to the practices employed by managed-care teams: earlier
detection of cancer, rising childhood immunization rates, reduced rates of
premature births in high-risk pregnancies, and increasing use of beta blockers
after heart attacks. Many improvements reflect the tremendous technological
advances of the past half century in pharmaceuticals, surgery, and diagnostic
imaging.

   Every decade seems to bring new treatments for disease and disabilities never
before amenable to human intervention. The next decade promises such dramatic
breakthroughs as gene therapy and telemedicine. Americans have made historic
contributions to medicine, and Boston has played a major role. Surely the
financing of health care can be improved, too, by cooperative leadership and
using objective information.

   We would welcome a thoughtful process to analyze these complicated issues.
Let's work together to assure that Massachusetts residents have the world's best
health care at prices we can still afford.

   While we ask health care leaders to work together, let's also ask our
political leaders to do the same. Let's avoid dueling advisory and fact-finding
groups and ask the attorney general, governor and Legislature jointly to appoint
a blue-ribbon commission to identify the causes of our challenges and provide
the unified leadership necessary to solve them.

GRAPHIC: DRAWING, TIM BRINTON ILLUSTRATION

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             780 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Globe Newspaper Company
                                The Boston Globe

                   February 29, 2000, Tuesday ,THIRD EDITION

SECTION: HEALTH/SCIENCE; Pg. E4

LENGTH: 137 words

HEADLINE: SCIENCE BRIEFS / TEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN Stephen Reucroft and
John Swain are experimental particle physicists who teach at Northeastern
University.;
LIVERS AND SHOELACES

BYLINE: BY STEPHEN REUCROFT AND JOHN SWAIN

BODY:

   New developments may help people whose livers have stopped functioning due to
infections or overconsumption of alcohol. Ronald dePinho of the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School and his colleagues have shown that
part of the reason why livers can fail to regenerate is that their teleomeres
erode. Teleomeres are to DNA what the little plastic things on the ends of your
shoelaces (aglets) are to the laces. They protect the end of the DNA, but also
shorten with each cell division, helping prevent cancer, and limit the number of
times a liver cell can divide to regenerate damaged tissue. Using gene therapy,
the team managed to restore liver function in sick mice by keeping the
teleomeres from shortening. Extensions of the work to humans is still a way off.

   ref: Science, Feb. 18, 2000.

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             781 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
                               The New York Times



                February 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words

HEADLINE: Clinical Trials Database for Patients Goes Online

BYLINE: AP

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 28

BODY:

   The federal government will open a database on Tuesday of all clinical trials
for serious illnesses, with simple explanations of how the experiments work and
what questions patients should ask before enrolling to ensure that they
understand the risks.

   Each study lists a phone number that can be used to call researchers about
enrolling and to ask questions about the study. Less than 5 percent of American
patients now enroll in such medical experiments.

    "This is a single place you can go where the most important information, we
hope, will be available to everybody," said Dr. Donald Lindberg of the National
Library of Medicine, which is opening the registry, http://clinicaltrials.gov.

   Commissioner Jane E. Henney of Food and Drug Administration advised people to
seek a doctor's help in sifting through the studies, and then, when entering a
study, to take along a friend or relative to hear researchers explain the risks
and benefits.

   "If they don't understand something, it might be that you didn't either," Ms.
Henney said. Patients "are very vulnerable for information that might sound too
hopeful," she said.

   The free database so far contains 4,000 studies at 47,000 sites nationwide,
mostly sponsored by government agencies or universities. Congress has mandated
that the registry be comprehensive, so more studies, particularly drug company
trials, will probably be added.

   A handful of other Internet sites also are trying to list certain clinical
trials; the communications company CenterWatch claims over 200,000 visitors a
month check its site, www.centerwatch.com.

   Clinical trials are vital to medical progress, enabling doctors to treat and
understand disease better. They can offer patients access to cutting-edge
therapies and, because participants are supposed to be so strictly monitored,
first-rate care.

   But there are caveats. Patients may not get the experimental treatment, but a
placebo or standard care for comparison. And the research could be in such an
early stage, or the person so sick, that the only reason to participate is to
help future patients.

   Or the experiment could fail or be harmful. Indeed, experts are questioning
the oversight of clinical trials after an Arizona teenager died in a University
of Pennsylvania gene therapy experiment. The boy's father told Congress he was
misled about the risks.

   Consequently, getting involved can be a hard decision.

   "It was very tough," Patrick Cotter of Madison, Wis., said of enrolling his
daughter Colleen, now 8, in a study of the drug Enbrel for juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis. Standard medicines were helping Colleen, but they have toxic
long-term effects.

   "It took us three months to decide," Mr. Cotter said, but Colleen started
testing Enbrel two years ago and is doing well. "It was the best thing we ever
did," he said.

   There is fierce competition for such patients. Pharmaceutical companies
usually need about 4,000 people to test an experimental drug. Companies often
pay doctors up to $2,500 for every patient they recruit.




   http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             782 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 P.G. Publishing Co.
                     Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)

                   February 29, 2000, Tuesday, SOONER EDITION

SECTION: SCIENCE, MEDICINE, TECHNOLOGY, Pg. A-3

LENGTH: 703 words

HEADLINE: WEB SITE LISTS ALL CLINICAL DRUG TRIALS FOR PATIENTS TO JOIN

BYLINE: LAURAN NEERGAARD, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: WASHINGTON -

BODY:


   Your doctor grimly announces there's no more chemotherapy to try for your
pancreatic cancer. Or you heard a news blurb about an experimental Parkinson's
drug but your physician isn't testing it so you're stumped. Or you'd desperately
like a less toxic medicine for your child's rheumatoid arthritis.

   Scientists are conducting thousands of clinical trials in a quest to improve
treatment of those and hundreds of other diseases, yet less than 5 percent of
American patients enroll in such medical experiments.

   One reason: It's incredibly difficult for sick patients to ferret out who's
studying what and then wade through the scientific jargon to determine if an
experiment might help them or is too risky. Today, the government opens a
database to help.

   Congress ordered the comprehensive registry of all clinical trials for
serious illnesses - with consumer-friendly explanations of how the experiments
work and what questions patients should ask to ensure they understand the risks,
such as:

   Why do researchers think this treatment will work better than standard care?
How many people have tested it and what happened to them? What side effects are
possible?

   What kinds of tests or procedures will I undergo? Will they hurt?

   Who is funding the study and who will oversee my care? Will I have to pay for
any of it?

   Each study lists a phone number to reach researchers about enrolling and ask
those questions.

   "This is a single place you can go where the most important information, we
hope, will be available to everybody," says Dr. Donald Lindberg of the National
Library of Medicine, which opens the Internet-based registry
http://clinicaltrials.gov - this morning.

   Get your own doctor to help sift the studies you find on the database,
advises Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Jane Henney. Then if you enter
a study, bring a friend or relative along to hear researchers explain the risks
and benefits.

   "If they don't understand something, it might be that you didn't either,"
Henney warned. Patients "are very vulnerable for information that might sound
too hopeful. ... Be willing to ask questions and probe for information."

   The free database so far contains 4,000 studies at 47,000 sites nationwide,
mostly government- or university-sponsored ones. But Congress mandated that it
be comprehensive, so more studies, particularly drugcompany trials, will likely
be added in coming months.

   A handful of other Internet sites also are attempting to list certain
clinical trials; the communications company CenterWatch claims over 200,000
visitors a month check its site, www.centerwatch.com.

   Clinical trials are vital to medical progress, enabling doctors to treat and
understand disease better. They can offer patients access to cutting-edge
therapies and, because participants are supposed to be so strictly monitored,
topnotch care.

   But there are caveats. Patients may not get the experimental treatment, but a
placebo or standard care for comparison. The research could be in such an early
stage, or the person so sick, that the only reason to participate is to help
future patients.

   Or the experiment could fail or be harmful. Experts are questioning the
oversight of some clinical trials after a University of Pennsylvania
gene-therapy experiment killed an Arizona teen-ager. The boy's father told
Congress he was misled about the risks.

   Consequently, getting involved can be a hard decision.

   "It was very tough," Patrick Cotter of Madison, Wis., said of enrolling his
daughter Colleen, now 8, in a study of the drug Enbrel for juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis. Standard medicines were helping Colleen, but they have very toxic
long-term effects.

   "It took us three months to decide," but Colleen started testing Enbrel two
years ago and is doing well. "It was the best thing we ever did."

   There is fierce competition for such patients. Pharmaceutical companies
usually need some 4,000 people to test every experimental drug.

   Making medical experiments more patient-friendly would help, says Elizabeth
Moench of MediciGroup, citing a scientist who developed a special safety quiz
for his clinical trial after too many patients forgot the risk warnings.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2000


                             783 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                      Copyright 2000 Boston Herald Inc.
                               The Boston Herald

                     February 28, 2000 Monday ALL EDITIONS

SECTION: FINANCE; Pg. 026

LENGTH: 587 words

HEADLINE: Ariad enjoys stock run-up

BYLINE: By CROMWELL SCHUBARTH

BODY:

   Ariad Pharmaceuticals Inc. develops products that activate critical genes
when patients in protein and cell therapy take a pill.

   If their pills work on genes as effectively as Ariad's stock has produced
gains since October, the Cambridge biotech company's future could be very
bright.

   Ariad is trading at more than 40 times its October value of 50 cents a share
on the Nasdaq exchange, leading all of Massachusetts' stocks in the first two
months of this year.

   This comes despite the fact that the company has never posted a profit in its
nine-year history and is at least two years away from marketing its first drug.

   "People are finally taking notice of the real dramatic progress we have
made," said Dr. Harvey Berger, chief executive of the company, last week.

   Ariad's stock run began when in October it sold its stake in the
Hoechst-Ariad Genomics Center in Cambridge for about $ 40 million.

   That infusion of cash is critical in an industry where millions get spent on
research before a product generates sales revenue.

   "We are now much more focused on products instead of research and we now have
enough cash on hand to do what we have to do for two years," Berger said.

   It will be at least that long before any of Ariad's products can be sold to
the public, Berger estimated.

   In the meantime, the company is also in discussions with potential partners
that could bring in more cash, he said.

   "We look forward to having a partnership in place this year," he said.

   In addition to the company's gene therapy products, Ariad is developing small
molecule drugs that block the pathways between cells critical in treating
diseases such asosteoporosis and immunity disorders.

   Berger likens the gene activators and gene regulators Ariad is working on to
a computer operating system.

   "What a lot of other companies involved in genomic science are doing is
discovering genes and finding ways to modify them. The products they develop
will be like software programs designed for specific purposes," he said. "They
will need our technology to regulate when and how long these genes work."

   Ariad's technology "has the potential to provide an externally controlled and
regulated system for the delivery of a wide variety of therapeutic proteins,"
BancBoston Robertson Stephens & Co. wrote in a favorable Jan. 27 research
report.

   That report projected share losses of $ 1 for 1999 and 64 cents for 2000.
That compares with losses of $ 13.14 a share in 1998 and $ 19.31 a share in
1997.

   Ariad's ability to maintain its current stock run-up will have more to do
with investor infatuation with biotech stocks than its products, analysts say.

   Jim Shrine, managing editor of BioWorld Today, said much of the money pouring
into the sector appears to be coming from investors who are looking for places
to put their profits from Internet stocks.

   "A lot of people are anticipating a lot of breakthroughs in the next couple
of years," Shrine said. "Not many people in the industry understand what's going
on, but they like it."

   The current biotech boom defies usual investment logic, according to Ned
Riley, chief investment strategist at State Street Global Advisors.

   "We're in an unusual period where investors are willing to accept profitless
possibilities," he said.

   Photo Caption: INVESTOR INTEREST: Dr. Harvey Berger, CEO of Ariad, says
investors have taken notice of the progress made by his company, whose stock now
trades at 40 times its October value of 50 cents per share. STAFF PHOTO BY NANCY
LANE

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             784 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            February 28, 2000 Monday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. A8

LENGTH: 440 words

HEADLINE: Research and profit

BODY:

   Several aspects of the University of Pennsylvania's gene therapy research
were so troubling that the government stopped all clinical trials following the
death of a teen-age volunteer.

   But federal regulators have been slow to recognize the potential for harm in
allowing scientists to enroll and treat patients in clinical studies that are
paid for by companies owned by those same scientists.

   One disclosure that bothered lawmakers and bioethics experts concerned Dr.
James Wilson, director of the university's Institute for Human Gene Therapy. He
founded a biotechnology company in which both he and the university hold stock.
The company contributes part of the institute's budget and has exclusive rights
to develop Wilson's discoveries into commercial products.

   Wilson, in short, has a very large financial interest in the outcome of the
institute's experimentation. That, say critics, is a manifest conflict of
interest that clouds the integrity of research. But as the New York Times
reported recently, such an arrangement is more rule than exception in the
exploding field of biomedicine.

   Academic scientists with no industry ties are rare, the Times found. So many
have started their own companies "that deans of medical schools no longer talk
about eliminating conflicts of interest; the current buzzword . . . is
management." And, the Times noted, the primary management tool is disclosure --
to supervisors but not to the public.

   The trend began with the passage of a 1980 law designed to accelerate the
marketing of academic discoveries. Universities were encouraged to patent
inventions, then assign rights to private firms that could develop them into
products.

   Opportunistic campus scientists bypassed existing businesses and started
their own. They like the cozy arrangement, says the Times, because they don't
have to give up the prestige of academia to earn the money available in
industry. So the question remains: Does the lure of profit affect the judgment
of researchers?

   Yes, argues Dr. David Blumenthal, who directs the Institute for Health Policy
at Massachusetts General Hospital. He would ban the practice of scientists
owning substantial equity in firms that sponsor their clinical research.

   Dr. Ruth Macklin, professor of bioethics at Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, would require doctors who have a financial interest in the research to
disclose it on all patient consent forms.

   Those are but two reactions to the quandary of dual allegiance in the field
of gene therapy.

   Now that regulators know what is at stake, they must act. The issue at hand
is not university policy or personal aggrandizement but public health.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             785 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                      FEBRUARY 28, 2000 Monday SF EDITION

SECTION: PHILADELPHIA BUSINESS; Pg. C01

LENGTH: 1308 words

HEADLINE: KIMERAGEN HOPES MERGER WILL HELP MARKETING, FUNDING THE NEWTOWN GENE
THERAPY FIRM AND ITS FRENCH PARTNER ALSO WILL BE ABLE TO BENEFIT FROM EACH
OTHER'S DISCOVERIES.

BYLINE: Andrea Knox, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   Seven years after its founding in a Thomas Jefferson University research lab,
Kimeragen Inc. is merging - and going global.

   Last week, the Newtown gene therapy company announced plans to merge with
ValiGene S.A., of Paris, to form a company that both partners hope will be able
to get products to market faster and be more attractive to investors.

   It is a new tack for Kimeragen, which was founded to pursue a bold and
tantalizing vision: the hope of curing disease by encouraging damaged genes to
repair themselves.

   In conventional gene therapy, the defective gene is replaced by a healthy
version of the same gene.

   In Kimeragen's novel and patented form of gene therapy, a special molecule
called a chimeraplast is bound to the defective gene, where it can stimulate the
gene to repair itself.

   Making either of these techniques work safely in human beings has yet to be
achieved.

   In 1993, Kimeragen snared investors, then moved three years later from the
Jefferson laboratory to an office of its own in Newtown, expanded its research
staff, and hired professional managers.

   But seven years is a short time in drug development, and Kimeragen's vision
is still far from being realized. And although the company has raised $28
million from investors, more money is always needed in the high-stakes world of
biotechnology drug development, and that goes double for a complex and
ground-breaking technique such as gene therapy.

   Kimeragen's merger partner, ValiGene, is a development-stage company that
focuses on discovering the specific functions performed by individual genes.

   Why merge? ValiGene can use Kimeragen's molecule to help identify gene
functions, while Kimeragen can use ValiGene's discoveries about gene functions
as the basis for further research, a Kimeragen board member, Douglas Watson,
explained .

   In addition, "the merged company will look more attractive to investors"
because of its more diversified portfolio of potential products, Watson said.
While neither company produces any revenue now, ValiGene might be within a few
months of discoveries about gene functions that could be sold or licensed to
drug development or other companies, Watson said.

   The merged company, to be called ValiGen, would legally have its headquarters
in the Netherlands, but would continue to have administrative and research
centers in Paris and Newtown. The merger of the two privately held companies
must still be approved by their shareholders - about 200 at Kimeragen and about
75 at ValiGene, including founders and outside investors - but is expected by
April 3.

   If ValiGene's discoveries are expected to begin generating revenue in the
short term, in the medium term Kimeragen's research agreements with three U.S.
seed companies should begin to pay off, Watson said. The companies are using the
Kimeragen molecule to develop new types of golf course grass and other
commercial plants.

   Long term, there is the hope that the company's chimeraplasty form of gene
therapy can be molded into a safe and effective - and extremely lucrative -
product. With this balanced portfolio, "We are hopeful that we will be able to
bring some financing into the combined company," Watson said.

   The cross-ocean combination will also serve to give Kimeragen entree into the
European market and ValiGene a foothold in the United States, he said.

   In the merger, the company's top job and its board chairmanship will go to
ValiGene executives - which outgoing Kimeragen chief executive officer Gerald L.
Messerschmidt said suited him just fine.

   "I've been working very hard for four years, and I wanted more time with my
children, so I told the board I didn't want to continue after the merger,"
Messerschmidt said. "But we will end up with a stronger company, a company much
broader in its scope and applications, and [one] that should make everyone's
shares more valuable." Messerschmidt, whose last official day is tomorrow, will
continue to hold shares in the company.

   The combined company would be run by Jean Louis Pourny, who is chief
executive officer of ValiGene.

   Watson praised Messerschmidt, calling him "an effective leader," and
describing his departure as an "unfortunate side effect" of the merger.

   But several people familiar with the company said Messerschmidt could be
difficult to work with, and suggested that his departure might be a beneficial
aspect of the merger.

   One of them was Eric B. Kmiec, cofounder of the company, whose wife,
Jennifer, had served as vice president for administration. He said both were
summarily dismissed by Messerschmidt in December 1998. Kmiec said he received a
letter from Messerschmidt saying the company no longer needed his services after
he repeatedly urged top management to take a more cautious approach to human
testing.

   Kmiec said two other high-ranking executives were asked to leave as well.

   Messerschmidt said that he was thankful to Kmiec for his hard work and had
regretted having to make staff cuts, but that a failed financing deal had made
them necessary. "It's never a pleasant experience either as the person who makes
those decisions or as the person who gets told," he said.

   Several months later, the company received $7.5 million from Burrill & Co. of
San Francisco and another investor.

   This fall, the company was thrown another curve when 18-year-old Jesse
Gelsinger died in a gene therapy experiment at the University of Pennsylvania,
prompting a national review of all gene therapy experiments.

   Kimeragen, which has not done any human trials, was pushing forward with
plans to start testing its therapy in Amish children who suffer from an
inherited liver disease. It was eager to get going, if for no other reason than
that it had been promised $7.5 million in additional financing if it met several
targets. One was applying to the Food and Drug Administration for permission to
do a trial. That financing remains on hold.

   Kmiec, who remains a shareholder in the company, said trials were originally
slated to begin by the end of 1999. Watson said the goal was the second quarter
of this year. In any event, they now will not start before the end of the year.

   Watson said the national concerns about gene trials have not affected
Kimeragen's timetable. "The caution is making sure that we have all our
preparations right before we submit to the FDA for approval," he said. "This is
par for the course. Things crop up in the normal course of development; I don't
find that unusual."

   Kmiec has moved to the University of Delaware, where he heads a 10-person
laboratory that receives more than $500,000 a year in federal and other funding
to continue research on chimeraplasts. He said he is ecstatic about the merger.

   That is in part because he hopes it will keep the company from rushing into
human trials before it is really ready. It is also in part because he had urged
Kimeragen without success to become involved in the business that is ValiGene's
specialty, functional genomics.

   And it is also in part because the new management will include two
internationally known scientists: Stephan Evans-Freke as board chairman and J.
Craig Venter as head of the scientific advisory board. Both men occupy those
positions at ValiGene.

   Evans-Freke is founder and chief executive officer of a biopharmaceutical
company, Sugen Inc., in South San Francisco. Venter is the father of gene
sequencing, the technique of identifying the pieces of DNA strands that form
genes. He began gene sequencing as a researcher at the National Institutes of
Health, and later founded two companies, Human Genome Sciences Inc. and Celera
Genomics Group, that are racing against NIH to be the first to identify all the
genes.

   "I think this is fabulous," Kmiec said. "I hope I can become more involved in
Kimeragen again."

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             786 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                    Copyright 2000 Chicago Sun-Times, Inc.
                               Chicago Sun-Times

                    February 27, 2000, SUNDAY, First Edition

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 128

LENGTH: 498 words

HEADLINE: Healing through gene therapy;
Researchers claim athletes could see benefits in 2-5 years

BODY:


   An injection of a therapeutic gene might someday help to heal an athlete's
badly damaged muscle, broken leg or blown-out knee, researchers say.

   In lab animals, gene therapy has knit together broken bones and made injured
muscles grow stronger. Preliminary human trials already have begun, and experts
believe these experimental findings will develop into treatments.

   "I think the chances are extraordinarily high," said R. Rodney Howell, a
University of Miami School of Medicine professor who is president of the
American College of Medical Genetics, a professional group. "It's going to take
a while, but I think the chances are overwhelming it will work."

   Therapies might start to show potential for sports injuries in two to five
years, researchers say.

   "These are very complicated studies," Howell said. "The time frame will be
substantial. It's not going to be next week or next year."

   Much of the work centers on growth factors, proteins that the body produces
to help various tissues grow. Because genes direct the production of growth
factors, researchers are working on ways in which to add copies of these genes.

   One method is to genetically engineer a virus, such as one that causes the
common cold, by removing the illness-causing material and replacing it with a
growth factor-triggering gene. The virus is then inserted into a test animal,
where the new gene implants the growth factor gene in the cells.

   Another method is to remove cells from the test subject, add growth
factor-triggering gene to those cells and inject them back into the subject. At
this point the virus method is more efficient, said an article in The Physician
and Sportsmedicine, a medical journal. But the engineering of a patient's own
cells could have greater potential, said researcher Johnny Huard of the
University of Pittsburgh, one of the paper's authors.

   Certain cells, known as muscle-derived stem cells, seem to be progenitors of
bone, tendon, ligament or muscle, and can be directed to grow into one or the
other, Huard said. Substances called bone-muscle genetic protein seems to act as
the switch, but it's not yet known how the body decides which way to direct the
stem cells to develop, he said.

   However, in lab experiments, Huard and other researchers have been able to
heal tissue.

   Using muscle-derived stem cells, Huard's lab was able to almost completely
heal broken skulls in mice. Researchers at the UCLA School of Medicine healed
broken mouse leg bones with similar stem cells derived from marrow. And at
Harvard University, using growth factor carried on a virus, researchers were
able to make mice show progressive increases in muscle mass.

   If the research lives up to its potential, the main benefit for athletes
could be healing of joints, and bones that are too badly damaged to heal
correctly under current therapies, researchers said. Ligaments and tendons
especially tend to grow back slowly, so a boost from gene therapy could speed
the process.

GRAPHIC: ASSOCIATED PRESS

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 2000


                             787 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                      Copyright 2000 The Indianapolis Star
                              All Rights Reserved
                        The Indianapolis Star (Indiana)

                            February 27, 2000 Sunday
                               CITY FINAL Edition

SECTION: EDITORIAL; Pg. D3

LENGTH: 623 words

HEADLINE: Promising future of gene therapy

BYLINE: By, DAVID A. WILLIAMS

BODY:

   The past year has seen the extremes of success and setbacks in the infant
field of gene therapy. Unfortunately, the discussion is focusing on the
setbacks, overshadowing the successes and threatening to leave the public with a
distorted view of a medical treatment with a promising future.

   For more than a decade, medical researchers have been making solid progress
on techniques to deliver healthy genes to people affected by such diseases as
cystic fibrosis, cancer and devastating immune disorders. There have been early
promising results in tests, including some here at Indiana University School of
Medicine, that lead us to believe gene therapy will become another useful tool
for physicians to treat and prevent disease.

   Recently, the alleged oversights in the conduct of specific trials and
deficiencies in patient safeguards at several prominent academic centers have
been a setback for the field as a whole. The field also still suffers from
unrealistic expectations encouraged in part by some "gene therapists" in the
1980s.

   Clearly, there must be accountability for mistakes that may have been made in
the conduct of any tests on human patients. But that is true for all such
clinical trials, whether or not they involve gene therapy.

   During the current controversy, little has been said about the progress in
the field, in particular the first report suggesting real success in the use of
this technology for the treatment of a monogenic disorder, a disease caused by a
defect in a single gene.

   Last year, a research team in France reported that they had successfully
transferred genes into two young boys with a form of severe combined
immunodeficiency, a disease that had left them unable to fend off many
life-threatening infections.

   After the treatments, both boys' bodies were producing infection-fighting
white blood cells containing working copies of the new gene. One boy was no
longer receiving treatment for SCID.

   Moreover, it's important to understand that there are many different
approaches to gene therapy, particularly in the mechanism used to deliver genes
to their target in the body. Most scientists affiliated with the IU School of
Medicine who are conducting gene therapy research use a different type of virus
-- a retrovirus modified so it cannot replicate -- than the one used in the
University of Pennsylvania trials where a patient died last year.

   The side-effect profiles of the two virus "vectors" are much different, and
we believe the vectors used in clinical studies at IU are safe. In fact, the IU
School of Medicine was selected by the National Institutes of Health to produce
the modified retrovirus vectors for gene therapy researchers across the country.

   The focus on gene therapy technology has also overshadowed to some extent
truly remarkable advances made over the last two decades in the use of cellular
therapies, particularly bone marrow transplantation and the use of other immune
cells such as lymphocytes to treat cancer and serious virus infections.

   However, there can be little doubt that steady progress has been made in the
technology of gene transfer over this same time period and that the application
of gene-transfer technology to the treatment of human disease will become an
important component of medical therapies in the future.

   For some people, gene therapy is one of the few glimmers of hope to treat
their diseases. We should not allow the current controversies to eliminate that
hope.

   Williams, M.D., is Frieda and Albrecht Kipp Professor of Pediatrics and
Medical and Molecular Genetics at the Indiana University School of Medicine, and
director of the Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research. He is also an
associate investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2009


                             788 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       FEBRUARY 27, 2000 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A20

LENGTH: 1559 words

HEADLINE: A SHINING REPUTATION UNDER ATTACK JAMES WILSON PLANS TO ANSWER REPORTS
CRITICAL OF PROCEDURES IN HIS GENE-THERAPY INSTITUTE.

BYLINE: Shankar Vedantam, Huntly Collins and Joseph N. DiStefano, INQUIRER,
STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   Brilliant and ambitious, Jim Wilson soared in the last decade to the top of
an elite group of researchers in the experimental field of gene therapy.

   Now, facing sanctions from the federal government and at the epicenter of
multiple investigations, the University of Pennsylvania scientist finds his
reputation tarnished: The first known patient death from gene therapy occurred
under his care.

   Since Jesse Gelsinger, 18, died Sept. 17, hardly a week has gone by without
fresh criticism being leveled at Wilson.

   Wilson, 44, said he was working hard to address federal authorities' concerns
about patient safety and to provide them information about what went wrong.

   "We're in overdrive," he said last week. "I don't think I've worked as hard
over the last six months as I have in a long time."

   Wilson's future affects more than himself. The field of gene therapy has been
hit hard by his fall, and scientists are anxiously watching to see whether he
recovers.

   Many hurdles lie ahead:

   Gelsinger's family may be planning to sue Wilson and Penn.

   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration charged that Wilson violated its rules
and that his institute lacks the procedures to protect patients, and it
suspended seven other clinical trials at the institute.

   A federal patient safety group began investigating Wilson.

   And within Penn, Wilson faces challenges:

   The university has begun a review into Wilson's institute.

   Ten days ago, Wilson's longtime mentor and fiercest defender, William N.
Kelley, was fired as dean of Penn's medical school and head of the health
system, in a move unrelated to Gelsinger's death.

   In a few weeks, Wilson is to respond to a critical report by colleagues from
Penn and elsewhere - a report that Kelley said raised so many "significant"
issues that he recused himself last fall from handling it because he was "too
close" to Wilson.

   "It has been a difficult six months for us in trying to sort through many
issues," said Wilson, a tall man with sharp features, at his second-floor
offices on Penn's campus.

   Accompanied by his personal lawyer and the university's top public-relations
officer, Wilson said he planned to do his best to get the FDA suspension lifted
and to carry on where he had left off.

   "I'll tell you what has allowed us to sustain ourselves," Wilson said. "I
have tremendous pride in the people who work here at the institute in the way in
which they have handled this adversity."

   Patients, he said, have also been encouraging. "What has amazed me through
the last six months is how those who have supported gene therapy or have hopes
for gene therapy have really hung in there in general, despite the fact that the
field has fallen upon hard times."

   Penn has reiterated its confidence in Wilson. Peter Traber, the interim
medical dean, said Wilson would continue to lead the gene institute.

   "Jim's strengths as a scientist are that he sees and understands very
fundamental research," Traber said. He "is able to conjure up creative ways to
use that fundamental research for innovative purposes."

   Although Wilson's attorney prohibited him from discussing the specifics of
the Gelsinger case, Penn and Wilson have said that the teenager's death could
not have been predicted or prevented. The scientist said he still firmly
believed in the prospects for gene therapy.

   "There are particular areas for diseases for which we are getting pretty
close," to a cure, he said. "It's an incredible opportunity to be in that
position."

   Gene therapists use viruses and other vehicles to insert healthy genes into
patients to correct genetic defects.

   Wilson, a Michigan native, has said he was always drawn to science - not
biology, but math and physics. On a recent visit to a school he was considering
for his daughter, he stopped by a calculus class and was so transfixed that he
"couldn't get out," he said.

   Biology, by contrast, was less quantitative. But Wilson came of age when
powerful laboratory techniques were unlocking the measurable workings of
molecules and genes.

   At the University of Michigan in the 1980s, Wilson trained under Kelley, one
of the top gene therapy researchers. The field was just taking off. Michigan was
a nerve center for the Human Genome Project, which had as its goal the mapping
of all human genes. Wilson was swept up.

   When the defective gene that caused cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989,
Wilson told an annual meeting of patients and doctors that gene therapists would
try to fix it. The crowd roared.

   "It was electrifying," Wilson said. "I almost felt as though I had been given
the responsibility to carry this through."

   In 1991, Wilson planned a gene therapy experiment on a 27-year-old Canadian
woman who was dying from hereditary heart disease. He devised a procedure that
involved removing, genetically altering and replacing cells from the woman's
liver.

   The procedure was risky, and Wilson recalled that he was nervous. Before the
procedure, the patient handed him a quotation she had cut out of a book: "When
you wait for assurances that everything will go perfectly, you risk never
starting."

   Wilson took the dictum to heart. The operation was successful. The woman got
better, but as with all gene therapy to this day, was not ultimately cured.

   A national newsmagazine anointed Wilson a scientific star. He attracted
millions in research grants. He developed new techniques and secured patents for
them. He churned out scientific papers.

   The cutting-edge Michigan scientists were described as "gene jocks," recalled
one Wilson protege, Krishna Fisher.

   In 1992, Kelley, who had been appointed dean of the University of
Pennsylvania Medical School, offered Wilson the opportunity to build a
pioneering program that would be called the Institute for Human Gene Therapy.

   Fisher accompanied Wilson to Philadelphia. In time, the institute grew to 195
scientists and included a small factory to make gene therapy medicine.
Researchers wearing bodysuits and masks worked in sophisticated facilities that
cost millions to construct.

   But his strong desire to find cures and commercialize research soon found
Wilson at odds with his academic colleagues.

   "There is a difference between research which has a goal of therapy versus
fundamental research in the pursuit of knowledge," he said. "An academic health
center is a great opportunity to have a mix."

   Fisher said Wilson became distant as his responsibilities at Penn grew. "We
went from being a group that worked well together to a machine," he said.

   "I had this great admiration for him," he said. "The Jim Wilson that I knew
died."

   Fiercely driven, Wilson launched trials in cystic fibrosis, brain cancer,
lung cancer and, in 1997, a liver disorder called ornithine transcarbamylase
(OTC) deficiency.

   Last Sept. 13, Jesse Gelsinger became the 18th patient to be treated in an
OTC trial. Within hours of being infused with the medicine, the ammonia levels
in the teenager's body soared. He slipped into a coma and died several days
later. An investigation found that an unexpected immune response had shut down
his lungs.

   Friends and colleagues said Wilson was devastated.

   Since then, the National Institutes of Health have launched an investigation
into the trial, the FDA has suspended Wilson's clinical trials, and Congress has
been contemplating new laws for patient safety in experimental therapy.

   Coincidentally last fall, a committee of Wilson's colleagues completed a
yearlong routine review of his department. One committee member called the
report "extraordinarily severe."

   Wilson and his supporters said such reports, which Penn conducts every five
years for all departments, were meant to be critical. "It is not meant to be
comfortable," Wilson said.

   "We are asking for a critique," Kelley said last week. "We are not asking for
a namby-pamby" report.

   Still, committee members who spoke recently to The Inquirer on the condition
of anonymity questioned the power concentrated in Wilson's hands and the
institute's links to his private company, Genovo, which is licensed to
commercialize the institute's discoveries, among other issues.

   Penn officials said the power given to Wilson was not unusual, and they
defended the school's relationship with Genovo.

   While Wilson answers the criticisms, patient-advocacy groups wait. Even
though some have suspended funding for gene therapy trials until the FDA's
concerns are addressed, they continue to believe in Wilson.

   "We are anxious to move forward," said Robert J. Beall, president and chief
executive officer of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. "For this frenzy to destroy
a lab - and its potential to impact an entire field of medicine - is very
troubling."

   Wilson's friends and colleagues said they hoped his troubles would not
obscure his achievements.

   "Ten years ago, there really weren't very many companies gearing up for gene
therapy," said Dan Rader, a Penn heart doctor. "One thing Jim clearly did early
on is develop the model of an academic center establishing a production
facility. That accelerated the whole field of gene therapy."

   Krishna Fisher, who left Penn two years ago and is now at Tulane Medical
Center in New Orleans, said he hoped that the cloud over Wilson would pass.
"This shouldn't have happened," he said. "He is too bright, too talented."

NOTES: A Stake in Science

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             789 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC
                             All Rights Reserved

                            The Philadelphia Inquirer

                       FEBRUARY 27, 2000 Sunday D EDITION

SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. A01

LENGTH: 1779 words

HEADLINE: PENN REVIEWING GENE INSTITUTE'S TIES TO COMPANY BACKERS OF JAMES M.
WILSON'S FIRM FINANCE HIS RESEARCH. HE COULD BENEFIT PERSONALLY. IS THERE A
CONFLICT OF INTEREST?

BYLINE: Joseph N. DiStefano, Huntly Collins and Shankar Vedantam, INQUIRER,
STAFF WRITERS

BODY:

   When James M. Wilson arrived at the University of Pennsylvania in 1993, he
brought with him more than a reputation for excellence in the cutting-edge field
of gene therapy. He arrived with his own fledgling for-profit company to turn
his campus research into marketable products.

   Soon after, the company, Genovo Inc., won a promise of $36 million in
corporate funding. And soon after that, Penn eased some of its
conflict-of-interest rules to make sure it kept Wilson and benefited from the
money he had raised to support his scientific work.

   Twenty years after corporations began funding campus biomedical research,
universities are wrestling with the biotech industry's growing role in financing
their gene-based research.

   Wilson's and Penn's ties to Genovo are an example of the difficulties
universities face in trying to ensure that their scientists remain objective
when they have a personal financial stake in the company funding their work.

   The original agreements linking Penn, Genovo and Genovo's main source of
corporate funds, Biogen Inc., expire this summer.

   Penn is preparing to renegotiate its relationships, through a process of
"intense self-scrutiny," said Penn general counsel Peter C. Erichsen.

   With problems at Penn triggering national review of gene-therapy programs,
Wilson himself acknowledges the possibility that Genovo's relationship with Penn
may have to change. "It's not a bad idea, at this point in the year 2000, to
take a fresh look going forward," Wilson said last week.

   Penn waived some of its own conflict-of-interest guidelines in 1995 when it
gave exclusive rights to license patents from Wilson's lab at Penn to Genovo and
Genovo's corporate sponsors, led by Biogen.

   Penn also allowed Wilson to control up to 30 percent of Genovo's stock, far
more than the 5 percent generally allowed for professors under the university's
conflict-of-interest guidelines.

   But the death of gene therapy patient Jesse Gelsinger in September and an
ensuing federal ban on Wilson's clinical trials have renewed questions about
conflicts of interest when for-profit companies help foot the bill for research
- and when scientists have a financial stake in the results.

   Nobody has claimed that Wilson's commercial ties had any bearing on
Gelsinger's death.

   "It is almost impossible to find a smoking gun," said Mildred Cho, a
bioethicist at Stanford University and formerly at Penn. "Gelsinger's death may
or may not have been a function of the commercial ties. In all likelihood, it
was not."

   Beyond the Gelsinger case, many experts are worried about the pressure of
money. Arthur Beaudet, professor of genetics at Baylor College of Medicine in
Houston and a member of the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee of the National
Institutes of Health, raised the issue at a meeting convened to discuss
Gelsinger's death.

   "The company stock changes price depending on the academic announcement," he
said. "There are so many potential conflicts. The investigators may be perceived
to have conflicts in their desire to be successful."

   PRESTIGE AND MONEY CAME WITH WILSON

   Penn eased its conflict-of-interest rules for Wilson because he promised to
deliver two things: $21 million from Sharon Hill-based Genovo, and cutting-edge
science that could put Penn in the forefront of an important new field.

   Wilson had founded Genovo in 1992 while he was still at the University of
Michigan. Today, the company provides nearly a quarter of the budget for Penn's
Institute for Human Gene Therapy, which Wilson heads.

   While Wilson agreed in 1995 not to take a paid position at Genovo, his
laboratory's relationship with the company remains its biggest asset, according
to Genovo corporate partners - Biogen, Genzyme Corp. and Ariad Pharmaceuticals.
So far, Wilson has outlasted three Genovo chief executive officers.

   "The fact that Jim Wilson was so intimately involved with the company made a
lot of people uncomfortable," a former Penn executive recalled. "But the promise
of the approach was so great that we thought it was important for Penn to have a
first-class person doing it."

   In exchange, however, Penn imposed an extra measure of oversight on Wilson.
The university set up two committees to review Wilson's science and his
relationship with Genovo. The committees were dominated by Penn faculty and
administrators.

   Ralph Amado, Penn's current vice provost for research, said the Genovo deal
"was considered to be sufficiently large in scale, larger than previous
undertakings," that it required more oversight.

   Penn officials said Wilson has been rigorous in abiding by the guidelines the
university had set. Penn "has reviewed the guidelines and compliance and has
been satisfied every year," Amado said.

   Wilson's supporters - and many of his critics - dispute any suggestion that
money was more important to him than science, or that his lab cut corners in
search of a quick buck.

   "Jim Wilson has tried hard to resist the lure of industry," said Arthur
Caplan, a Penn bioethicist in Wilson's institute who has been critical of Wilson
on other issues. "He could have left [Penn] at any time, made more money, been
subject to less scrutiny and had fewer hassles. He has stuck it out in a
university setting because he believes in the academic mission."

   FACULTY COMMITTEE LISTED 18 CONCERNS

   But Wilson has a financial interest in the success of gene therapy, as does
his mentor, William N. Kelley, the former dean of Penn's medical school and
chief executive of its health system.

   Both men hold patents that will enable them to reap the financial rewards
that could accrue if gene therapy ever creates effective treatments.

   When Kelley arrived at Penn in 1989, he had already applied for a broad
patent based on work he and two colleagues did at Michigan. This patent, granted
in 1997, enables him to collect royalties should gene therapy research from Penn
and other labs prove effective someday.

   When Kelley recruited Wilson to Penn, he brought half a dozen gene therapy
patents already in process. Now, Wilson holds more than 20, and others are
pending.

   Kelley knew that Wilson's reputation could attract top-flight scientists and
research dollars to Philadelphia. That reputation was enhanced when Genovo began
negotiating its $36 million deal with Biogen in 1994.

   But other faculty members had questions. At a Feb. 6, 1995, meeting of the
university's conflict-of-interest committee, faculty members listed 18 concerns,
according to the minutes. Among them:

   "Since Dr. Wilson's research efforts will be directed toward the solution of
a problem in which he has an interest in the outcome, how can Dr. Wilson assure
the University that he will not be conflicted when making decisions that could
have an impact on either Genovo, Biogen or the further development of his
intellectual property?"

   From late 1994 into 1995, attorneys for Penn, Wilson and Genovo labored to
come up with guidelines to prevent financial conflicts - or the appearance of
conflicts - from influencing Wilson's work. Penn hired the Washington law firm
of Hogan & Hartson and the Philadelphia investment bank Janney Montgomery Scott
as advisers.

   In the end, Penn agreed to grant Genovo exclusive rights to exploit all gene
therapies developed at Wilson's lab. Genovo agreed to sponsor Penn research
through 2000.

   There were two other agreements between Penn and Genovo, Penn counsel
Erichsen said. One gave Genovo the right to commercialize Penn's work in nine
specific gene therapy fields, subject to the company meeting certain scientific
milestones.

   The other gave Genovo the right to develop liver and lung treatments without
such performance requirements. Liver and lung research was Wilson's particular
interest - as well as Biogen's. The arrangement gave Wilson more flexibility and
Penn less leverage.

   Penn also acquired what trustees called a "substantial" stake in Wilson's
company, according to 1996 board minutes. Penn originally had rights to as much
as 15 percent of Genovo. The university's share, and Wilson's, has since been
diluted by the new shares issued to corporate investors and a rapid succession
of CEOs.

   FINANCIAL PARTNER HAD HANDS-OFF POLICY

   If Wilson's deal with Penn was unusual, so were his arrangements with Genovo,
which enjoyed a rare independence from its financial backers.

   In its early years, Wilson avoided what he considered shortsighted venture
capitalists. As a corporate partner, he selected Biogen, of Cambridge, Mass.,
because it agreed to take a long-term view toward his research and not interfere
in day-to-day operations - "nurturing the field, not pushing it," Wilson said
last week.

   Though Biogen has two representatives on Genovo's board, they are not
involved in supervising the day-to-day activities of Genovo, or the work it
sponsors at Penn, said Kathryn Bloom, a Biogen spokeswoman.

   Genovo's arm's-length relationship with its investors was designed to enable
Wilson to move at his own pace. The arrangement through which Biogen has
invested $36 million in Genovo research since 1995 expires this summer. Bloom
said the relationship was under review.

   According to the terms of Wilson's agreement with Penn, volunteers for the
experimental gene therapy trials conducted at Wilson's institute in the late
1990s had to be informed of Wilson's potential conflicts of interest.

   For instance, participants in the trials in which Gelsinger died received
this information in the last paragraph of an 11-page patient-consent form:

   "Please be aware that the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. James M. Wilson
(the Director of the Institute for Human Gene Therapy), and Genovo, Inc., (a
gene therapy company in which Dr. Wilson holds an interest) have a financial
interest in a successful outcome from the research involved in this study."

   Jesse Gelsinger signed such a form. Now, his family thinks he should have
been told more about the financial relationships. His father, Paul, thought his
18-year-old son "was dealing with physicians, not entrepreneurs," said Alan
Milstein, a Pennsauken lawyer representing the family.

   Some gene therapy scientists say universities have done a poor job disclosing
the full extent of their ties to industry.

   "Financial conflicts of interest, in complicated arrangements of industry and
academics, are not the problem. It's how they're handled," said Theodore
Friedmann, head of the gene therapy program at the University of California at
San Diego and a director of a gene therapy firm.

   "It all has to be done wide-open. As soon as any of those things get hidden,
it's a recipe for misunderstanding."

NOTES: A Stake in Science

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2002


                             790 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 San Antonio Express-News
                        San Antonio Express-News (Texas)

                       February 27, 2000, Sunday , STATE

SECTION: SPORTS; Pg. 16C

LENGTH: 653 words

HEADLINE: Gene therapy may help athletes

BYLINE: Ira Dreyfuss


BODY:  An injection of a therapeutic gene might someday help to heal
an athlete's badly damaged muscle, broken leg or blown-out knee,
researchers say.


    In lab animals, gene therapy has knit together broken bones and
made injured muscles grow stronger. Preliminary human trials
already have begun, and experts believe these experimental findings
will develop into treatments.


    "I think the chances are extraordinarily high," said Dr. R. Rodney
Howell, a University of Miami School of Medicine professor who is
president of the American College of Medical Genetics, a
professional group. "It's going to take a while, but I think the
chances are overwhelming it will work."


    Therapies might start to show potential for sports injuries in two
to five years, researchers say.


    "These are very complicated studies," Howell said. "The time frame
will be substantial. It's not going to be next week or next year."


    Much of the work centers on growth factors, proteins that the body
produces to help various tissues grow. Because genes direct the
production of growth factors, researchers are working on ways in
which to add copies of these genes.


    One method is to genetically engineer a virus, such as one that
causes the common cold, by removing the illness-causing material
and replacing it with a growth factor-triggering gene. The virus is
then inserted into a test animal, where the new gene implants the
growth factor gene in the cells.


    Another method is to remove cells from the test subject, add growth
factor-triggering gene to those cells and inject them back into the
subject. At this point the virus method is more efficient, said an
article in The Physician and Sportsmedicine, a medical journal. But
the engineering of a patient's own cells could have greater
potential, said researcher Johnny Huard of the University of
Pittsburgh, one of the paper's authors.


    Certain cells, known as muscle-derived stem cells, seem to be
progenitors of bone, tendon, ligament or muscle, and can be
directed to grow into one or the other, Huard said. Substances
called bone-muscle genetic protein seems to act as the switch, but
it's not yet known how the body decides which way to direct the
stem cells to develop, he said.


    However, in lab experiments, Huard and other researchers have been
able to heal tissue.


    Using muscle-derived stem cells, Huard's lab was able to almost
completely heal broken skulls in mice. Researchers at the UCLA
School of Medicine healed broken mouse leg bones with similar stem
cells derived from marrow. And at Harvard University, using growth
factor carried on a virus, researchers were able to make mice show
progressive increases in muscle mass.


    If the research lives up to its potential, the main benefit for
athletes could be healing of joints, and bones that are too badly
damaged to heal correctly under current therapies, researchers
said. Ligaments and tendons especially tend to grow back slowly, so
a boost from gene therapy could speed the process.


    Muscle heals anyway, so gene therapy might only be needed for very
bad injuries, said Dr. Jay R. Lieberman of UCLA.


    Techniques to inject genes for anti-inflammatory proteins could
treat joint diseases such as arthritis.


    Scientists such as Howell think that findings from disease-focused
studies could carry over to benefit athletes. "The basic mechanisms
by which they work is very similar," he said.


    Human trials into possible benefits for athletes are only in the
early stages, and the studies are aimed at establishing that the
therapies are safe.


    Risks include the possibility that genetically engineered cells
could grow out of control, leading to cancer.



LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             791 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                   Copyright 2000 The Baltimore Sun Company
                               THE BALTIMORE SUN

                       February 26, 2000, Saturday ,FINAL

SECTION: BUSINESS ,11C

LENGTH: 347 words

HEADLINE: Human Genome teams with Vical; Companies to share data to quicken drug
development

BYLINE: Sean Somerville

SOURCE: SUN STAFF

BODY:

   Human Genome Sciences Inc. said yesterday that it will share part of its gene
database with a San Diego-based biotech company as part of an agreement to
quicken the development of promising drugs.

    In return, Rockville-based Human Genome has the option to license the DNA
gene-delivery technology developed by Vical Inc. for use in up to three
gene-based products.  Vical can license up to three genes from Human Genome's
proprietary genomics database for gene-based product development.

    "We are delighted to collaborate with Vical in applying our considerable
genomics database in the development of DNA-based pharmaceutical products," said
William A. Haseltine, chairman and chief executive officer of Human Genome.

    Vical's "naked DNA delivery technology" allows genes to enter the body
without being bundled with a virus.

    The agreement also calls for Vical to grant a license to a third company,
Vascular Genetics Inc., for "naked DNA delivery" of Vascular Endothelial Growth
Factor-2 -- a gene-based therapy for treating an advanced form of peripheral
artery disease known as critical limb ischemia.

    Vascular Genetics Inc., based in Triangle Park, N.C., is a privately held
company in which Human Genome is a major shareholder.

    "We have identified the potential value in combining gene discovery and gene
delivery," said Dr. Alain B. Schreiber, president and chief executive officer of
Vical.

    Vical's shares rose on the news, closing at $61.50, up $4.25, or 7.4
percent. Human Genome shares closed at $206, down $12.06, or 5.5 percent.

    " It's more important for Vical than for Human Genome Sciences," said Carl
L. Gordon, an analyst with OrbiMed Advisors, a health care investment management
firm. "This deal is the bringing together of genomics and gene therapy."

    Leslie Wright Marino, an analyst at Robertson Stephens, compared the deal to
trading baseball cards. "They're saying, 'I'll give you my genes and you give me
your technology and we'll try to develop some technologies.'"

    Bloomberg News contributed to this article.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2000


                             792 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                        Copyright 2000 The Denver Post
                             All Rights Reserved
                                The Denver Post

                     February 26, 2000 Saturday 2D EDITION

SECTION: A SECTION; Pg. A-02

LENGTH: 389 words

HEADLINE: Scientists mesh cells, circuitry 'Bionic chip' could be key in genetic
engineering

BYLINE: By Cliff Edwards, The Associated Press,

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO - Don't look for the Six Million Dollar Man  just yet, but
researchers say they have found a way to mate human  cells with circuitry in a
'bionic chip' that could play a key role  in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device - smaller and thinner than a strand of hair -  combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip.  Scientists say that by
controlling the chip with a computer, they  can control the activity of the
cell.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip,  triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the  cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell-chips in large  numbers and insert them into the body to
replace or correct  diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the  difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely  open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   'We've brought engineering essentially into the field of  biology,' said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at  the University of
California, Berkeley, which funded his research.  'We can introduce DNA, extract
proteins, administer medicines -  all without bothering other cells that might
be around.'

   Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center  at the Ohio
State University, called Rubinsky's invention a  'potentially useful laboratory
tool in the early stages of  development.'

   'The method for opening cells has been around a long time,  but this makes it
more exact and easier to do in large throws,'  Ferrari said.

   The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of the journal  Biomedical
Microdevices, rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell  membranes become permeable
when exposed to certain voltages.

   Scientists for years have been conducting genetic research in  a
time-consuming trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with  electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as  new drug treatments or
genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually they can develop cell-chips tuned  for the
precise voltage needed to activate different bodily  tissues, from muscle to
bone to brain. That way, cell-chips could  be applied by the thousands to
correct a variety of health problems.

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             793 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

           Copyright 2000 The Houston Chronicle Publishing Company
                             The Houston Chronicle

                   February 26, 2000, Saturday 3 STAR EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 433 words

HEADLINE: 'Bionic chip' melds cells and circuitry;
Device could play important role in medicine, genetic engineering

SOURCE: Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   SAN FRANCISCO - Don't look for the Six Million Dollar Man just yet, but
researchers say they have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a
"bionic chip" that could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device - smaller and thinner than a strand of hair - combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip. By controlling the chip
with a computer, scientists say they can control the activity of the cell.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell-chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to replace
or correct diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   "We've brought engineering essentially into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California,
Berkeley, which funded his research. "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins,
administer medicines - all without bothering other cells that might be around."

   The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of the journal Biomedical
Microdevices, rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable
when exposed to certain voltages.

   Scientists for years have been conducting genetic research in a
time-consuming trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or
genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually they can develop cell-chips tuned for the precise
voltage needed to activate different bodily tissues, from muscle to bone to
brain. That way, cell-chips could be applied by the thousands to correct a
variety of health problems.

   "In the past, any electricity applied to the cell was like hitting it with a
hammer in the hopes that something would happen, or it would open for us. Now,
we know just how to make it work," Rubinsky said.

   Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center at Ohio State
University, called Rubinsky's invention a "potentially useful laboratory tool in
the early stages of development."

   "The method for opening cells has been around a long time, but this makes it
more exact and easier to do in large throws," Ferrari said.

   "It seems to me that we have a ways to go before you'd see a bionic man," he
said, but the ability to program cells quickly could accelerate genetic
research.


LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2000


                             794 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 26, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: BUSINESS;Pg. C-1

LENGTH: 384 words

HEADLINE: Vical has deal with firm for gene use; Local biotech to license
material for use in drugs

BYLINE: Thomas Kupper; STAFF WRITER | Bloomberg News contributed to this report.

BODY:
 San Diego biotech Vical announced an unusual deal yesterday under which it will
license several genes from another biotech for potential use as drugs.

   The genes come from Human Genome Sciences, a Maryland company that is a
leader in the area of genomics -- the search for genes that could help
scientists find new ways to treat disease.

   But instead of using the genes merely as research tools, Vical will try to
use them as actual drugs with a technique the company has developed that it
calls "Naked DNA."

   Vical has several vaccines in development that use the approach, though such
vaccines use genes that are in the public domain and not subject to patents.
This is the first time it will license genes from another company.

   In return, HGS will get the right to use Naked DNA in as many as three
products of its own, which it would develop independently of Vical.  Both
companies would get royalties on any products the other develops.

   "They're trading their baseball cards," said Leslie Wright Marino, an analyst
at Robertson Stephens with a "buy" rating on Vical shares.  "They're saying,
'I'll give you my genes and you give me your technology and we'll try to develop
some therapies.' They're leveraging their information."

   The deal is a step toward commercializing much-publicized work that has been
done in recent years to understand human genetics.  Anticipation of miracle
drugs has pushed up genomics' companies stocks sharply; HGS shares are up 1,200
percent since this time last year; Vical shares are up 400 percent.

   But it would be years before any drugs resulted from the partnership.  Vical
has yet to pick which genes it wants from HGS's database, and it could take a
year or longer just to decide which ones it thinks are most likely to make
effective drugs.

   Still, Vical shares jumped as much as 28 percent yesterday before closing at
$61.50, up $4.25. HGS shares fell $12.06 1/4 to close at $206.

   Other attempts at gene therapy, as the use of genes to treat disease is
called, have aroused controversy.  A patient died in a gene therapy study in
Pennsylvania last year, and many other studies have failed to actually cure
anyone.

   But Vical is betting that its Naked DNA approach will fare better because it
works differently from other approaches.


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             795 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 26, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-11

LENGTH: 432 words

HEADLINE: Berkeley researchers mate human cell, circuitry

BYLINE: ASSOCIATED PRESS

BODY:
 SAN FRANCISCO -- Don't look for the "Six Million Dollar Man" just yet, but
researchers say they have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a
"bionic chip" that could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device -- smaller and thinner than a strand of hair -- combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip.  By controlling the chip
with a computer, scientists say they can control the activity of the cell.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activate the cell.  Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell-chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to replace
or correct diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   "We've brought engineering essentially into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California
Berkeley, which funded his research.  "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins,
administer medicines -- all without bothering other cells that might be around."

   The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of the journal Biomedical
Microdevices, rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable
when exposed to certain voltages.

   Scientists for years have been conducting genetic research in a
time-consuming trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or
genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually they can develop cell-chips tuned for the precise
voltage needed to activate bodily tissues, from muscle to bone to brain.  That
way, cell-chips could be applied by the thousands to correct a variety of health
problems.

   "In the past, any electricity applied to the cell was like hitting it with a
hammer in the hopes that something would happen, or it would open for us.  Now,
we know just how to make it work," Rubinsky said.

   Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center at Ohio State
University, called Rubinsky's invention a "potentially useful laboratory tool in
the early stages of development."

   "The method for opening cells has been around a long time, but this makes it
more exact and easier to do in large throws," Ferrari said.

   "It seems to me that we have a ways to go before you'd see a bionic man," he
said, but the ability to program cells quickly could accelerate genetic
research.


LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000


                             796 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                  Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                          February 26, 2000, Saturday

SECTION: NEWS;Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 942 words

HEADLINE: Blue-chip stocks continue to tumble; Dow falls below 10,000;
high-techs buoy Nasdaq

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath; STAFF WRITER

BODY:
 The Dow Jones industrial average crashed below the 10,000-point barrier
yesterday, erasing all the gains from the past 10 months and sparking fears that
the long-touted bull market has been swallowed by a bear.

   The Dow fell 230.51 points yesterday -- a 2.2 percent drop -- to close at
9,862.12. In one week, the Dow has dropped 350 points.  Since the year began, it
has lost 1,627 points, or 14.2 percent of its value.

   It was the first time since April that the Dow has closed below 10,000.

   For many high-tech and biotech firms in San Diego County, ranging from
Applied Micro Circuits Corp. to Aurora Biosciences, the drop in the Dow has been
good news.  The Dow's decline over the past couple of months has sent many
investors scrambling from such standbys as General Electric, Hewlett-Packard and
IBM into the arms of newfangled darlings with names that end with dot-com.

   The exodus from the "Old Economy" stocks on the New York Stock Exchange
pushed the "New Economy" Nasdaq stock exchange, where most tech stocks trade, to
a record high Thursday before it slid slightly yesterday.  The Nasdaq composite
index closed yesterday at 4,590, just 27.65 points off the all-time high.

   But now analysts are wondering if Nasdaq, too, may have hit its peak.  One
troubling sign: A number of San Diego's hottest companies -- including Qualcomm,
Gateway and Leap Wireless -- fell by from 2.5 percent to 5 percent yesterday,
exceeding the drop in the Dow.

   "We look like we're very close to a top in the market," says Kevin Pilot, a
principal with Phoenix Capital Management in Carlsbad.

   Ironically, the drop in the Dow was touched off by a glowing report on the
U.S. economy.

   The Commerce Department yesterday said the economy surged upward at a 6.9
percent annual rate during the final three months of 1999, the strongest pace in
more than three years.  The big advance in the gross domestic product -- the
total output of goods and services -- was even stronger than the 5.8 percent
fourth-quarter rate the government estimated one month ago.

   Such rapid growth has led the Federal Reserve to worry about inflation.  To
prevent inflation, the Fed has raised interest rates four times since June and
has warned that more hikes are on the way.

   The Fed's chief goal is to slow growth, but a corollary goal is to lower the
sky-high prices on the stock market, where the prices of some companies are far
higher than the value of their equity.

   The Fed's fear is that the "wealth effect" of these companies is helping fuel
inflation.  But the irony is that a rise in interest rates typically hurts
industrial stocks, such as the Dow's blue chips, more than the real high fliers
on the stock market -- Internet and high-tech companies.

   Unlike manufacturing companies, which need to borrow money to pay for
property and equipment, many high-tech companies run at a relatively low cost
and don't directly notice the rise in interest rates.

   The divergence in the stock market can be seen in San Diego.

   As the Dow's blue chips careened downward yesterday, San Diego stocks, on
average, edged up 0.76 percent, bolstered by the area's high percentage of
high-tech and biotech companies.

   Some shares skyrocketed during the day.  Collateral Therapeutics, which is
exploring gene-therapy products for heart disease, shot up 41 percent to $44.38.
JMAR Technologies, which makes precision measurement systems, jumped nearly 18
percent to $11.19.

   While such prices may have sent champagne corks flying among the high-tech
set, they were cause for concern among stock market analysts.

   "It's a crazy market," Pilot said.  "Some high-tech companies are trading at
300 times their equity, compared to a perfectly fine stock like Owens Corning
that is trading for just three times its equity.  Some 'value stocks' (or
traditional blue chips) are trading at Depression levels."

   Pilot adds that there are signs that the infatuation with "New Economy"
stocks is fading.  A number of local companies slipped yesterday.  Daou Systems,
which provides information technology to the health-care industry, fell 15
percent.  Immune Response slipped 12 percent.  Cypress Bioscience dropped 10
percent.

   "Biotechs have gotten a little ahead of themselves in the past few months by
hitting some high prices," Pilot said.  "Now people are taking their chips off
the table.  They're becoming a lot more skittish."

   San Diego's biggest name in high-tech, Qualcomm, has been sliding since it
peaked at $179.31 1/4 on Jan. 3. Yesterday, it lost another $6.12 1/2 to close
at $133.56 1/4 . Pilot says the price still may be too high.

   James Welsh, who heads Welsh Money Management in Olivenhain, said that in the
past few months a number of investors have gravitated to high-tech stocks in the
mistaken notion that they are immune from interest-rate increases by the Fed.

   "But all these Internet companies have to sell their products to somebody,"
he added.  "And if their customers are being hurt by interest rates, of course
it's going to affect them.  I've never seen a case in the past 20 years when
high-tech firms weren't eventually affected by interest rates."

   In the meantime, executives at the high-tech firms are remaining sanguine
about the stock market's roller coaster ride.

   "We really try not to focus on the stock market," said an executive at one
high-tech firm who declined to be named.  "We focus on our business and let the
market take care of itself.  If the market's going to tank, it's going to tank.
That kind of thing is out of our control.  All we control is how our business is
doing, and we're trying to do that as best we can."


GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; SOURCE: Bloomberg News | CRISTINA MARTINEZ / Union-Tribune;
Different paths

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2000


                             797 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 The Chronicle Publishing Co.
                          The San Francisco Chronicle

                   FEBRUARY 26, 2000, SATURDAY, FINAL EDITION

SECTION: BUSINESS; Pg. D1

LENGTH: 489 words

HEADLINE: Scientists Develop Bionic Chip;

Living cell in silicon circuit will help gene researchers

BYLINE: Tom Abate, Chronicle Staff Writer

BODY:
A University of California at Berkeley professor has created what is being
called the world's first bionic chip -- a single living cell embedded in a tiny
silicon circuit.

    Inventor Boris Rubinsky said the bionic chip is a laboratory tool that will
ultimately help gene therapy researchers find better ways to slip fragments of
DNA into cells to repair genetic damage.

    "It is not really bionic in the sense of the Six Million Dollar Man,"
Rubinsky said. "But the cell is the heart of the chip, which makes it bionic."

    Tejal Ashwin Desai, review editor for the Journal of Biomedical Devices,
which published Rubinsky's discovery, explained why the work is important.

    Scientists have long known that when cells are subjected to electric shocks,
the outer membrane of the cell becomes porous, allowing DNA strands or drugs to
enter the cell. This technique is called electroporation.

    Until now, however, electroporation has been a hit-or-miss technique,
because scientists had no way to determine how much of a jolt it took to open
the cell membrane, Desai said.

    Rubinsky's chip solves that problem. With the help of graduate student Yong
Huang, the Berkeley professor created a three-layered silicon chip,
one-hundredth of an inch wide. In the center of the chip, Rubinsky placed a
prostate-cancer cell nourished by a drop of sugared water.

    Rubinsky said the cell acted as a diode, or electrical gate. When zapped
with just the right charge, the cell membrane opened, allowing electricity to
pass from the top to the bottom of the bionic chip.

    By noting what voltage caused this to occur, Rubinsky has been able to
determine precisely how much electricity it takes to pry open different types of
cells.

    "You can, for each cell, selectively apply voltages that open the pores
without damaging the cell," he said.

    Despite its sexy name, the bionic chip is likely to be of greatest interest
to laboratory scientists, who want precise tools for getting gene therapies or
drugs into cells. The chip is transparent, so the cell can be studied under a
microscope to see how it responds to the therapy.

    Berkeley has sought a patent on the technology and hopes to license it to
drug and biotech firms, which might use the bionic chip to test potential
remedies before giving them to animals or humans.

    Rubinsky, meanwhile, is working on the next phase of the experiment. He
wants to find the electrical keys that might open cells in the human body.

    His idea is to create a device that might be embedded in a liver, perhaps.
The device would have to generate a charge capable of opening many liver cells,
while simultaneously delivering a therapeutic agent that would scoot through the
open cell membranes.

    But Rubinsky, who spent three years perfecting the bionic chip, isn't
promising success soon.

    "This is not a cure for genetic diseases around the corner," he said.


   E-mail Tom Abate at abate@sf gate.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO, The bionic chip enables scientists to determine how much
electricity is needed to open the outer membrane of different types of living
cells. / UC Berkeley Office of Media Services

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000


                             798 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                   Copyright 2000 The San Diego Union-Tribune
                          The San Diego Union-Tribune

                           February 26, 2000 Saturday

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A-1

LENGTH: 926 words

HEADLINE: Blue-chip stocks continue to tumble;
Dow falls below 10,000; high-techs buoy Nasdaq

BYLINE: Dean Calbreath, STAFF WRITER

BODY:

   The Dow Jones industrial average crashed below the 10,000-point barrier
yesterday, erasing all the gains from the past 10 months and sparking fears that
the long-touted bull market has been swallowed by a bear. The Dow fell 230.51
points yesterday -- a 2.2 percent drop -- to close at 9,862.12. In one week, the
Dow has dropped 350 points.

   Since the year began, it has lost 1,627 points, or 14.2 percent of its value.
It was the first time since April that the Dow has closed below 10,000. For many
high-tech and biotech firms in San Diego County, ranging from Applied Micro
Circuits Corp. to Aurora Biosciences, the drop in the Dow has been good news.

   The Dow's decline over the past couple of months has sent many investors
scrambling from such standbys as General Electric, Hewlett-Packard and IBM into
the arms of newfangled darlings with names that end with dot-com. The exodus
from the "Old Economy" stocks on the New York Stock Exchange pushed the "New
Economy" Nasdaq stock exchange, where most tech stocks trade, to a record high
Thursday before it slid slightly yesterday.

   The Nasdaq composite index closed yesterday at 4,590, just 27.65 points off
the all-time high. But now analysts are wondering if Nasdaq, too, may have hit
its peak.

   One troubling sign: A number of San Diego's hottest companies -- including
Qualcomm, Gateway and Leap Wireless -- fell by from 2.5 percent to 5 percent
yesterday, exceeding the drop in the Dow. "We look like we're very close to a
top in the market," says Kevin Pilot, a principal with Phoenix Capital
Management in Carlsbad. Ironically, the drop in the Dow was touched off by a
glowing report on the U.S. economy. The Commerce Department yesterday said the
economy surged upward at a 6.9 percent annual rate during the final three months
of 1999, the strongest pace in more than three years.

   The big advance in the gross domestic product -- the total output of goods
and services -- was even stronger than the 5.8 percent fourth-quarter rate the
government estimated one month ago. Such rapid growth has led the Federal
Reserve to worry about inflation.

   To prevent inflation, the Fed has raised interest rates four times since June
and has warned that more hikes are on the way. The Fed's chief goal is to slow
growth, but a corollary goal is to lower the sky-high prices on the stock
market, where the prices of some companies are far higher than the value of
their equity. The Fed's fear is that the "wealth effect" of these companies is
helping fuel inflation.

   But the irony is that a rise in interest rates typically hurts industrial
stocks, such as the Dow's blue chips, more than the real high fliers on the
stock market -- Internet and high-tech companies. Unlike manufacturing
companies, which need to borrow money to pay for property and equipment, many
high-tech companies run at a relatively low cost and don't directly notice the
rise in interest rates. The divergence in the stock market can be seen in San
Diego. As the Dow's blue chips careened downward yesterday, San Diego stocks, on
average, edged up 0.76 percent, bolstered by the area's high percentage of
high-tech and biotech companies. Some shares skyrocketed during the day.

   Collateral Therapeutics, which is exploring gene-therapy products for heart
disease, shot up 41 percent to $44.38. JMAR Technologies, which makes precision
measurement systems, jumped nearly 18 percent to $11.19. While such prices may
have sent champagne corks flying among the high-tech set, they were cause for
concern among stock market analysts. "It's a crazy market," Pilot said.

   "Some high-tech companies are trading at 300 times their equity, compared to
a perfectly fine stock like Owens Corning that is trading for just three times
its equity.

   Some `value stocks' (or traditional blue chips) are trading at Depression
levels." Pilot adds that there are signs that the infatuation with "New Economy"
stocks is fading.

   A number of local companies slipped yesterday.

   Daou Systems, which provides information technology to the health-care
industry, fell 15 percent.

   Immune Response slipped 12 percent.

   Cypress Bioscience dropped 10 percent. "Biotechs have gotten a little ahead
of themselves in the past few months by hitting some high prices," Pilot said.

   "Now people are taking their chips off the table.

   They're becoming a lot more skittish." San Diego's biggest name in high-tech,
Qualcomm, has been sliding since it peaked at $179.31 1/4 on Jan. 3. Yesterday,
it lost another $6.12 1/2 to close at $133.56 1/4 . Pilot says the price still
may be too high. James Welsh, who heads Welsh Money Management in Olivenhain,
said that in the past few months a number of investors have gravitated to
high-tech stocks in the mistaken notion that they are immune from interest-rate
increases by the Fed. "But all these Internet companies have to sell their
products to somebody," he added.

   "And if their customers are being hurt by interest rates, of course it's
going to affect them.

   I've never seen a case in the past 20 years when high-tech firms weren't
eventually affected by interest rates." In the meantime, executives at the
high-tech firms are remaining sanguine about the stock market's roller coaster
ride. "We really try not to focus on the stock market," said an executive at one
high-tech firm who declined to be named.

   "We focus on our business and let the market take care of itself.

   If the market's going to tank, it's going to tank.

   That kind of thing is out of our control.

   All we control is how our business is doing, and we're trying to do that as
best we can."

GRAPHIC: 1 GRAPH; CAPTIONS: Different paths; PHOTOBY: SOURCE: Bloomberg News |
CRISTINA MARTINEZ / Union-Tribune

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2007


                             799 of 2963 DOCUMENTS

                 Copyright 2000 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
                       St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)

              February 26, 2000, Saturday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

SECTION: NEWS, Pg. 17

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: NEW "BIONIC CHIP" MAY PLAY MEDICAL ROLE, RESEARCHERS SAY

BYLINE: The Associated Press

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:


   * The tiny device combines a healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry
chip. Scientists hope to use the chips to treat diseased tissue.

   Although it's a long way from the Six Million Dollar Man, researchers say
they have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a "bionic chip" that
could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

   The tiny device combines a healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry
chip. By controlling the chip with a computer, scientists say, they can control
the activity of the cell.

   The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to replace
or mend diseased tissue.

   The cell chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

   "We've brought engineering essentially into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, who teaches mechanical engineering at the University of California at
Berkeley. "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins, administer medicines - all
without bothering other cells."

   As profiled in next month's issue of the journal Biomedical Microdevices, the
cell chip rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable when
exposed to certain voltages.

   For years, scientists have been conducting genetic research in a
time-consuming trial-and-error process. They bombard cells with electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or
genetic material.

   Researchers hope eventually they can develop cell chips tuned for the precise
voltage needed to activate different bodily tissues, from muscle to bone to
brain. That way, cell chips could be applied by the thousands to correct a
variety of health problems.

   "In the past," Rubinsky said, "any electricity applied to the cell was like
hitting it with a hammer in the hope that something would happen, or it would
open for us. Now, we know just how to make it work."

   The chief of the Biomedical Engineering Center at the University of Ohio
called Rubinsky's invention a "potentially useful laboratory tool in the early
stages of development."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000


                             800 of 2963 DOCUMENTS


                    Copyright 2000 Newark Morning Ledger Co.
                              All Rights Reserved
                      The Star-Ledger (Newark, New Jersey)

                           February 26, 2000 Saturday
                                 FINAL EDITION

SECTION: NEWS; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 388 words

HEADLINE: One small chip for science, one big step for bionic man

BYLINE: Cliff Edwards, ASSOCIATED PRESS

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO

BODY:

   Don't look for the Six Million Dollar Man just yet, but researchers say they
have found a way to mate human cells with circuitry in a "bionic chip" that
could play a key role in medicine and genetic engineering.

    The tiny device - smaller and thinner than a strand of hair - combines a
healthy human cell with an electronic circuitry chip. By controlling the chip
with a computer, scientists say they can control the activity of the cell.

    The computer sends electrical impulses to the cell-chip, triggering the
cell's membrane pores to open and activating the cell. Scientists hope they can
manufacture cell- chips in large numbers and insert them into the body to
replace or correct diseased tissues.

   The cell-chip also gives them greater control over the difficult process of
gene therapy, because they can more precisely open the cell's pores, said lead
researcher Boris Rubinsky.

    "We've essentially brought engineering into the field of biology," said
Rubinsky, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of California,
Berkeley, which funded his research.

    "We can introduce DNA, extract proteins, administer medicines - all without
bothering other cells that might be around."

    The cell-chip, profiled in the March issue of the journal Biomedical
Microdevices, rests on a long-known phenomenon: Cell membranes become permeable
when exposed to certain voltages.

    Scientists for years have been conducting genetic research in a
time-consuming trial-and-error process of bombarding cells with electricity in
an attempt to introduce foreign substances such as new drug treatments or
genetic material.

    Researchers hope that eventually they can develop cell-chips tuned for the
precise voltage needed to activate different bodily tissues, from muscle to bone
to brain.

    "In the past, any electricity applied to the cell was like hitting it with a
hammer in the hopes that something would happen, or it would open for us. Now,
we know just how to make it work," Rubinsky said.

    Mauro Ferrari, director of the Biomedical Engineering Center at the
University of Ohio, called Rubinsky's invention a "potentially useful laboratory
tool in the early stages of development."

    "It seems to me that we have a ways to go before you'd see a bionic man,"
Ferrari said, but the ability to program cells could accelerate genetic
research.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2007
